CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF UPPER ARLINGTON, OHIO 
____________ 
Republished in 2015 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
UPPER ARLINGTON, OHIO 
____________ 
Kip Greenhill 
President 
Brendan T. King 
Vice-President 
____________ 
Carolyn T. Casper 
Brian C. Close 
Michele M. Hoyle 
Jim Lynch 
Susan Ralph 
City Council 
____________ 
Dan Ralley 
Acting City Manager 
____________ 
Jeanine Hummer 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Ashley Ellrod 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1960 Code, as supplemented through August 18-2014, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1960 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    Each section number consists of two parts separated by a decimal. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number within the part, and the figure after the decimal refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 101 in part 1 is numbered 101.02, and the first section of chapter 711 in part 7 is 711.01. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a part of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the part. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Dennis Sinnett, Vice President of Supplementation, and Peggy Lamar, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ashley Ellrod for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 2015. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 60-2014 11-24-2014 Included 1 62-2014 11-24-2014 Included 1 63-2014 11-24-2014 Included 1 65-2014 12- 8-2014 Included 1 71-2014 12- 8-2014 Included 1 73-2014 12- 8-2014 Included 1 8-2015  3- 9-2015 Included 1 9-2015  4-27-2015 Included 1 19-2015  4-13-2015 Included 1 30-2015  5-27-2015 Included 1 35-2015  6- 8-2015 Included 1 39-2015  6-22-2015 Included 1 42-2015  6-22-2015 Included 1 44-2015  7-13-2015 Included 1 48-2015  7-13-2015 Included 1 50-2015  7-13-2015 Included 1 62-2015 11-23-2015 Included 2 75-2015 11-23-2015 Included 2 76-2015 11-23-2015 Included 2 77-2015 11- 9-2015 Included 2 87-2015 12-14-2015 Included 2 88-2015  1-25-2016 Included 2 89-2015  2-22-2016 Included 2 8-2016  2-22-2016 Included 2 12-2016  3-14-2016 Included 3 13-2016  3-14-2016 Included 3 14-2016  3-14-2016 Included 3 15-2016  3-14-2016 Included 3 20-2016  4-11-2016 Included 3 21-2016  5- 9-2016 Included 3 34-2016  6- 6-2016 Included 3 38-2016  7-11-2016 Included 3 Charter Ord. of 11- 3-1998 Included 4 29-2016  5- 9-2016 Included 4 44-2016 10-24-2016 Included 4 58-2016 11- 7-2016 Included 4 62-2016 11-28-2016 Included 4 63-2016 11-28-2016 Included 4 64-2016 11-28-2016 Included 4 65-2016 11-28-2016 Omitted 4 72-2016 12-12-2016 Included 4 5-2017  2-13-2017 Included 4 6-2017  2-13-2017 Included 4 8-2017  1-23-2017 Included 4 14-2017  2-27-2017 Included 4 16-2017  4-10-2017 Included 4 36-2017  5-22-2017 Included 4 42-2017  6-26-2017 Included 4 44-2017  7- 5-2017 Included 4 64-2017 11-27-2017 Included 4 69-2017 11-27-2017 Included 4 53-2017 12-11-2017 Included 5 54-2017 12-11-2017 Included 5 16-2018  2-27-2018 Included 5 17-2018  2-20-2018 Included 5 25-2018  4- 9-2018 Included 5 27-2018  4- 9-2018 Included 5 32-2018  4-23-2018 Included 5 35-2018  5-29-2018 Included 5 36-2018  5-14-2018 Included 5 38-2018  4-23-2018 Included 5 41-2018  5-29-2018 Included 5 47-2018  6-25-2018 Included 5 48-2018  6-25-2018 Included 5 49-2018  6-25-2018 Included 5 50-2018  7- 9-2018 Included 5 66-2018  9-24-2018 Included 5 72-2018 10- 8-2018 Included 5 74-2018 10-22-2018 Included 5 75-2018 10-22-2018 Included 5 Amend. of 11- 6-2018 Included 5 87-2018 12-10-2018 Included 6 5-2019  2-11-2019 Included 6 10-2019  4-22-2019 Included 6 22-2019  4- 8-2019 Included 6 27-2019  4-22-2019 Included 6 36-2019  6- 2-2019 Included 6  
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF UPPER ARLINGTON[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Charter is set out herein as adopted on Nov. 3, 1998, with the following exceptions: Obvious typographical errors have been corrected and words in explanation or clarification have been inserted in brackets where appropriate. In the event of amendment of the Charter, the amendatory enactment will be cited in parentheses following the amended provision. 

§ I. - CORPORATE POWERS. 
    The inhabitants of the City of Upper Arlington, as its limits now are or may hereafter be, shall be a body politic and corporate, by name, The City of Upper Arlington, Ohio, and shall have all powers, express and implied, that now are, or hereafter may be, granted to municipalities by the constitution or laws of Ohio. 
§ II. - GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF COUNCIL. 
    The government and control of the City shall be vested in a Council of seven citizens who shall be elected at large, in the manner provided by law for the election of municipal officers, nominated by petition and elected on a nonpartisan ballot. Municipal elections shall be in odd numbered years for the election of three or four Council Members, respectively, for four-year terms as the existing term expires. 
    The Council shall constitute the governing body of the City, and shall have full power to pass ordinances, adopt resolutions and otherwise exercise all legislative power and executive authority now or hereafter vested in municipal officers by law, and in the Council by this Charter. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by the Constitution of the State of Ohio, the Council may by ordinance or resolution prescribe the manner in which any power of the City shall be exercised. In the absence of such provision as to any power, such power shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by the general laws of the state applicable to municipalities. The Council shall have authority to fix by ordinance the compensation of its Members. 
    A majority of all current Council Members shall constitute a quorum to do business, and shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance or resolution, but a less number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent Members in such manner and under such penalties as shall be prescribed by ordinance. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be, "Be it ordained by the Council of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio". The Council may, by ordinance, prescribe the manner of giving public notice of the passage of ordinances, resolutions or other acts or procedures. The Council may, by ordinance, determine the effective date of any ordinance, resolution, or other measure. 
( Amend. of 11-6-2018 ) 
§ III. - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM. 
    Legislative acts by the City Council are subject to referendum as procedurally prescribed in the Ohio Revised Code except as provided by the Ohio Revised Code or by an ordinance prescribing the legislative acts subject to referendum. Administrative ordinances, resolutions or decisions shall be subject to redress through the judicial system. 
    Initiative powers are hereby reserved to the people of the City as authorized by State law. 
( Amend. of 11-6-2018 ) 
§ IV. - QUALIFICATIONS OF COUNCIL MEMBERS. 
    A Council Member shall be an elector and shall have resided in the City of Upper Arlington for at least one year prior to the date of their taking office. Each Council Member elected or appointed shall remain a resident and qualified elector throughout the term of his or her office. An employee of the City shall not be a candidate nor Member of Council. Any Council Member who ceases to possess these qualifications, or who is absent from four successive regular Council meetings unless such absence is authorized or excused by Council, shall forfeit the seat of Council Member. 
    A vacancy in the Council shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining Council Members. Such appointment shall be made within sixty days of the vacancy. If Council fails to fill the vacancy within sixty days, the President of Council/Mayor shall make the appointment within ten days thereafter. If the President of Council/Mayor fails to appoint, the seat shall be considered open and a special election shall be held to fill the open seat no earlier than ninety days and no later than one hundred and twenty days from the date of the opening. If an appointment occurs after June 30 in the final two years of a term, the appointment shall be for the unexpired term. If an appointment occurs before June 30 of the final two years of a term, the person appointed shall serve until a successor is certified as elected at the next general election. If there is a failure to appoint and a special election is required to fill the vacated seat, the special election shall be for the remainder of the vacated term. 
    No person shall hold the office of Council Member for a period longer than two consecutive terms of four years. For purposes of this section, any appointment or election for less than a full four-year term shall not count against the two-term limitation. 
    A person who is ineligible because two consecutive terms have been served will be eligible for election to additional terms, pursuant to this provision, so long as four years intervene between expiration of the second of the two consecutive terms and the commencement of the new one. 
( Amend. of 11-6-2018 ) 
§ V. - CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND DISQUALIFICATION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS. 
    No person in the employ of the City shall participate in securing, or contribute any money toward, the nomination or election of any candidate for the Council. 
    The Council may remove any officer of the City, or Council Member, for violation of any provision of law for which forfeiture of office is a penalty, for failing or ceasing to possess the qualifications established by this Charter for that office, or for the conviction while in office of any crime involving moral turpitude, but no such removal shall be made without the concurrence of at least five Council Members, nor until the accused officer or Council Member shall have been given a written copy of the charges and an opportunity to be heard, with at least ten days' notice of the time and place of hearing. 
    No person who is a candidate for election to the Council shall be appointed City Manager, City Attorney, or City Clerk within two years after said election, and no person who serves as a Council Member shall be appointed City Manager, City Attorney, or City Clerk until at least two years after the expiration of the term of office to which such Member was elected or appointed. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Charter or by Council, the laws of the State of Ohio pertaining to conflicts of interest, criminal misbehavior, ethics, financial disclosure, campaign financing and other election practices for municipal office shall apply to all Council Members, officers, employees and to board and commission members where applicable. 
( Amend. of 11-6-2018 ) 
§ VI. - RECALL. 
    The electors shall have the power to remove from office by a recall election any Council Member in the manner provided by the Ohio Revised Code. However, in the event of a recall, any vacancy created shall be filled in the manner set out in Section IV of this Charter. 
§ VII. - ELECTIONS. 
    Regular municipal elections shall be held on the dates and times fixed by the election laws of the State of Ohio. The Council may, by resolution, order a special election at any time, the purpose of which shall be set forth in the resolution. 
    All regular and special municipal elections shall be conducted by County and State of Ohio election officials in accordance with provisions in the Ohio Revised Code, or as otherwise provided by Council. 
    The Council shall have the power, in addition to its other appropriation and expenditure powers, to appropriate and expend funds to pay the costs for providing factual information to the public in connection with elections on tax levies, bond issues and other public issues. 
§ VIII. - ORGANIZATION. 
    Council Members shall take office on the second Monday in January following their election and shall serve until the second Monday in January of the fourth year thereafter, and until their successors are elected and have qualified. The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its Members. 
( Amend. of 11-6-2018 ) 
§ IX. - PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL. 
    After the newly elected Council Members have taken office, the Council shall organize and forthwith elect one of its Members President, who shall also be the Mayor of the City, until in like manner a successor has been chosen. The President in accordance with any of the foregoing provisions shall have full voting and other privileges and rights of Council membership. The Council shall also elect a Vice President who shall perform the duties of the President and be acting Mayor in the event the President is unable for any cause to perform the duties of the office. The Council may designate another Member to perform the duties of the President and be acting Mayor in the event both the President and Vice President are temporarily unable to perform their duties. In case of the death, resignation or removal of the President or Vice President, the Council shall elect one of its Members as President or Vice President for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
§ X. - DUTIES OF MAYOR. 
    The Mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the City by the courts for the purpose of serving civil process and for ceremonial purposes. The Mayor shall have and exercise all the judicial powers granted by the general laws of Ohio to mayors of cities unless and until other lawful provisions shall be made for the exercise of such powers. The Mayor shall have no veto power over legislation. 
§ XI. - COUNCIL MEETINGS. 
    The Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, fix a time and place for holding its regular meetings. The President or any two Members may call special meetings of the Council upon written notice served upon each Member by electronic transmission or left at their usual place of residence at least twenty-four hours before the time fixed for such meeting. The notice for all Council meetings shall state the subjects to be considered and such meetings shall be limited to a consideration of such subjects, except by unanimous consent of all Members. 
    All meetings of Council or its committees shall be open to the public, except executive sessions which may be held pursuant to City ordinance or State law. The Council shall keep a journal of its public proceedings and may determine its own rules and order of business, including the adoption of ordinances, resolutions, or other measures by a consent agenda. Any citizen shall have access to public records during usual business hours pursuant to State law. 
( Amend. of 11-6-2018 ) 
§ XII. - CITY ORGANIZATION. 
    Subject to the provisions of Section XIII of this Charter, the Council shall have full power and authority to establish, administer and control departments as it may deem for the best interests of the City, may determine the powers and duties of such departments and the officers thereof and the manner of administering the same, may delegate to such departments or the officers and employees thereof, such authority as it deems advisable and may combine, divide, distribute or discontinue such departments and may appoint, employ and discharge administrative officers, assistants, clerks and employees and fix their compensation. 
    In case of doubt as to whether certain powers or duties imposed by law on the Mayor or other executive or administrative authority, are to be exercised or performed by the Mayor, the Council, the City Manager, or other officer, the Council may by ordinance or resolution determine the officer or officers by whom such powers or duties shall be exercised. 
    Except for inquiries and investigations, no Council Member shall directly interfere with the conduct of any department or employee thereunder, but rather shall deal solely with the City Manager or appointing authority. Neither Council nor any Council Member shall dictate the appointment of any person to office or employment by the City Manager or the appointing authority. 
( Amend. of 11-6-2018 ) 
§ XIII. - CITY MANAGER. 
    The Council shall appoint a City Manager who shall be the administrative head of the municipal government and its chief executive officer, under the direction and supervision of the Council. The City Manager shall be chosen by the Council solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications and with special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of the best practices in respect of the duties of that office. At the time of the appointment, the City Manager need not be a resident of this City or State but the Council may, by ordinance, make such provision as it may deem advisable with respect to residence during the tenure of office. 
    The City Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term, and may be removed by the Council at its pleasure, at least five Members concurring therein. 
    The Council may designate some properly qualified person to execute the functions of the office of the City Manager during the absence or disability of the City Manager or during temporary vacancies in that office. 
    The powers and duties of the City Manager shall be: 
1.  To see that the laws and ordinances are enforced. 
2.  Subject to the provisions of Sections XII and XIV and to the civil service laws, to appoint, discipline and remove all employees of the City, and to exercise such other appointive power as Council may vest in that office by ordinance or resolution. 
3.  To exercise supervision and control over all departments and divisions of the City government, subject to such regulation as the Council may provide. 
4.  To attend all meetings of the Council, with the right to take part in the discussions, but having no vote. 
5.  To recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as may be deemed necessary or expedient. 
6.  To prepare and submit to the Council such reports as may be required by that body, or as may be deemed advisable. 
7.  In conjunction with the Finance Director or other Chief Fiscal Officer to keep the Council advised of the financial condition of the City and its future needs and to prepare and submit to the Council a tentative budget for the next fiscal year. 
8.  To perform such other duties as the Council may determine by ordinance or resolution. 
§ XIV. - ORGANIZATION OF DEPARTMENTS. 
    Under the provisions of Section XII of the Charter, a Finance Department is created under the supervision of the Finance Director. The Finance Director shall be appointed by the City Manager subject to the approval of at least five Council Members. The Finance Director shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager, but may only be removed at the recommendation of the City Manager upon approval of such recommendation by at least five Council Members. 
    The City Attorney shall be appointed and serve at the pleasure of Council. 
    The Clerk of Council shall be appointed and serve at the pleasure of Council. 
( Amend. of 11-6-2018 ) 
§ XV. - ZONING AND PLANNING. 
    The Council may establish a Board of Zoning and Planning and may fix the number, qualifications and terms of the members thereof. The duties, powers, limitations and procedures of such Board of Zoning and Planning may be prescribed by ordinance, and in the absence of such ordinance it shall perform the duties and exercise the powers conferred upon the City Zoning and Planning commissions by general laws of the state not in conflict with this Charter. The Council may exercise all powers relative to zoning and planning in the City and surrounding areas vested by law in municipalities. 
§ XVI. - TAXATION. 
    The aggregate amount of taxes that may be levied by the Council without a vote of the people, for all municipal purposes, on property which is taxable according to value, shall not exceed five mills on each dollar of taxable valuation. Taxes may be levied for such purposes outside of this limitation upon approval by a majority of the electors of the City voting thereon at a November election or in any manner provided by general law for voting levies outside the statutory limitations. 
    The Council shall not enact any ordinance levying an income tax, including a change in a municipal income tax credit, except upon approval by a majority of electors of the City voting thereon at a general or special election held not less than sixty days after the adoption by Council of a resolution calling for such election, which resolution shall set forth the rate of the proposed tax and the purposes for which the receipts therefrom shall be used. In the event of an affirmative vote, the proceeds of such levy shall be used only for the specified purposes. 
§ XVII. - EFFECT OF CHARTER. 
    All general laws-of the state applicable to municipal corporations now or hereafter enacted, which are not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter or with ordinances or resolutions of this City, shall be applicable to this City, provided however, that nothing contained in this Charter shall be construed as limiting the power of the Council to enact any ordinance or resolution not in conflict with the Constitution of the State or the express provisions of this Charter. 
    The enumeration of particular powers of this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive but, in addition to the powers enumerated herein, implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the City shall have and may exercise all other powers which, under the Constitution of the State of Ohio, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. The determination that any part of this Charter is invalid shall not invalidate or impair the force or effect of any other part hereof, except to the extent that such other part is necessarily dependent for its operation upon the part declared invalid. 
    All ordinances, resolutions and other measures in force at the time of the taking effect of any amendments to this Charter, not inconsistent with its provisions, shall continue in effect until amended or repealed. 
§ XVIII. - CHARTER REVIEW COMMISSION. 
    Ten years after the adoption of this Charter and every ten years thereafter, Council shall appoint a Commission of at least seven electors of the City to review the City Charter and report to Council its recommendations concerning possible amendments. Council may appoint a Charter Review Commission at other times as it shall determine. 
COMPARATIVE TABLE - CHARTER 
    This table shows the location within the Charter of legislation that is included herein. 
Legislation Date Section Section in Charter Amend. of 11- 6-2018 §§ II-V, § VIII, §§ XI, XII, § XIV  
RULES OF COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF UPPER ARLINGTON[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Rules of Council are set out herein as adopted on May 9, 2016, by Ord. No. 29-2016 , with the following exceptions: Obvious typographical errors have been corrected and words in explanation or clarification have been inserted in brackets where appropriate. In the event of amendment of the Rules of Council, the amendatory enactment will be cited in parentheses following the amended provision. 

ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS. 
    Clerk: means the City Clerk or Clerk designee. 
    Community Events: means events that permit Council attendance without the formalities of an agenda that deal with talks, lectures, films or other features of informational value that are open to the community. 
    Concurrence: means the unanimous consent of all Members of City Council to place an item on a regular or special Council Meeting agenda where there has not been prior notice that the subject would be discussed. Concurrence shall require the unanimous consent of all Members. 
    Consent Agenda: may include items such as the approval of minutes, appointments, resolutions of appreciation or commendation, applications for and acceptance of grants, and minor or routine legislation, including minor code changes. The Consent Agenda may also include legislation approving the expenditure of funds for the purchase of goods or services which have already been appropriated in the annual appropriation ordinance, except for the design, inspection, or construction of public improvements. Legislative items approved on the Consent Agenda shall be deemed to have had first reading. Zoning ordinances and emergency legislation shall not be included on the Consent Agenda. The items to be included on the Consent Agenda shall be approved by the President, or in the absence thereof, the Vice President, or in the absence of both, the Council Member Designate. 
    Council Conference Session: means a meeting of City Council convened for the primary purpose of reviewing/investigating issues for formal placement on a Council Meeting agenda and receiving/discussing/approving reports or other information concerning matters of public interest. Council may vote on motions to go into executive session, formation of a standing committee or directing the City Manager, City Attorney, or City Clerk to take specific action. Council may also take legislative or administrative action, including legislative readings, administrative appeals, public hearings, council deliberation, and council voting provided that the proposed action was included on the agenda. 
    Council Meeting: means a meeting of City Council convened for the primary purpose of taking legislative or administrative action, including legislative readings, administrative appeals, public hearings, council deliberation, and council voting. 
    Day: means calendar day. 
    Electronic Transmission: communication transmitted, posted or otherwise made or communicated by e-mail, text, video, or E-Fax, or otherwise to or from an E-System or other equivalent service acceptable to City Council. 
    Executive Session: means the portion of a meeting from which the public is excluded and at which no business shall be transacted except as provided in Article II, § 13. 
    Majority: four members of City Council shall constitute a majority for the normal transaction of business. 
    Statutory Super-Majority: a ? super-majority requires five votes of all City Council Members. 
    3/4 Super Majority: requires six votes of all City Council Members. 
    Meeting: means, pursuant to these rules, any prearranged discussion of the public business by the City Council by a majority of its members. 
    Ordinance: means the formal written enactment of City Council in the exercise of a governmental power vested in the City by the City Charter or codified ordinances for the regulation of the conduct of citizens of the City or others subject to its control, and intended to be of permanent duration. 
    Regular Meeting: means a meeting of City Council held at a regularly scheduled time and place, including Council Meetings, as well as Council Conference Sessions. 
    Resolution: means the formal written enactment of City Council of a less permanent nature, not prescribing any permanent rules of conduct and usually required or applied to the preliminary declaration of legislative intent to be effectuated by the subsequent passage of an ordinance, or for the disposition of a specific matter not required by state law or the City Charter to be done by ordinance. 
    Special Meeting: means a meeting of City Council held at a time different from that of its regularly scheduled meetings, this may include but is not limited to Council Meetings, Council Conference Sessions, forums, retreats, and community events. 
    Municipal Body: means the City Council, any board, commission, committee or similar decision-making body of the City government. 
    Notification (Oral): means notification given orally either in person or by telephone or electronic means, directly to the person for whom such notification is intended, or by leaving an oral message for such person at the address, or if by telephone, at the telephone number, of such person as shown on the records kept by the Clerk under these Rules. 
    Notification (Written): means notification in writing, mailed, e-mailed, telegraphed, faxed, or any other means recognized by law, or delivered to the address of the person for whom such notification is intended as shown on the records kept by the Clerk under these Rules, or in any way delivered to such person. If mailed, such notification shall be mailed by first-class mail, deposited in a U.S. Postal Service mailbox no later than the second day preceding the day of the meeting to which such notification refers, provided that at least one regular mail delivery day falls between the day of mailing and the day of such meeting. 
    Published: means posted or published in accordance with Ohio Revised Code § 7.12 and C.O. § 113.01, as set forth in Article IV, § 6. 
    Standing Committees: means any committee created by City Council pursuant to Article III, § 2 to address specific aspects of Council responsibility that is on-going in duration. 
(Ord. No. 36-2019 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-2-2019) 
ARTICLE II. - MEETINGS. 
1.  Regular Meetings. Regular Meetings of the City Council shall be held pursuant to a time and date fixed by ordinance or resolution. 
2.  Special Meetings. The President of City Council or any two members of City Council may call Special Meetings upon at least 24 hours written notice served to each member by any of the following methods; electronic transmission, personally served, or left at his or her usual place of residence. The notice shall indicate the date and time of the meeting and the subjects to be considered. 
3.  Cancelling Meetings. The President of City Council may cancel a Regular Meeting, with the concurrence of the Vice President. The President of City Council may cancel a Special Meeting that was called by the President. The President may cancel a Special Meeting that was called by someone other than the President, with the concurrence of the members that requested the Special Meeting. The City Clerk shall notify City Council and any news media organizations that have requested notification pursuant to Article II, § 10 or 11. 
4.  Place of Meetings. 
A.  Regular Meetings of the City Council will be held in the Municipal Services Center, unless a different location is authorized by ordinance or resolution. 
B.  Special Meetings of the City Council shall be held in the Municipal Services Center, unless a different location is set forth in the notice of the Special Meeting. 
5.  Agenda. 
A.  For all meetings of City Council, the Clerk shall prepare a tentative agenda of matters to be considered resulting from: 
(1)  A recommendation from a Council Conference Session, a City Board, City Commission, 
(2)  The request of the City Manager or City Attorney, 
(3)  The request of any member of City Council, or 
(4)  Appeals from any Board or Commission or Committee of the City. 
B.  The President, or in the absence thereof, the Vice President, or in the absence of both, the Council Member Designate, shall review the tentative agenda and may add or remove items from the tentative agenda prior to approving it. Once approved, the Clerk shall publish the tentative agenda in conformance with C.O. Chapter 113. If an item requested by a Council Member pursuant to Article II, § 5.A(3) or Article II, § 5.A(4) is removed, then the Clerk shall immediately notify the Council Member. 
C.  After the tentative agenda has been approved, a member of Council that receives the consent of two other members of Council shall have an item placed on the agenda. 
D.  Residents may request to have an item placed on the tentative agenda in the following manner: (1) by a request to and approval of the City Manager or City Attorney, (2) by a request to and approval of any City Council Member. The Council Member, City Attorney, or City Manager shall then direct the City Clerk to place the item by title on the tentative agenda pursuant Article II, § 5.A. After the tentative agenda has been approved, a resident may only request to have an item placed on the agenda by having a member of Council and two other members of Council place the item on the agenda pursuant to Article II, § 5.C. 
E.  Requests to have an item placed on the tentative agenda shall be submitted to the Clerk by twelve o'clock Noon of the Wednesday prior to the day of the meeting. 
F.  Staff should prepare the supporting documentation for agenda items recommended by a Council Conference Session, a City Board, a City Commission, or the City Manager. The Council Member should prepare the supporting documentation for agenda items requested by the Council Member. Supporting documentation should be submitted to the Clerk by four o'clock of the Wednesday prior to the day of the meeting. 
G.  Any ordinance or resolution appearing on the agenda shall be sponsored by a member of City Council or as prescribed by law. 
H.  The Clerk shall distribute to the City Council, prior to any meeting, the official agenda with any and all ordinances, resolutions, requests, plans, or reports attached thereto. 
I.  Pursuant to Section XI of the City Charter, concurrence is required for consideration of subjects not included in the notice of the meeting. For purposes of this requirement, notice of the meeting is the distribution to Council Members of the official agenda with any and all ordinances, resolutions, requests, plans, or reports attached thereto. The Charter requires twenty-four hour notice for calling a special meeting. 
J.  The City Manager and Council Member Updates are primarily intended for informational purposes and not for Council discussion or consideration of a topic. Pursuant to Section XI of the City Charter, Council consideration of a topic is not permitted unless that topic is specifically listed on the Council agenda or by unanimous consent of all Members. 
6.  Order of Business. 
A.  The President shall take the Chair at the hour appointed for the meeting of City Council and shall call the members to order and direct the Clerk or designee to call the roll at a Council Meeting. Attendance shall be taken at Council Conference Sessions. The minutes of the preceding Council Meeting and Council Conference Session shall be considered for approval at the next Council Meeting, unless otherwise directed by the President. The minutes shall accurately reflect the actions taken by City Council at the previous Council Meeting and the matters reviewed or actions taken at the previous Council Conference Session. Unless the minutes are to be published, they should contain mainly a record of what was done at the meeting, not what was said by the City Council Members. Upon a motion to approve City Council minutes, a City Council Member that submits a negative vote for approval shall also submit a motion to amend for City Council consideration. A City Council Member absent from that meeting may abstain from the vote to approve the minutes. 
B.  In the absence of the President, Vice President or Council Member Designate, the Clerk shall call the City Council to order and call the roll. If a quorum shall be present, the City Council shall elect by motion one of its members President Pro Tempore for that meeting or until the appearance of the President or Vice President, or Council Member Designate. 
C.  The Clerk or designee shall be present at all meetings of City Council, including Council Meetings, Council Conference Sessions, and committee meetings, and record the minutes of the proceedings. The Clerk shall attempt to have the minutes prepared by the next Council Meeting. However, the President may permit the Clerk additional time to prepare the minutes. Audio recordings may be substituted for written minutes provided they are a complete and accurate record of the meeting, the rationale for any decisions, and are in compliance with applicable state law. 
D.  This Rule shall not apply to forums or community events. 
7.  Preservation of Order and Speaking Privileges. 
A.  The President of City Council shall conduct meetings in accordance with these Rules and ensure that members of City Council, City employees, and other persons comply with these Rules. The President of City Council, at any meeting of Council, may designate any one or more police officers, firefighters, or other suitable persons to preserve order at the meeting. If any City Council Member, in speaking or otherwise, shall violate any rule of this City Council, the President shall call such Council Member to order; if such member shall be called to order while speaking, such Council Member shall immediately desist unless permitted to explain. 
B.  The City Manager, Director of Finance, City Clerk, and City Attorney, shall be entitled at all times to any of the privileges of the floor for the purpose of speaking upon any topic pending before Council. 
C.  The President of City Council may recognize members of the public who submit requests to speak to any legislative matter before City Council at the first, second or third reading and may fix time limits on such presentations. Speaker slips must be submitted to the City Clerk prior to the agenda item being considered by City Council. Conference session items not involving legislative action are intended to be a work session for Council and not a public hearing on the items being discussed. 
D.  In addition to or in lieu of appearing at a Council Meeting or during the portion of a Conference Session involving legislative action, members of the public may submit written materials to be delivered to City Council Members. Materials must be submitted to the City Clerk no later than 12:00 noon on the Friday preceding the Council Meeting or the Conference Session. The person submitting them is responsible for either providing 10 copies of the written materials or payment of the City's actual copying costs. (5 cents per page) 
E.  Members of the public planning to use a PowerPoint presentation or other electronic media format during their address to Council must submit the electronic media either through email or flash drive to the City Clerk's office no later than 11:00 a.m. on the day of the meeting. Members of the public planning to use any other electronic equipment during their address to Council must make prior arrangements with the City Clerk's office no later than 11:00 a.m. on the day of the meeting. 
F.  Council Members or Members of a Municipal Body shall be present in order to participate in the public meeting. Council Members and any Member of a Municipal Body while present at the meeting, may use any form of electronic transmission communication during any Council Meeting, Council Conference Session, Committee Meeting, or administrative hearing, provided that such use complies with the open meetings law, public records law, and the rules for quasi-judicial proceedings. Council Members using electronic transmission communication during public meetings are required to comply with Ohio Open Meeting laws. Rules regarding electronic transmission communication during an executive session shall be govern by Article II, § 13.D. 
8.  Notice of Regular and Organizational Meetings. 
A.  The Clerk shall post a statement of the time and place of regular meetings of each Municipal Body for each calendar year not later than the second day preceding the day of the first regular meeting (other than the organizational meeting) of the calendar year of that Municipal Body. The Clerk shall check at reasonable intervals to ensure that such statement remains so posted during such calendar year. If at any time during the calendar year the time or place of regular meeting(s) is changed on a permanent or temporary basis, a statement of the time and place of such changed regular meeting(s) shall be so posted by the Clerk at least 24 hours before the time of the first changed regular meeting. 
B.  The Clerk shall post a statement of the time and place of any organizational meeting of a Municipal Body at least 24 hours before the time of such organizational meeting. 
C.  Upon the adjournment of any regular meeting to another day for the purpose of continuing business of the meeting, the Clerk shall promptly post notice of the time and place of such adjourned meeting. 
9.  Notice of Special Meetings. 
A.  Except in the case of a special meeting referred to in Article II, § 10.D the Clerk shall, no later than 24 hours before the time of a special meeting of a Municipal Body, post a statement of the time, place and purpose(s) of such special meeting. 
B.  The statement under this Article II, § 9 and the notifications under Article II, § 10 shall state the purpose(s) of such meeting and may state, as a general purpose, that any other business that may properly come before such Municipal Body at such meeting may be considered and acted upon. 
C.  Upon the adjournment of any special meeting to another day for the purpose of continuing business of the meeting, the Clerk shall promptly post notice of the time and place of such adjourned meeting. 
10.  Notice to News Media of Special Meeting. 
A.  Any news media organization that desires to be given advance notifications of special meetings of a Municipal Body shall file with the Clerk a written request therefore. Except in the event of an emergency requiring immediate official action as referred to in Article II, § 10.D., a special meeting shall not be held unless at least 24 hours advance notice of the time, place and purpose(s) of such special meeting is given to the news media that have requested such advance notifications in accordance with Article II, § 10.A. 
B.  News media requests for such advance notification of special meetings shall specify: the Municipal Body that is the subject of such request; the name of the requesting organization; the name and address of its representative to whom such written notification may be mailed, faxed, telegraphed, transmitted by electronic mail or delivered; and the names, street addresses, telephone numbers, facsimile machine or electronic mail numbers (including addresses and telephone, facsimile machine or electronic mail numbers at which notifications may be given either during or outside of business hours) of at least two persons to either of whom oral notifications to such organization may be given. Any such request shall be effective for one year from the date of filing with the Clerk or until the Clerk receives written notice from such organization canceling or modifying such request, whichever is earlier. Each requesting news media or organization shall be informed of such period of effectiveness at the time it files its request. Such requests may be modified or extended only by filing a complete new request with the Clerk. A request shall not be deemed to be made unless it is complete in all respects, and the instructions in such request may be conclusively relied on by the Municipal Body that is the subject of such request, and the Clerk. 
C.  The Clerk shall give such oral notification or written notification, or both, as the Clerk determines, to the news media that have requested such advance notification in accordance with Article II, § 10.A, of the time, place and purpose(s) of each special meeting, at least 24 hours prior to the time of such special meeting. Notification may be made by e-mail, fax, voice message, or other electronic transmission. 
D.  In the event of an emergency requiring immediate official action, a special meeting may be held without giving 24-hour advance notification thereof to the requesting news media. The person or persons calling such meeting, or the Clerk on their behalf, if directed to do so, shall immediately give oral or written notification, or both, as the person or persons giving such notification determine, of the time, place and purposes of such special meeting to such news media as have requested such advance notification in accordance with Article II, § 10.A. Notification may be made by e-mail, fax, voice message, or other electronic transmission. 
11.  Notification of Discussion of Specific Types of Public Business. 
A.  Any person, upon written request and as provided herein, may obtain reasonable advance notification of all meetings at which any specific type of public business is scheduled to be discussed. Such person may file a written request with the Clerk specifying: the person's name, and the address(es) and telephone, facsimile machine, or email address at or through which the person can be reached during and outside of business hours; the specific type of public business, the discussion of which the person is requesting advance notification; the Municipal Body that is the subject of such request; and the number of calendar months (not to exceed six), which the request covers. Such request may be canceled by request from such person to the Clerk. Each such written request shall be processed in conformance with the City's Records Management policies. Such requests may be modified or extended only by filing a complete new request with the Clerk. A request shall not be deemed to be made unless it is complete in all respects, and such request may be conclusively relied on by the Municipal Body that is the subject of such request, and the Clerk. 
B.  The Clerk shall, if practicable, give such advance notification under this Article II, § 11 by written notification, either printed on paper or sent via email, fax, or other electronic transmission. If such written notification cannot be given or has not been given, the Clerk shall attempt to give oral notification either in person or via a voice message. The contents of written notification under this Article II, § 11 may be a copy of the agenda of the meeting. 
12.  Miscellaneous Notice Provisions. 
A.  Any person may visit, email, or telephone the office of the Clerk during that office's regular business hours to determine, based on information available at that office, the time and place of regular or conference session meetings; the time, place and purposes of any then known special meetings; and whether the available agenda of any such future meeting states that any specific type of public business, identified by such person, is to be discussed at such meeting. 
B.  Any notification provided herein to be given by the Clerk may be given by any person acting on behalf of or under the authority of the Clerk. Notification may be made by e-mail, fax, voice message, or other electronic transmission. 
C.  A reasonable attempt at notification shall constitute notification in compliance with these Rules. 
D.  To ensure compliance with these Rules as to notice, each Municipal Body, other than the City Council, shall designate the member, Clerk, Secretary or other agent of such body who shall be responsible for timely advising the Clerk of future meetings of such Municipal Body and the subject matter to be discussed at such meetings, to the extent that such subject matter is known. 
E.  The Clerk shall maintain a record of the date and manner, and time if pertinent under these Rules, of all actions taken with regard to notices required by these Rules, and shall retain copies of proofs of publication of any notices published thereunder. 
13.  Executive Sessions. 
A.  The City Charter provides that "all meetings of Council or its committees shall be open to the public, except executive sessions which may be held pursuant to State law." Pursuant to Section 121.22 of the Ohio Revised Code and City Charter, City Council or any other Municipal Body may hold an executive session only after a majority of the public body determines, by a roll call vote, to hold such a session for the consideration of any of the following matters: 
(1)  To consider the appointment, employment, dismissal, discipline, promotion, demotion, or compensation of a public employee or official, or the investigation of charges or complaints against a public employee, official, licensee, or regulated individual, unless the public employee, official, licensee, or regulated individual requests a public hearing. Except as otherwise provided by law, no public body shall hold an executive session for the discipline of an elected official for conduct related to the performance of the elected official's official duties or for the elected official's removal from office. The motion and vote to hold that executive session need not include the name of any person to be considered at the meeting. 
(2)  To consider the purchase of property for public purposes for the sale of property at competitive bidding or any other methods of sale permitted under the law, if premature disclosure of information would give an unfair competitive or bargaining advantage to a person whose personal, private interest is adverse to the general public interest. No member of a public body shall use this subsection as a subterfuge for providing covert information to prospective buyers or sellers. A purchase or sale of public property is void if the seller or buyer of the public property has received covert information from a member of a public body that has not been disclosed to the general public in sufficient time for other prospective buyers and sellers to prepare and submit offers. If the minutes of the public body show that all meetings and deliberations of the public body have been conducted in compliance with this section, any instrument executed by the public body purporting to convey, lease, or otherwise dispose of any right, title, or interest in any public property shall be conclusively presumed to have been executed in compliance with this section insofar as title or other interest of any bona fide purchasers, lessees, or transferees of the property is concerned. 
(3)  Conferences with an attorney for the public body concerning disputes involving the public body that are the subject of pending or imminent court action or where the attorney conference is privileged based on attorney-client confidentiality. 
(4)  Preparing for, conducting, or reviewing negotiations or bargaining sessions with public employees concerning their compensation or other terms and conditions of their employment. 
(5)  Details relative to the security arrangements and emergency response protocols for a public body or a public office, if disclosure of the matters discussed could reasonably be expected to jeopardize the security of the public body, the City or any other public body or any other public office. 
(6)  Matters required to be kept confidential by federal law or regulations or state statutes. 
(7)  To consider confidential information related to the marketing plans, specific business strategy, production techniques, trade secrets, or personal financial statements of an applicant for economic development assistance, or to negotiations with other political subdivisions respecting requests for economic development assistance, provided that both of the following conditions apply: 
a.  The information is directly related to a request for economic development assistance that is to be provided or administered under any provision of Chapter 715., 725., 1724., or 1728., or sections 701.07, 3735.67 to 3735.70, 5709.40 to 5709.43, 5709.61 to 5709.69, 5709.73 to 5709.75, or 5709.77 to 5709.81 of the Revised Code, or that involves public infrastructure improvements or the extension of utility services that are directly related to an economic development project. 
b.  A unanimous quorum of the public body determines, by a roll call vote, that the executive session is necessary to protect the interests of the applicant or the possible investment or expenditure of public funds to be made in connection with the economic development project. 
(8)  To consider negotiations for economic development assistance, which may include information such as marketing plans, specific business strategies, production techniques, trade secrets, or personal financial statements, or related to negotiations with other political subdivisions as to requests for economic development assistance. The information considered in executive session must be directly related to economic development assistance which may be provided by the City, or involving public infrastructure improvements or the extension of utility services directly related to an economic development project. 
(9)  And for any other matters that State law permits to be discussed in executive session. 
B.  The motion and vote to hold an executive session shall state which one or more of the approved matters listed in Article II, § 13.A are to be considered at the executive session. If the executive session is for personnel matters, the motion and vote shall also state which one or more of the approved purposes (appointment, discipline, compensation, etc.) listed in Article II, § 13.A(1) are the purposes for which the executive session is to be held. 
C.  Council may hold executive sessions during a regular or special Council Meeting or Council Conference Session. 
D.  Members of Council or Members of any Municipal Body shall not use electronic transmission or video and telephonic communication during any executive session to communicate with individuals or entities not present in the executive session unless the entity or individual is invited to participate in the meeting through telephonic or video communication for the purpose on subject matters of executive session. Any communication must be held to the same confidentiality rules as set forth in Article II, § 14. A Council Member not present in a regular meeting is not permitted to participate in an executive session through video or telephonic communication unless the absence was due to an emergency. Council may permit participation by a Council Member who is absent in the regular meeting due to an emergency provided the minutes shall reflect that the Council Member participated in the executive session, the matter was not economic development, and the Council Member is able to maintain the confidentially for the executive session. Council shall announce prior to or after the executive session whether a Council Member participated through video or telephonic communication. 
E.  Members of Council shall not take any action during executive session. The confidentiality requirement contained in these rules and under state law shall apply to executive sessions. 
14.  Confidential Information. 
A.  No present or former Member of City Council or Member of any Municipal Body shall disclose or use, without appropriate authorization, any information acquired by them in the course of their official duties which is clearly designated as confidential. Confidential information shall include any information whether obtained in executive session or by written or oral communication, privileged information provided to Council Members by the City Attorney which must necessarily remain confidential for the proper conduct of government business, including matters required to be kept confidential by federal law or rules or state statutes. 
B.  Any present or former Member of City Council or Member of any Municipal Body who violates the confidentiality clause of City Council rules may be prosecuted pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code § 102.03(B) a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
15.  Consent Agenda. 
A.  The Consent Agenda of a Council Meeting may include items such as the approval of minutes, appointments, resolutions of appreciation or commendation, applications for and acceptance of grants, and minor or routine legislation, including minor code changes. The Consent Agenda may also include legislation approving the expenditure of funds for the purchase of goods or services which have already been appropriated in the annual appropriation ordinance, except for the design, inspection, or construction of public improvements. Legislative items approved on the Consent Agenda shall be deemed to have had first reading. Zoning ordinances and emergency legislation shall not be included on the Consent Agenda. The items to be included on the Consent Agenda shall be approved by the President, or in the absence thereof, the Vice President, or in the absence of both, the Council Member Designate. 
B.  An item shall be removed from the Consent Agenda of a Council Meeting for the purposes of consideration under the regular agenda upon request of a Council Member. The Clerk shall inform the President of any request by a resident to remove an item from the Consent Agenda. Thereafter the President may request the item be removed or shall ask whether any Council Member wants the item removed from the Consent Agenda. Any legislative item removed from the Consent Agenda shall be read in accordance with these rules. 
C.  All items listed on the Consent Agenda can be received and approved with a single motion and vote. Such action shall be deemed the same as if each item had been read and voted upon separately. Consent Agenda items do not need to be read by title, provided that the description of the item in the Consent Agenda provides reasonable notice of the purpose and nature of the item. 
16.  Office Hours. City Council may establish regular office hours when at least one, but no more than three, Members will be available to meet with residents to discuss matters of concern or interest on a first come, first served basis. The hours shall be posted in the Municipal Services Center and available from the Clerk's office. Residents are free to contact individual Members on their own to arrange an appointment to discuss such matters. Discussion with Members is subject to the limitations concerning ex parte communications regarding administrative appeals. 
17.  Public Forums. City Council may schedule public forums for public comment on a specific topic(s) as a part of or all of a Council Meeting or Council Conference Session. The President, or in the absence thereof, the Vice President, or in the absence of both, the Council Member Designate may establish reasonable rules for the public forums, including but not limited to regulating the length of time for the public forum and for each speaker, the total number of speakers and the number of speakers permitted to speak on any particular topic, and the use of speaker slips. A speaker's conduct shall be subject to the right of the President, or in the absence thereof, the Vice President, or in the absence of both, the Council Member Designate to preserve the order and decorum of the public forum. The schedule of public forums shall be pursuant to Article II, § 5. Public forums shall not include discussions regarding any pending or impending administrative appeal. Public forums shall not conflict with the Charter requiring notice of the matters to be considered. 
18.  Members of Collective Bargaining Units. City Council Members should refrain from meeting with members of collective bargaining units to discuss matters related to wages, hours, terms, and other conditions of employment. 
19.  Legislative Prayer. City Council has a long history of beginning Council meetings with a legislative prayer. The City Clerk is responsible for scheduling the legislative prayer in accordance with the guidelines approved by the City Attorney. The prayer is intended for the benefit of the Council Members and should be directed towards them and not the audience. Employees and members of the audience are welcome to not participate in the prayer. The prayer shall not be conducted by Council Members or City employees. 
(Ord. No. 36-2019 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-2-2019) 
ARTICLE III. - COMMITTEES. 
1.  The President of City Council or City Council may, from time to time, create committees for limited purposes and duration. Such committees shall not consist of more than three members of City Council and shall report to City Council for any formal action. 
2.  City Council may from time to time, create standing committees to address specific aspects of City Council responsibility. Such committees shall consist of not more than three members of City Council, shall report to City Council for any formal action, and shall be appointed by the President of City Council subject to approval by City Council. City Council may set forth the terms of the committee members and may dissolve a standing committee at any time by a majority vote. The City Clerk shall maintain the roster of any standing committee and provide a yearly update to City Council of all standing committees created pursuant to this rule. 
3.  Committees created by Council are subject to the requirements regarding notice, executive sessions, and confidentiality set forth in Article II, §§ 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14. 
4.  Committees created by Council may adopt additional rules that are not inconsistent or contrary to federal or state law, the City Charter, City ordinances, or these rules. 
ARTICLE IV. - LEGISLATION. 
1.  Action by Ordinance, Resolution or Motion. Four Votes Required. (Except as otherwise provided in these Council Rules or by Charter) shall be taken by ordinance or resolution, or motion, and which shall require, for its passage or adoption, an affirmative vote of at least four City Council Members and entered upon the journal. 
2.  Written Form. Each ordinance or resolution shall be introduced by a member of City Council in written or printed form. The sponsoring City Council Member's name shall appear on the relevant agenda and in the legislative record following passage or adoption. 
3.  One Subject. Each ordinance or resolution shall contain not more than one subject, which shall be fully described in the caption in easily understood terms. 
4.  Number of Readings Required. 
A.  Each ordinance or resolution shall be read at a Council Meeting or a Conference Session by title only, provided the Council may by majority vote require the entire ordinance or resolution to be read in full. 
B.  Except as provided in Article IV, § 4.C, Article IV, § 4.D, or Article IV, § 4.E, each ordinance or resolution shall be read at a Council Meeting or a Conference Session on three different days. 
C.  Only two readings shall be required at a Council Meeting or Conference Session when the subject matter of the ordinance or resolution was previously included on a Conference Session agenda for discussion. If the Conference Session agenda has the subject matter listed for discussion as well as action, the item only requires two readings. 
D.  Only one reading shall be required at a Council Meeting or Conference Session when Council by an affirmative vote of five members waives the reading requirement if all members are present or an affirmative vote of at least four members if two or more members are absent or abstains from the vote. 
E.  Only one reading shall be required at a Council Meeting or Conference Session when the ordinance or resolution involves any one of the following: 
(1)  Appropriations for current expenses. 
(2)  Street improvements petitioned for by the owners of a majority of the feet front of the property benefited and to be especially assessed for the cost of the improvements. 
(3)  The second or subsequent ordinance or resolution required to complete the legislation necessary to make and pay for any public improvement. 
(4)  The expenditure of funds for the purchase or lease of property or services which have already been appropriated in the annual appropriation ordinance. 
(5)  The award of a contract to the lowest and best bidder pursuant to UACO Chapter 138-Procurement Code. 
(6)  A resolution or proclamation of support or appreciation that does not involve the expenditure of City funds or creating any rights or obligations. 
(7)  The acceptance of deeds to the City. 
(8)  The adoption of the salary schedule pursuant to UACO Section 155.02. 
(9)  Consent Agenda items. 
(10)  The adoption of the tax budget and the subsequent acceptance of the tax rates and the acceptance, rejection, or modification of the recommendations of the tax incentive review council. 
(11)  Amending the Rules of Council. 
(12)  The approval or granting of economic development incentives that exceeds the city manager contracting or grant authority which have already been appropriated in the annual or midyear appropriation ordinance. 
(13)  A contract or agreement that does not involve the expenditure of funds. 
(14)  Settlement agreements recommended by the City Attorney. 
(15)  Resolutions directing the City Manager or staff to take specific administrative action for which the City Manager or staff already has authority to act. 
(16)  Creation of a committee/task force. 
(17)  Collective bargaining agreements. 
(18)  Tax Increment Financing Legislation. 
(19)  Issuance of Bonds. 
(20)  Motions by Council to adopt policies, procedures, and appointments. 
(21)  Contracts under $40,000.00 but are before Council for approval. 
F.  Consent Agenda items do not need to be read by title, provided that the description of the item in the Consent Agenda provides reasonable notice of the purpose and nature of the item. 
5.  Effective Date. 
A.  Except as provided in Article IV, § 5.B or Article IV, § 5.C, no ordinance or resolution shall go into effect until thirty days after it is passed by Council. 
B.  An ordinance or resolution shall go into immediate effect or as stated in the ordinance when Council by an affirmative vote of five members determines that the ordinance or resolution is an emergency measure necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, provided that the reasons for such necessity are set forth in the ordinance or resolution. 
C.  An ordinance or resolution shall go into immediate effect when it involves any one of the following: 
(1)  Appropriations for current expenses. 
(2)  Street improvements petitioned for by the owners of a majority of the feet front of the property benefited and to be especially assessed for the cost of the improvements. 
(3)  The second or subsequent ordinance or resolution required to complete the legislation necessary to make and pay for any public improvement. 
(4)  The expenditure of funds for the purchase or lease of property or services which have already been appropriated in the annual appropriation ordinance. 
(5)  The award of a contract to the lowest and best bidder pursuant to UACO Chapter 138-Procurement Code. 
(6)  A resolution or proclamation of support or appreciation that does not involve the expenditure of City funds or creates any rights or obligations. 
(7)  The acceptance of deeds to the City. 
(8)  The adoption of the salary schedule pursuant to UACO Section 155.02. 
(9)  The adoption of the tax budget and the subsequent acceptance of the tax rates and the acceptance, rejection, or modification of the recommendations of the tax incentive review council. 
(10)  Amending the Rules of Council. 
(11)  The approval or granting of economic development incentives that exceeds the city manager contracting or grant authority which have already been appropriated in the annual or midyear appropriation ordinance. 
(12)  The application for and acceptance of grants. 
(13)  A contract or agreement that does not involve the expenditure of funds. 
(14)  Settlement agreements recommended by the City Attorney. 
(15)  Resolutions directing the City Manager or staff to take specific administrative action for which the City Manager or staff already has authority to act. 
(16)  Creation of a committee/task force. 
(17)  Collective bargaining agreements. 
(18)  Approval of the budget. 
(19)  Tax Increment Financing Legislation. 
(20)  Issuance of Bonds. 
(21)  Motions by Council to adopt policies, procedures, and appointments. 
(22)  Contracts under $40,000.00 but are before Council for approval. 
6.  Publication. 
A.  All municipal ordinances, resolutions, statements, orders, proclamations, notices, and reports required by law or ordinance to be published shall be published by copies thereof in a public place in the Municipal Services Center of the City of Upper Arlington for a period of not less than ten days, by posting copies thereof on the City's website, or by publication thereof in any newspaper printed in Ohio and of general circulation in the City of Upper Arlington, provided, however, notices to bidders for the construction of public improvements and notices of the sale of bonds shall be published as provided by Upper Arlington Codified Ordinance or statute (Ohio Revised Code). 
B.  Pursuant to Section XI of the City Charter, concurrence is required for consideration of subjects not included in the notice of the meeting. For purposes of this requirement, the distribution to Council Members of the official agenda with any and all ordinances, resolutions, requests, plans, or reports attached thereto shall be the official notice of the meeting. The Charter requires twenty-four hour notice for calling a special meeting. There is no requirement that this notice be published. Notification may be made by e-mail, fax, voice message, or other electronic transmission. 
7.  Sponsorship. 
A.  Any member of City Council may initiate and sponsor legislation. Sponsorship of such legislation is an indication that a City Council Member is a proponent of the subject matter addressed by such legislation. 
B.  The Clerk shall assign on a rotating basis a member of City Council to sponsor legislation initiated by staff or Council committee. Sponsorship of such legislation is not an indication that a City Council Member is a proponent of the subject matter addressed by such legislation. 
8.  Voting Responsibility. 
A.  All members of City Council have the responsibility to vote on any issue before City Council unless the member is required to abstain due to conflict of interest or the appearance of impropriety. Members shall be required to state the reason for abstaining. An abstention shall not count as a vote in the affirmative or negative on any such issue. A member who is present but remains silent during a roll call or voice vote shall be counted as an affirmative vote. Pursuant to Roberts Rules, Council Members may vote to approve minutes of meetings they did not attend. Council Members may also abstain from approving minutes of a meetings they did not attend. 
B.  The President of City Council shall call for a voice vote unless a roll call vote is required by law or when a roll call vote is requested by the President of City Council or any Member of Council. Each roll call vote shall be rotated, so that the Council Member whose name was recorded first on the last preceding vote shall be recorded last. The Council Member whose name was recorded second on the preceding roll call vote shall be recorded first and so on throughout the membership, alphabetically. The President of City Council shall always be recorded last 
C.  Clerical Adjustments. The City Clerk shall have the authority to make non-substantive changes to legislation (e.g., typographical errors) following passage by City Council with the consent of the President of City Council. 
9.  Quorum Requirements. Four members of City Council shall constitute a quorum for transaction of business at any meeting. In the absence of a quorum at any meeting, a majority of those present may adjourn the meeting until a quorum can be present. Notice of such adjourned meeting shall be given to all members of City Council. 
(Ord. No. 36-2019 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-2-2019) 
ARTICLE V. - RULES GOVERNING PROCEDURES. 
1.  Parliamentary Authority. The rules contained in the current edition of Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised shall govern the Council in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with these Rules of Council and any special rules of order the Council may adopt. The City Attorney shall serve as Parliamentarian. 
2.  Precedence of Motions. Motions are classified, as follows: 
 Main Motion 
 Subsidiary Motions 
 Privileged Motions 
 Incidental Motions 
 Motions that bring a question again before the assembly. 
The main motion, the seven subsidiary motions and the five privileged motions fall into a definite order of precedence, which gives a particular rank to each of these thirteen motions. The main motion ranks lowest. Each of the other twelve motions has its proper position in the order, taking precedence over the motions that rank below it and yielding to those that rank above it. 
A.  Main Motion. Brings business before the Assembly. The lowest ranking motion (requires a second is debatable, amendable, majority vote required, can be reconsidered). 
B.  Subsidiary Motions. Aids an assembly in handling or disposing of a main motion: 
 Postpone Indefinitely: cancels the main motion and avoids a direct vote on the question (requires a second, is debatable, majority vote required). 
 Amend: to modify the main motion before it is voted on (requires a second, is debatable (if applied to a debatable motion)). Amendable by primary and secondary amendment, if germane, majority vote required, can be reconsidered. In amending an ordinance or resolution, it shall not be necessary to set forth in full the ordinance or resolution, as amended, but it shall be sufficient to identify with certainty the section, subsection, or paragraph being amended and to set forth the same in full, as amended. 
 Commit or Refer: to assign to a small group to investigate or study the main motion and any amendments attached to it (requires a second, is debatable, amendable, majority vote required, can be reconsidered). 
 Postpone to a Certain Time: to put off action on the pending questions, within limits, to a definite day, meeting or hour, or until after a certain event (requires a second, is debatable, amendable, majority vote required, can be reconsidered). 
 Limit or Extend Debate: to exercise special control over debate (requires a second, amendable, ? vote required, can be reconsidered). 
 Previous Question (Close Debate): to close debate and vote immediately (requires a second, ? vote required, can be reconsidered). 
 Lay on the Table: to set aside business temporarily when something else of immediate urgency has arisen (requires a second, majority vote required). 
C.  Privileged Motions. Do not relate to the pending business, but have to do with special matters of immediate and overriding importance, which should be allowed to interrupt the consideration of anything else. 
 Call for the Orders of the Day: one member can require the assembly to conform to its agenda, program or order of business. 
 Raise a Question of Privilege: a request, which relates to the rights of the assembly or its members. 
 Recess: a short intermission. The Chair may call a recess without a second or a vote. A member other than the Chair may make a motion for a recess, which requires a second, is amendable, and requires a majority vote. 
 Adjourn: to close the meeting (requires a second, majority vote required). 
 Fix the Time to Which to Adjourn: to set the time for another meeting to continue business of the session (requires a second, amendable, majority vote required, can be reconsidered). 
D.  Incidental Motions. Deal with questions of procedure, which must be decided before business can proceed. Incidental Motions have no rank. 
 Point of Order: when the rules of the assembly are being violated. 
 Appeal: permits the assembly to sustain or reverse the Chair's ruling, if members believe the Chair has ruled incorrectly (requires a second, majority vote required, can be reconsidered). 
 Suspend the Rules: to do something that cannot be done without violating one or more of the regular rules, providing the proposal is not in conflict with the City Charter or state or federal law (requires a second, ? vote required). The suspension of rules shall require an affirmative vote of five members of Council. 
 Division of the Question: allows a motion with several parts, which are capable of standing as a complete proposition to be divided and considered separately (requires a second, amendable, majority vote required). 
 Division of the Assembly: to require a vote to be retaken when a member doubts the result of the vote as announced by the President of Council (motion does not require a second, is not amendable, no vote required). 
 Request or Inquiries: Refer to Exhibit A for information on motions. 
E.  Motions that Bring A Question Again Before the Assembly. 
 Take from the Table: to bring back as the pending question a motion that has been previously laid on the table (requires a second and majority vote). 
 Rescind or Amend Something Previously Adopted: to strike out an entire main motion, resolution, rule or to change an action previously taken or ordered (requires a second, is amendable, debatable, 2/3 vote or majority vote with notice or a majority of the entire membership). 
 Reconsider: to bring back for further consideration a motion, which has already been voted on (requires a second, majority vote, debatable, if motion to be reconsidered is debatable). Only a member who voted on the prevailing side can move to reconsider. A motion to reconsider must be made within three months of the original vote on the motion. 
3.  Renewal of Motions. Motions that failed to be adopted may be renewed at another meeting, but may not be reintroduced at the same meeting. No assembly is obliged to repeat consideration of business a second time on the same day except by use of such motions as Reconsider and Rescind. 
ARTICLE VI. - AMENDMENT. 
1.  Council shall adopt or amend its Rules by ordinance. 
2.  These Rules contain provisions that are mandated by City Charter or state law. Any amendment of these Rules must be consistent with the City Charter and any applicable state or federal law. 
3.  Members of City Council shall conduct a review of Rules of Council, following City Council's organization, which occurs every two years. 
4.  Any proposed amendment or addition to these Rules of Council may be referred to a committee composed of three members of City Council designated by the President. The committee shall report its recommendations to the President for consideration by the Council at the next Council Meeting. 
5.  These Rules of Council may be amended at any Council Meeting by an affirmative vote of five members. 
ARTICLE VII. - COUNCIL PERSONNEL POLICIES. 
1.  Resignation. The resignation of a member of City Council shall not take effect until same has been accepted by a majority vote of the members of City Council, exclusive of the person tendering the resignation. 
2.  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled in accordance with Section IV of the City Charter. 
3.  Vacation. City Council may direct the time and duration of its vacation period. 
4.  Certificates of Election. Members of Council shall provide the Clerk with a copy of their certificate of election prior to being sworn into office. The Clerk shall retain the copies as part of the permanent records of the City. 
5.  Pursuant to Section XII of the City Charter, except for inquiries and investigations, no Council Member shall directly interfere with the conduct of any department or employee thereunder, but rather shall deal solely with the City Manager or appointing authority. Neither Council nor any Council Member shall dictate the appointment of any person to office or employment by the City Manager or the appointing authority. 
6.  Council Members shall not use their private email addresses when communicating with staff or the public regarding City business. If they receive an email concerning City business on their private emails, Council Members shall forward the email to their City email address. 
7.  Quasi-judicial role. Council Members serve in a quasi-judicial role when hearing appeals from BZAP or other administrative hearings. These appeals or administrative hearings require testimony to be taken and a ruling or decision is made on the testimony and documents presented at the hearing. Just like a trial, members of the public are not free to offer their opinion concerning the matter. Council Members should refrain from speaking with a member of the public, an attorney, or a developer regarding any appeal or administrative hearing matter that may come before Council. Council Members may direct the public to communicate with the City Manager who is permitted to discuss the matter. If Council Members receive written "ex parte" communication relating to an appeal or administrative hearing matter, the Member should transmit the communication to the Clerk to be included in the official records. The Clerk shall forward the communication to the parties as soon as practicable before the hearing. The prohibition on ex parte communication is based on fairness to all parties. 
(Ord. No. 36-2019 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-2-2019) 
ARTICLE VIII. - MUNICIPAL BODY. 
1.  Unless otherwise provided by Council, the following rules shall apply to all Municipal Bodies: 
 Article I-Definitions where applicable; 
 Article II, §§ 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14; 
 Article V, §§ 1, 2, and 3. 
2.  Municipal Bodies may adopt additional rules that are not inconsistent or contrary to federal or state law, the City Charter, City ordinances, or these rules. 
3.  Municipal Bodies are subject to Ohio Open Meeting laws Public Records laws. 
(Ord. No. 36-2019 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-2-2019) 
COMPARATIVE TABLE - RULES OF COUNCIL 
    This table shows the location within the Rules of Council of those ordinances which are included herein. 
Ordinance Number Date Section Section in Rules 29-2016  5- 9-2016       Added Arts. I-VIII 36-2019  6- 2-2019 1(Exh. A) Art. I Art. II Art. IV Art. VII Art. VIII  
Part 1 - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE 
CHAPTER 101. - CODIFIED ORDINANCES 

§ 101.01 - DESIGNATION, HOW CITED. 
The provisions contained in this and the following chapters shall constitute the Codified Ordinances of Upper Arlington, Ohio, 1960. 
The Codified Ordinances of Upper Arlington, Ohio, 1960, may be referred to as the Codified Ordinances or the Municipal Code; any component Code of the Codified Ordinances may be referred to by its name, such as the Traffic Code; and sections of the Codified Ordinances may be cited by the designation C.O. followed by the number such as C.O. § 101.01. 
§ 101.02 - AMENDMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTS. 
The Codified Ordinances may be amended or supplemented at any time and, when any amendment or supplement is adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of Council to make the same a part thereof, such amendment or supplement shall be incorporated in, and deemed a part of the Codified Ordinances, so a reference to the Codified Ordinances shall be understood and construed as including the Codified Ordinance of Upper Arlington, Ohio, 1960, and any and all such amendments and supplements. 
§ 101.03 - INTERPRETATION. 
In the construction of the Codified Ordinances, the following rules shall control, excepting those inconsistent with the manifest intent of council as disclosed in a particular provision, section or Code: 
    Calendar-Computation of time: The terms month and year shall mean the calendar month or year. The time expressed in days within which an act is to be done or a period is to expire shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day except if the last be Sunday, it shall be excluded. If time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday shall be excluded. 
    City and municipality: The words city and municipality shall mean the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
    City Hall: The term City Hall shall mean the public building located at 3600 Tremont Road in the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
    Conjunctions: And shall include or and or shall include and, if the sense so requires. 
    Council: Council means the Council of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
    Fire division: The term fire division or fire department shall mean the fire division of the department of public safety of the city. 
    Gender: Words importing the masculine shall extend and be applied to the female and neuter genders. 
    General rule: Excepting as otherwise provided in this section words and phrases shall be construed according to the common usage of language; provided, however, that technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a special meaning in the law, shall be construed according to such technical or special meaning. 
Whenever in the Codified Ordinances authority is given to an officer or an act is required to be performed, such authority may be exercised and such act may be performed, at the instance of such officer, by a deputy or subordinate unless contrary to law or to the clear intent of any such particular provision. 
    Joint authority: words giving authority to a board, commission or to three (3) or more municipal officers or employees or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority thereof unless otherwise specifically provided. 
    Municipal building: The terms municipal building and Municipal Services Center shall mean the public building located at 3600 Tremont Road in the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
    Number: Words in the plural shall include the singular and in the singular shall include the plural number. 
    Owner: The word owner when applied to property, shall include any part owner, joint owner or tenant in common, of the whole or any part of such property. 
    Person: The word person shall extend to and be applied to associations, clubs, corporations, firms and partnerships, as well as to individuals. 
    Police division: The terms police division or police department shall mean the police division of the department of public safety of the city. 
    Premises: The word premises when used as applicable to property shall extend to and include land and buildings. 
    Public authority: The term public authority shall extend to and include the board of education of the municipality, the municipality, the county commissioners, the State of Ohio, the United States of America, and any duly authorized public official, board or commission. 
    Property: The word property shall include real and personal, and any mixed and lesser estates or interests therein; the words personal property shall include every kind of property except real property; and the words real property shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Reasonable time: In all cases where provision is made for an act to be done or notice to be given within a reasonable time, it shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such act or giving of such notice. 
    Street: The word street shall be construed to include alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, streets and other public ways in the Municipality. 
    Tenant or occupant: The words tenant or occupant as applied to a building or land shall extend and be applied to any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or any part of a building or land, alone or with others. 
    Tenses: The use of any verb in the present tense shall include the future. 
§ 101.04 - SEPARABILITY. 
Each section and each part of each section of the Codified Ordinances is hereby declared to be an independent section or part of a section and, notwithstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any such section or part of a section, or any provision thereof, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held to be invalid the remaining sections or parts of sections and the application of such provision to any other person or circumstances, other than those as to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that the Codified Ordinances would have been adopted independently of such section, sections or parts of a section so held to be invalid. 
§ 101.05 - HEADINGS. 
The headings of the several sections, chapters and titles of the Codified Ordinances are intended as catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections, chapters and titles and shall not be deemed to be a part of the sections of law. 
§ 101.99 - GENERAL PENALTY. 
Whoever in the Codified Ordinances or in any ordinance heretofore or hereafter adopted, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in said Codified Ordinances the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of the Codified Ordinance or of any such ordinance is hereby made a misdemeanor, any violator upon conviction by the court, shall be fined in any amount not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00), or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each day any violation of any provision of the Codified Ordinances shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
CHAPTER 103. - OFFICIAL STANDARDS 

§ 103.01 - CORPORATE SEAL. 
The corporate seal of this city shall consist of a three-quarter circle of laurel leaves, representing accomplishment, connected at the top by the Latin words Contendite Ductum meaning Strive for Leadership. Within the circle shall be a torch and flame, representing enlightenment through continuous education, in a vertical position, with the words Upper Arlington in a horizontal position in the center of the circle, and the words Founded 1918 positioned directly underneath. 
§ 103.02 - BENCH MARK DATUM. 
The vertical datum to serve the City of Upper Arlington is the North American Vertical Datum of 1929 as established by the National Geologic Survey. 
CHAPTER 105. - ELECTIONS 

§ 105.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
(A)  Contribution: means any contribution that is required to be reported in the statement of contribution under ORC § 3517.10 and defined under ORC § 3517.01(B)(5). 
(B)  Personal funds: means contributions to the campaign committee of a candidate by the candidate or by the candidate's spouse, parents, children, sons-in law, daughters-in-law, brothers, sisters, grandparents, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, or grandparents by marriage. 
(C)  In-kind Contribution: means any contribution that is defined under ORC § 3517.01(B)(16). 
§ 105.02 - SOLICITATION OF ELECTION VIOLATION. 
(A)  No person shall solicit any employee or officer of the City of Upper Arlington to violate any provision of the Charter of the City of Upper Arlington or of this chapter or to do any act which that person has reason to believe would result in a violation of any provision of the Charter of the City of Upper Arlington or of this chapter. 
(B)  Any person who is unaware that the solicited person is an employee of the City of Upper Arlington, and who upon learning of that employment and of the provisions of this chapter, immediately ceases and desists from further solicitation, shall not be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
§ 105.03 - FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTION. 
(A)  Solicitation of contributions: No person shall solicit any employee of the City of Upper Arlington, to contribute any money or any articles of value to secure the nomination or election of any candidate for Council in the City of Upper Arlington. 
(B)  Contribution by employees: No employee, including council-appointed employees, of the City of Upper Arlington shall make any contribution of money or any articles of value toward the nomination or election of any candidate for Council in the City of Upper Arlington. 
(C)  Campaign funds: No candidate for, or member of, the Council of the City of Upper Arlington shall accept any contribution of money or other item of value from any employee, including council-appointed employees. 
(D)  No person, corporation, or organization shall make a contribution or in-kind contribution of more than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) in a calendar year to any candidate or member of council to be used as campaign funds. 
(E)  No candidate or member of council shall accept a contribution or in-kind contribution of more than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) in a calendar year to be used as campaign funds. 
(F)  No person, corporation, or organization shall make cash contributions to a candidate for or member of council totaling more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) to be used as campaign funds in each primary, special, or general election or in a non-election calendar year. 
(G)  Subsections (D), (E) and (F) shall not apply to personal funds. 
(H)  The provisions of the laws of the State of Ohio pertaining to elections that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this section shall remain in full force and effect and shall apply in addition to the requirements of this section. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the laws of the State of Ohio and provisions of this section, the provisions of this section shall control. 
§ 105.04 - POLITICAL ACTIVITY. 
(A)  No employee, including council-appointed employees, shall take an active part in securing the nomination or election of any candidate for council in the City of Upper Arlington. 
(B)  No employee, supervisor, council-appointed employee, member of council or candidate for council of the City of Upper Arlington shall request any employee or appointed official of the City of Upper Arlington to sign any nominating petition for any candidate for any office, or any petition designed to place any issue upon, the ballot in the City of Upper Arlington. 
(C)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prevent any person from: 
(1)  Exercising his right to vote upon any item appearing on the ballot in the City of Upper Arlington. 
(2)  Providing access to the electoral process by the signature of any petition designed to provide access for any candidate or issue to the ballot in the City of Upper Arlington. 
(3)  Expressing his private political views in a private context in such a manner that publication of his views does not result. 
(4)  Responding to factual questions put to him in his official capacity in areas of his official knowledge or expertise, or to requests for his official opinion in those areas wherein he is required to be able to reach an official opinion. 
(D)  No person shall do any act that has the effect of precluding or discouraging any employee, officer, etc. from exercising the rights described in C.O. § 105.04(C). 
§ 105.05 - POLITICAL COMMUNICATION-SIGNS. (Repealed) 
§ 105.99 - PENALTIES. 
(A)  Any person or campaign committee violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor and upon conviction of a subsequent violation of the same provision within one (1) year when the same is so specified in the complaint shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
CHAPTER 111. - COUNCIL 

§ 111.01 - REGULAR MEETINGS. 
The regular meetings of the city council shall be held at 7:30 p.m. on the second and fourth Mondays of each month. 
§ 111.02 - PLACE OF MEETINGS. 
(A)  Such meetings shall be held in the City Hall, 3600 Tremont Road, also known as the Upper Arlington Municipal Services Center, provided that the council may, by a majority vote of the members present and voting at a regular meeting, determine that the next succeeding meeting shall be held in one of the public schools within this city. Notice of any meeting to be held elsewhere than at the City Hall shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the City Hall for at least five (5) days prior to such meeting, and shall be published in the Upper Arlington News or in some newspaper of general circulation in this city at least three (3) days before such meeting. 
(B)  Special meetings of the council shall be held in the City Hall, unless a different location is authorized by unanimous consent of all members. 
(C)  Nothing in this section shall restrict the council's authority to recess a meeting which has been duly convened, and to resume the same at another location within this city which is open to the public. 
§ 111.03 - COUNCIL SALARIES. 
(A)  The salary of each member of council shall be three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per annum payable at the rate of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per month, effective January 10, 2012. The salary shall automatically increase to the minimum monthly salary necessary to qualify for a full month credit of contributing service in the public employee retirement system on the effective date of any increase in the statutory requirement. (Ord. No. 82-2011) 
(B)  Each council member shall have the option to participate within the city's health care benefits program. 
§ 111.04 - PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL'S SALARY. 
The salary of the president of council and ex-officio mayor, in addition to council salary, shall be one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per annum, payable at the rate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month (effective January 1, 1990). The salary of the vice president of council, in addition to council salary, shall be six hundred dollars ($600.00) per annum, payable at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per month (effective January 1, 1990). 
CHAPTER 113. - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 

§ 113.01 - PUBLICATION. 
All municipal ordinances, resolutions, statements, orders, proclamations, notices and reports required by law or ordinance to be published shall be published by posting copies thereof in a public place in the Municipal Services Center of the City of Upper Arlington for a period of not less than ten (10) days, by posting copies thereof on the city's website, or by publication thereof in any newspaper printed in Ohio and of general circulation in the City of Upper Arlington; provided, however, notices to bidders for the construction of public improvements and notices of the sale of bonds shall be published as provided by Upper Arlington Codified Ordinance or statute. 
Pursuant to Section XI of the City Charter, concurrence is required for consideration of subjects not included in the notice of the meeting. For purposes of this requirement, the distribution to council members of the official agenda with any and all ordinances, resolutions, requests, plans or reports attached thereto shall be the official notice of the meeting, provided it occurs at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting. There is no requirement that this notice be published. 
CHAPTER 131. - CITY MANAGER 

§ 131.01 - GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES. 
The city manager shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of council. The city manager shall exercise the executive authority of the city. The city manager shall be the head of such departments of the city as may be authorized by council, except the city clerk and law departments. The city manager shall be the chief law enforcement officer of the city. Except as authorized by C.O. §§ 138.10 and 139.06 or by council ordinance or resolution, the city manager shall execute all contracts and bonds for the city. The city manager shall have such other duties and powers as are delegated to the city manager by the Charter, by statute or ordinance and specifically the enumerated powers and duties as set forth in this chapter. 
    The city manager may designate in writing the person or persons that will assume the city manager's powers and duties, except C.O. § 131.10(B), in the city manager's absence or disability. In the event that the city manager has not made such designation, the powers and duties, except C.O. § 131.10(B), shall devolve upon the following officers, if available, in the order named: Assistant city manager, director of finance, or fire chief or police chief. Between the fire chief and the police chief, the powers and duties of the city manager shall devolve first upon the official who is a resident of the City of Upper Arlington; then, if neither or both are residents of the city, the powers and duties of the city manager shall devolve upon the official with the longest tenure in the official's respective position with the city. 
(Ord. No. 111-2009; Ord. No. 49-2013; Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 1, 2-13-2017) 
§ 131.02 - MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS, RECORDS. 
The city manager shall manage and supervise all public works and undertakings of the city, except as otherwise provided by law, and shall have all powers and perform all duties conferred upon him/her by law. The city manager shall keep a record of his/her proceedings, a copy of which, certified by him/her, shall be competent evidence in all courts. 
(Ord. No. 115-2010, 3-16-2011) 
§ 131.03 - STREET REPAIRS, CONSTRUCTION, ETC. 
The city manager shall supervise the improvement and repair of streets, avenues, alleys, lands, lanes, squares, bridges, sidewalks, playgrounds, sewers, drains, ditches, culverts, the lighting, sprinkling and cleaning of public places and the construction of public improvements and public works. 
(Ord. No. 115-2010, 3-16-2011) 
§ 131.04 - UTILITIES, PARKS, PUBLIC BUILDINGS. 
The city manager shall manage the municipal water, sewage disposal, garbage and other undertakings of the city and the parks and playgrounds; and he/she shall make and preserve surveys, maps, plans, drawings and estimates. He/she shall supervise the construction and have charge of maintenance of public buildings and other property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 115-2010, 3-16-2011) 
§ 131.05 - CITY PERMITS FOR ALCOHOL ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. 
(A)  The city manager or designee shall have authority to issue city permits for the consumption of intoxicating liquor and beer, as defined in C.O. § 549.01, at the following locations: 
(1)  Amelita Mirolo Barn and surrounding premises, including the fenced-in west patio and any other area under roof (including the stage area and any tents associated with permitted events). 
(2)  Northam Park in an enclosed area designated by the city manager 
(B)  The city manager or designee shall have authority to issue city permits to a nonprofit organization, as defined in ORC § 4303.201, for the sale and consumption of intoxicating liquor and beer, as defined in C.O. § 549.01, at the following location: 
(1)  Amelita Mirolo Barn and surrounding premises, including the fenced-in west patio and any other area under roof (including the stage area and any tents associated with permitted events). 
(2)  Northam Park in an enclosed area designated by the city manager. 
(C)  The city permits shall include the following requirements: 
(1)  Compliance with all state and local liquor laws, including but not limited to obtaining any required state permits; 
(2)  Proof of Dram shop insurance coverage or other adequate insurance based on usage; 
(3)  No sales after 11:00 p.m. 
(4)  No consumption after 11:00 p.m. 
(5)  All sales and consumption at the Amelita Mirolo Barn shall be limited to inside the Amelita Mirolo Barn, and the surrounding premises, including the fenced-in west patio and any other area under roof (including the stage area and any tents associated with permitted events). 
(6)  All sales and consumption at Northam Park shall be limited to within the enclosed area of Northam Park designated by the city manager and only during the annual event sponsored by the Chamber of Commerce currently known as the Taste of UA or during other special events authorized by city council. 
(7)  Other policies and regulations adopted by the city manager or designee and reviewed by city council including but not limited to the requirement to hire a special duty police officer. 
(D)  The city manager or designee shall establish written policies and regulations, subject to Council approval, for the administration and enforcement of this section. 
(E)  The city manager is directed to provide an annual report to city council from the date of passage of this ordinance that details any safety issues, occupancy numbers, revenue and any other information requested by a council member. 
(Ord. No. 25-2011, 5-9-2011; Ord. No. 54-2012, 9-24-2012; Ord. No. 40-2013, 6-10-2013) 
§§ 131.06, 131.07 - RESERVED. 
§ 131.08 - ADMINISTRATOR OF DEPARTMENTS. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrator of the department of public safety and the department of public service; except as otherwise provided by law or this chapter, he/she shall have all powers and duties connected with and incidental to the appointment, suspension and removal granted by statute to directors of public service and safety as executive officers of cities. 
(Ord. No. 115-2010, 3-16-2011) 
§ 131.09 - ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER. 
The city manager, with the advice and consent of council, may appoint an assistant city manager whose powers and duties shall be prescribed by the city manager. 
§ 131.10 - RIOT, DISASTER OR OTHER EMERGENCY. 
(A)  In addition to the powers and duties imposed on him/her by these sections, the city manager shall have and exercise all powers and duties vested by law in mayors and all other executive officers of municipalities in the event of riot, civil commotion, enemy attack, flood, fire, snowstorm, breakdown of utility services, or other disaster or emergency which threatens the safety or health of the residents of the city. Such powers shall include, but not be limited to, appointment of temporary police officers, firemen and other personnel needed for the enforcement of law or the protection of lives and property, and the making of requests, in the name of the city, to the governor, civil defense organizations, Red Cross and other public or private agencies for the assistance in the enforcement of law or the rendering of other aid needed in such emergency. 
(B)  In addition to the powers outlined in C.O. § 131.10(A), in the event of any of the emergencies mentioned therein, the city manager is authorized to proclaim a state of emergency in the city or any area therein. In the absence or disability of the city manager, the authority to proclaim a state of emergency shall devolve upon the following officials, if available, in the order named: President of council or vice president of council. 
(C)  When a state of emergency has been proclaimed under C.O. § 131.10(B), any officer named therein is authorized to issue such proclamations as he/she deems necessary to protect life and property. 
(D)  No person shall violate a proclamation issued under C.O. § 131.10(B) or (C). No person shall fail to obey the lawful order of any police officer, militiaman or other law enforcement officer; and no person shall in any way intentionally interfere with any such police officer, militiaman or other law enforcement officer, or fireman, rescue personnel, medical personnel, or other authorized person in the protection or preservation of life or property during the existence of a state of emergency as proclaimed under this section. 
(E)  The city manager is granted emergency powers to suspend the enforcement of such provisions of the Codified Ordinances, as he/she deems necessary, including provisions of the housing, building, zoning, health and other codes and rules and regulations adopted thereunder, for a period not to exceed three (3) months or less, if terminated earlier by motion, resolution or ordinance of Council, in order to facilitate the provision of emergency housing and services to the victims of a disaster. 
The exercise of the powers granted hereby is not dependent upon the proclamation provided for in this section, but may be exercised upon a separate proclamation by the city manager, forwarded immediately to the city council. Thereupon, the city manager may, by his/her executive order directed to the appropriate city officials, suspend appropriate provisions of the Codified Ordinances, as well as rules and regulations which may have been adopted pursuant thereto, in order to continue, or provide necessary city services, facilitate provisions of emergency shelter, and otherwise assist in alleviating the distress of disaster victims. 
(F)  Council may, by vote of a majority of its members without hearing and notice and upon motion, terminate any proclamation or executive order issued under this section. 
(G)  Any person convicted of violating any proclamation issued in accordance with this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof may be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than one (1) year, or both. 
(Ord. No. 49-2013) 
§ 131.11 - SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS. 
The city manager is authorized, upon advice from the city attorney, to settle or compromise on behalf of the city any claim against the city, whether a moral or legal obligation, wherein the amount to be paid in settlement of such claim does not exceed thirty thousand dollars (30,000.00), and wherein such settlement is deemed by the city manager to be in the best interest of the city. Settlement of claims against the city in excess of thirty thousand dollars (30,000.00) shall be approved by ordinance of city council. 
(Ord. No. 111-2009) 
§ 131.13 - GRANTS. 
The city manager may apply for grants, enter into grant agreements, and receive grant proceeds without council approval provided that the grant agreement has been executed in accordance with C.O. § 138.11(B), the grant agreement does not obligate or necessitate council to enact legislation, and the city manager notifies council no later than thirty (30) days after the city receives such grant proceeds. 
(Ord. No. 111-2009) 
§ 131.14 - CONTRACTS INVOLVING CITY SERVICES OR EQUIPMENT. 
(A)  The city manager may enter into contracts involving the payment of money or providing services, equipment, or other value in-kind to the city in exchange for city services or the loaning of city equipment without council approval provided that 
(1)  The finance and administrator services director determines the payment or provision of services, equipment, or other value in-kind reasonably compensates the city for the services provided or the equipment loaned; 
(2)  The contract requires the other party to be responsible for any damages to the loaned city equipment and is executed in accordance with C.O. § 138.11(B); and 
(3)  The city manager notifies council no later than thirty (30) days after entering into the contract. 
(B)  The city manager may enter into contracts with another political subdivision involving the loaning of city equipment in exchange for the borrowing of equipment from the other political subdivision without council approval provided that 
(1)  The department director maintains a log of all equipment loans and annually reviews whether the rental value of equipment borrowed reasonably compensate the city for the rental value of equipment loaned; 
(2)  The contract requires the other political subdivision to be responsible for any damages to the loaned city equipment, permits the city to bill the other political subdivision if the city is not being reasonably compensated, does not involve an expenditure of more than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) by the city, and is executed in accordance with C.O. § 138.11(B). 
(3)  The city manager notifies council no later than thirty (30) days after entering into the contract. 
(C)  For purposes of this section, "reasonably compensates" means that the total of the cost of services provided, rental value of equipment loaned, and any expenditure made by the city is approximately equal to the total of the cost of services received, rental value of equipment borrowed, and any payment received by the city. 
(D)  This section does not modify the city manager's powers granted pursuant to C.O. §§ 131.01 and 131.10. 
(Ord. No. 111-2009; Ord. No. 9-2013; Ord. No. 34-2016, § 1, 6-6-2016 ) 
§ 131.15 - AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH FEES. 
(A)  Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the city manager shall have the authority to establish, modify, or waive fees for the following: 
(1)  Room rentals and use of city facilities; 
(2)  Administrative services; and 
(3)  Permits issued by the city manager. 
(B)  The city manager shall notify council thirty (30) days prior to adopting a new fee or amending the schedule of fees. 
(Ord. No. 111-2009) 
§ 131.16 - CITY MANAGER AUTHORITY TO SIGN ASSESSMENT PETITIONS FOR INSTALLATION OF SIDEWALKS. 
(A)  Except as provided in subsection (C), the city manager may sign on the city's behalf an assessment petition requesting improvement by the installation of sidewalks abutting land to which the city holds legal title without prior council approval. 
(B)  The city manager may sign the assessment petition irrespective of whether the city's subscription to the petition would determine whether the petition meets the minimum front-footage threshold prescribed by Ohio Revised Code. 
(C)  If the city's proportionate share of the cost of such improvement is estimated to exceed the city manager's contracting authority established in C.O. § 138.09(B), then the city manager shall not sign the assessment petition on the city's behalf without prior approval by council. 
(D)  Unless directed by council, the city manager shall not withdraw his signature from an assessment petition if council has adopted a resolution declaring the necessity of such improvement. 
( Ord. No. 41-2013, § 1, 6-10-2013 ) 
CHAPTER 133. - CITY CLERK 

§ 133.01 - POSITION ESTABLISHED. 
The position of city clerk is established. the city clerk shall be appointed and serve at the pleasure of council. 
(Ord. No. 115-2010, 3-16-2011) 
§ 133.02 - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
The city clerk shall act as the clerk of council and shall have all powers and duties delegated by statute or by council to such officials. 
§ 133.03 - DEPUTY CLERKS. 
The city clerk is authorized to appoint one (1) or more deputy clerks to assist him/her in the operation of his/her office and to act for him/her in his/her absence. 
CHAPTER 135. - MAYOR 

§ 135.01 - MARRIAGES. 
The mayor and acting mayor shall be permitted to accept monies gratuitously given for the solemnization of a marriage. 
CHAPTER 137. - FINANCE DEPARTMENT 

§ 137.01 - ESTABLISHMENT. 
    Under the provisions of Sections II and XIV of the Charter, a finance department is created under the supervision of the finance director. The finance director shall be appointed by the city manager subject to the approval of a super majority of at least five (5) members of council. The finance director shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager upon approval of such recommendation by a super majority of five (5) members of city council. 
(Ord. No. 6-2012, 2-13-2012; Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 2, 2-13-2017) 
§ 137.02 - FINANCE DIRECTOR DUTIES. 
    The finance director shall perform his/her functions in accordance with the laws of the State of Ohio and the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. The finance director shall be responsible for the audit and maintenance of all city financial records and accounts including all assets and liabilities in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The finance director shall have the ability to establish new funds, with the approval by ordinance. The finance director shall be responsible for the custody, investment and disbursement of all city funds. The finance director shall follow the city's investment policy, as established by city council and which supersedes any requirements of the Ohio Revised Code. The finance director shall also be responsible for the maintenance of payroll records and disbursements based thereon. The finance director shall also be responsible for the collection of all revenues accruing to the city. The finance director shall also be responsible for certification of availability of appropriated funds for all expenditures in accordance with the Ohio Revised Code. The finance director shall furnish council, on a monthly basis, a statement of receipts and disbursements of city funds and accounts. In conjunction with the city manager, the finance director shall submit to the council a tentative budget for the next relevant fiscal year or projected two (2) fiscal years. The finance director shall have such other duties as may be delegated to him/her by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 115-2010, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 6-2012, 2-13-2012; Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 2, 2-13-2017) 
§ 137.03 - FINANCE DIRECTOR'S SIGNATURE ON WARRANTS AND CHECKS. 
The finance director's signature shall be the only signature required on all warrants and other checks issued for the disbursement of all city funds. 
§ 137.04 - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND. 
There is hereby established a fund to be known as the capital equipment fund, which shall consist of two (2) divisions designated respectively as: 
(A)  New equipment. 
(B)  Special projects. 
Funds in division (A) shall be used for the purchase of new equipment having a useful life of at least five (5) years. Funds in division (B) shall be used for the financing of special projects of a nature not ordinarily included in current operating expenses of a non-recurring nature. 
§ 137.05 - EMPLOYEE BENEFIT FUND. 
(A)  That the employee benefit fund is hereby created in the treasury of the City of Upper Arlington for the sole purpose of providing for employee benefits, included but not limited to health care, life insurance, dental benefits and disability benefits. 
(B)  Deposits into the fund shall come from the proportionate share of the costs of employee benefits budgeted in the operating accounts of the departments and divisions of the city, along with third party reimbursements for employee benefits, premiums and refunds. 
(C)  Expenditures from the fund shall be to pay for the cost of employee benefits, administration of the benefits program and the cost of actuarial and advisory assistance. 
(D)  The fund shall be credited with interest based on the proportionate share of funds available for investment purposes. 
§ 137.06 - SANITARY SEWER SURCHARGE FUND. 
(A)  That a surcharge be added to the sewer rate, to be applied to all users of sewerage service within the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio, including any extensions of said city, at the rate of twenty-three percent (23%) of the sewer charges billed, by the City of Columbus. Said rate is in addition to the sewer rate charged by the City of Columbus. Such surcharge shall apply to all bills rendered for billing periods beginning on and after January 1, 2019. 
(B)  That all money derived from said surcharge shall be credited to the sanitary sewer surcharge fund, established by Ordinance No. 175-90. Said fund shall be used for the payment of the cost of management, maintenance, operation and repair of the sewerage system of this city, or for the enlargement or replacement of said system, for construction and reconstruction of main and interceptor storm sewers and for the payment of the interest on any debt incurred for the construction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 87-2018 , § 5, 12-10-2018) 
§ 137.07 - WATER SURCHARGE FUND. 
(A)  That a surcharge be added to the regular water rate, to be applied to all consumers in the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio, including any extensions of said city, at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the water charges billed by the City of Columbus based on meter consumption of water. Said rate is in addition to the water rate charged by the City of Columbus. Such surcharge shall apply to all bills rendered for billing periods beginning on and after January 1, 2019. 
(B)  That all money derived from said surcharge shall be credited to the water surcharge fund, which is hereby established. Said fund shall be used for the payment of the cost of management, maintenance and repair of the water distribution system of this city. Any balance in such fund may be used for the construction and reconstruction of the water distribution system including repair and/or replacement of fire hydrants and for the payment of the interest on any debt incurred for the construction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 87-2018 , § 6, 12-10-2018) 
§ 137.08 - CENTRALIZED BILLING FUND. 
(A)  That the centralized billing fund is hereby created in the Treasury of the City of Upper Arlington for the purpose of providing centralized billing services for the various departments, divisions and offices of the city. 
(B)  Deposits into the fund shall come from the departments, divisions and offices for whom centralized billing services have been provided. 
(C)  Expenditures from the fund shall be to pay the cost of operating expenditures incurred in providing the billing services. 
§ 137.09 - STATE ISSUE TWO IMPROVEMENT FUND. 
(A)  That the state issue two improvement fund is hereby created in the Treasury of the City of Upper Arlington for the purpose of undertaking capital projects approved by the Ohio Public Works Commission. 
(B)  Deposits shall come from the Ohio Public Works Commission and from any other city funds which are used to pay the matching funds. 
(C)  Expenditures from the fund shall be used to pay the expenses of the capital projects including architect and engineering fees and inspection services. 
    As the authorized levels of expenditures from projects approved from the bonded improvement fund are reached, balances in the projects shall be transferred to the state issue two fund, sanitary sewer fund, water surcharge fund, stormwater management fund or capital improvement fund, as appropriate. 
§ 137.10 - INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT FUND. 
(A)  That the infrastructure improvement fund is hereby created in the Treasury of the City of Upper Arlington for the purpose of undertaking capital projects. 
(B)  Deposits into the fund shall come from the transfers out category of the general fund at a funding level of seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000.00) per year, or as adjusted by city council through budget authority, for a period of five (5) years beginning with fiscal year 1997. 
(C)  Expenditures from the fund shall be used to pay the expenses of the capital projects including architect and engineering fees and inspection services. 
§ 137.11 - LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT BLOCK GRANT FUND. 
The resources of this fund shall consist of the department of justice's grant and the city's matching funds. The fund will accrue interest on any balance during the life of the grant. The grant shall be used for law enforcement within twenty-four (24) months. Any remaining funds must be returned to the department of justice. The total fund balance will be appropriated and expenditures used solely for law enforcement. 
§ 137.12 - ESTATE TAX CAPITAL PROJECT FUND. 
The estate tax capital project fund is hereby created in the Treasury of the City of Upper Arlington for the purpose of undertaking capital projects. 
Deposits into this fund shall come from estate tax in any year that exceeds $2.1 million and council designates the tax to be used for capital projects. A proportional amount of investments earnings will be deposited into this fund. 
Expenditures from the fund shall be used to pay all expenses of capital projects including such expenses as architectural/engineering fees and inspection services. 
§ 137.13 - TECHNOLOGY FUND. 
All cellular tower fees shall be deposited in the technology fund, which is hereby established. In addition, the fund shall be annually supplemented by cable television franchise fees in an amount not-to-exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). This technology fund shall be used for the purchase of all technological equipment to include communications and computer equipment unless another fund has been established by law. 
§ 137.14 - WELFARE, BURIAL OF INDIGENTS. 
(A)  Funeral director's statement- Any funeral director burying the dead body of any person required by any statue of the state to be buried at the expense of the city pursuant to ORC § 9.15, shall submit to the finance director an application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and an application that shall contain a statement under oath of the amount of any contributions received from friends, relatives or others, of insurance or property, real or personal, or of any other thing of value, which may be applied to the burial expense of such person, or of the absence of any such things of value which may be so applied, and containing an itemized statement of the burial expense of such person. To qualify there shall be a determination that the dead body was unclaimed or that the dead body was claimed by an indigent person. "Indigent person" shall be defined as a person whose income does not exceed 150% of the federal poverty line, as revised annually by the United States department of health and human services, for a family size equal to the size of the person's family. 
(B)  Payment of expenses- Upon the submission of such statement under oath to the finance director, satisfactory compliance with the requirements of this chapter and payment of the application fee, there shall be paid to such funeral director for the burial of such person an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). This maximum amount shall include the cemetery charges and the crematory charges, less the amount of any such things of value which may be applied to such funeral expense as shown by the required statement under oath. 
(Ord. No. 49-2011; Ord. No. 44-2015, § 1, 7-13-2015 ) 
CHAPTER 138. - PROCUREMENT CODE 

§ 138.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
(A)  Competitive procurement process: A contracting method in which the city solicits proposals and/or quotes, negotiates the terms, conditions, and other relevant factors, and enters into a contract advantageous and beneficial to the city. 
(B)  Construction contract: A contract entered into for the construction, demolition, alteration, repair, or reconstruction of any building, structure, street, or other public improvement. 
(C)  Formal competitive bid: A contracting method in which the city develops bid specifications and/or documents, provides notice to bidders, requires sealed bids by a stated deadline, accepts or rejects bids and awards the contract to the lowest and best bidder. 
(D)  Local business: A person or business entity that has its principal place of business within the corporation limits of the city and is not delinquent in the filing of returns or the payment of income or net profits taxes to the city. 
(E)  Lowest and best bid: The bid as determined by the city to be the most advantageous and beneficial to the city. Factors that may be considered in determining the lowest and best bid include, but are not limited to, the bid price, any local preference credit pursuant to C.O. § 138.23, the bidder's experience, financial condition, conduct and performance on previous contracts, facilities, management skills, ability to execute the contract timely and properly, and compliance with federal, state, or local laws. 
(F)  Non-local business: A person or business entity that does not meet the definition of being a local business. 
(G)  Procurement contract: A contract entered into for the buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or acquisition by any other manner of any materials, supplies, equipment, services, professional services, or grants in support of community agencies, but not including construction contracts. 
(H)  Professional services: Services that usually require skill or expertise of an advanced, specialized, or peculiar nature, including but not limited to attorneys, architects, engineers, professional design firms, construction managers, surveyors, accountants, physicians, real estate appraisers, Realtors, insurance advisors, computer software consultants, telecommunications consultants, and third-party benefit administrators. 
(I)  Reverse auction: A purchasing process in which offerors submit proposals in competing for the award of a procurement contract or a construction contract in an open environment via the internet. A reverse auction is not a formal competitive bid. 
(Ord. No. 112-2009; Ord. No. 55-2011) 
§ 138.02 - PURCHASING ADMINISTRATOR-POSITION ESTABLISHED. 
The purchasing administrator position is hereby created and established within the department of finance. The purchasing administrator shall perform all duties required by law and shall have the powers and duties prescribed by this ordinance and shall be appointed by the finance director subject to approval of the city manager. 
§ 138.03 - DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE PURCHASING ADMINISTRATOR. 
(A)  The purchasing administrator shall assist in the purchases of materials, supplies, and services and purchases, rentals, and leases of equipment in the manner set forth herein. 
(B)  The purchasing administrator shall, with the approval of the city manager, adopt administrative procedures necessary to implement this chapter, to protect the public interest, and to insure fair, efficient, and reasonable contracting practices. Such procedures shall be available for public inspection. 
(C)  The purchasing administrator shall prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to implement this chapter and any procedures promulgated under this chapter. 
(D)  The purchasing administrator shall maintain the original of all contracts entered into by the city in accordance with the city's records retention. 
(E)  The purchasing administrator shall perform all other duties assigned by resolutions or ordinances of the city council, by the city manager, or by the finance director. 
§ 138.04 - COMPETITIVE PROCUREMENT PROCESS. 
(A)  The award of a procurement contract involving more than seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) but not more than forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) shall be based upon a competitive procurement process. 
(B)  The award of a procurement contract involving not more than seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) shall not require a competitive procurement process. 
(Ord. No. 45-2013; Ord. No. 50-2015, § 1, 7-13-2015 ) 
§ 138.05 - FORMAL COMPETITIVE BID PROCESS. 
(A)  Any contract expenditure, other than the compensation of persons employed by the city, for more than forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) shall be awarded through the formal competitive bid process. 
(B)  For construction contracts, the purchasing administrator shall advertise a bid notice for not less than two (2) weeks in a publication of general circulation within Franklin County. 
(C)  For procurement contracts, the purchasing administrator shall solicit bids from persons producing or dealing in the relevant field of equipment, materials, supplies, services, or professional services. 
(D)  The bid notice shall contain a brief description of the item and direct potential bidders to the City's website where additional information may be found. 
(E)  The purchasing administrator may request additional information from one (1) or more bidders to determine the lowest and best bid. 
(F)  A general notice shall be posted in the municipal services center and on the city's website stating that information concerning upcoming bids may be obtained from the purchasing administrator. The city's website shall contain additional details regarding all construction contracts and procurement contracts to be awarded through the formal competitive bid process. 
(G)  The city manager shall only enter into contract upon passage of an ordinance by city council authorizing the city manager to enter into a written contract with the lowest and best bidder. 
(Ord. No. 45-2013) 
§ 138.06 - CONDITIONS OBVIATING FORMAL COMPETITIVE BID OR COMPETITIVE PROCUREMENT PROCESS. 
(A)  (1)  In the case of a real and present emergency arising in connection with the operation and maintenance of any department, division, commission, bureau, or board of the city, city council may, authorize the city manager to enter into a procurement contract or construction contract without a formal competitive bid or competitive procurement process. 
(2)  In the case of a real and present emergency as declared by either the President of the United States, the Governor of Ohio, the President of City Council or the City Manager arising in connection with the operation and maintenance of any department, division, commission, bureau, or board of the city and in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare needing action prior to the next regularly scheduled council meeting, the city manager may enter into a procurement contract or construction contract without a formal competitive bid or competitive procurement process. The city manager shall, as soon as reasonably possible under the circumstances, notify city council of the details concerning the contract(s) and the emergency. 
(B)  The following contracts may be awarded without a formal competitive bid or competitive procurement process: 
(1)  Contracts for gas and electric service, postage, water and sewer service, solid waste disposal, advertising, or, where fixed prices prevail. 
(2)  Contracts for professional services. 
(3)  Purchases made in accordance with the Ohio Cooperative Purchasing Act, ORC § 125.04. 
(4)  Purchase of machinery, materials, supplies or other articles made in accordance with ORC § 5513.01 or the purchase of any passenger vehicle, van, truck, trailer, or other heavy equipment in accordance with ORC § 5513.04. 
(5)  Procurement contracts if the city is participating as an additional purchaser in an existing valid and lawful contract between a vendor and another political subdivision, a state, the U.S. General Services Administration, a federal agency, or a governmental cooperative purchasing group, provided that the other political subdivision, state, U.S. General Services Administration, federal agency, or purchasing group has procured and entered into such contract in accordance with a formal competitive bid or competitive procurement process that is substantially similar to the provisions of this chapter. 
(6)  Subject to the provisions of C.O. § 138.09, purchases to replenish inventories of office supplies or other purchases to replenish inventories of goods or materials that are needed on a day-to-day basis for the operation of any department or division. 
(7)  Purchase contracts for proprietary computer software programs. 
(8)  When the purchasing administrator determines that only a sole source exists for the purchase of the supply of material. 
(9)  Grants in support of community agencies. 
(10)  Contracts involving city services or equipment entered into pursuant to C.O. § 131.14. 
(11)  Purchases made from a community rehabilitation program in accordance with ORC §§ 125.60 to 125.6012. 
(C)  The city may enter into a contract, without advertising and bidding, for the purchase of used equipment or supplies at an auction open to the public, or at a sale where the vendor has invited the public to submit written bids. 
(D)  The city may enter into a contract, without advertising and bidding, for services or the purchase of material, equipment, or supplies, from any department, division, agency or political subdivision of the state. 
(E)  The city may enter into a contract pursuant to a reverse auction authorized in accordance with ORC § 9.314 or C.O. § 138.21. 
(Ord. No. 112-2009; Ord. No. 45-2013; Ord. No. 50-2015, § 2, 7-13-2015 ) 
§ 138.07 - PROCEEDINGS ON OPENING OF FORMAL COMPETITIVE BIDS. 
(A)  Formal competitive bids shall be opened in public at the time, date and place specified in the notice to bidders or specifications and shall be publicly read by the purchasing administrator or designee. The date and time of bid openings may be extended by the purchasing administrator, provided that written notice of the change shall be posted at the municipal services center and on the city's website no later than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the original time and date fixed for the opening. Any modification of the plans or specifications may extend the time for opening the bids. 
(B)  The purchasing administrator may accept a late bid whenever the purchasing administrator determines that acceptance of the late bid is in the best interest of the city and that the other bidders have not been prejudiced by the late bid. 
(C)  The purchasing administrator may waive any variation from the bid requirements or defect in a bid that does not materially affect the competitive nature of the bid and does not prejudice the right of the public. A variance or defect does not materially affect the bid if the terms of the bid are clear and unambiguous, the bid contains all essential elements of the contract, the amount or competitive nature of the bid is not affected, and the bidder has not received an unfair advantage from having seen the competitor's bid documents. A variance or defect may include a clerical mistake as opposed to a judgment mistake that was actually due to an unintentional and substantial arithmetic error made in the compilation of the bid. In considering any waiver, the purchasing administrator shall attempt to secure the best work or materials at the lowest price practicable and shall make such determination in a manner as to fairly and reasonably accomplish such purpose with sole reference to the public interest. 
(D)  The purchasing administrator may reject any bid for any reason or all bids for no reason if acceptance of the lowest and best bid is not in the best interest of the city. 
(E)  If the city uses an online system to receive formal competitive bids electronically through a website purchasing portal, then the bids submitted electronically shall not be accessed until the time and date specified in the bid notice. Bids submitted electronically will be read at the bid opening. The individual bid information shall be posted on the city's website after the contract has been awarded. 
(Ord. No. 112-2009; Ord. No. 45-2013) 
§ 138.08 - CONTRACT MODIFICATIONS. 
(A)  Any modification of a contract shall only be made upon the order of the city but such order shall be of no effect until the modified contract, has been agreed upon in writing and signed by the contractor and by the city manager, on behalf of the city, approved as to form by the city attorney and finance director or their designees. 
(B)  The city manager may execute a change order for a construction contract, provided the adjustment does not exceed the amount including any contingency in the authorizing legislation. Change orders that cause the total contract price to exceed this authority must be approved by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(C)  The city manager may execute a change order for a procurement contract if: 
(1)  The total contract amount including the change order does not exceed forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00); or 
(2)  The amount of the change order and all prior change orders does not increase the contract by more than ten percent (10%) of the original contract amount, provided, however, that no change order, either individually or in combination with all prior change orders, shall exceed forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) without prior Council approval. 
(3)  The change order involves a contract for the items set forth in C.O. §§ 138.06(B)(3) through (5) provided that sufficient funds have already been appropriated and the amount of the change order and all prior change orders does not increase the contract by more than ten percent (10%) of the amount specifically identified for the item in the annual budget document approved by city council. Change orders that exceed this authority must be approved by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(D)  Change orders executed on Construction Contracts shall be reported to the city council as part of a final report at the conclusion of the project. 
(E)  No contractual liability for any modification shall be created against the city except as authorized by this section or by city council ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 112-2009; Ord. No. 48-2014, 8-18-2014) 
§ 138.09 - CONTRACTING AUTHORITY. 
(A)  Except as provided in divisions (B) through (H) below, any contract involving an expenditure of city funds shall require prior city council approval. 
(B)  Except as provided in division (E), the city manager may enter into any contract involving an expenditure of not more than forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) without prior city council approval, provided that sufficient funds have already been appropriated. 
(C)  The city manager may enter into contracts for the items set forth in C.O. § 138.06(B)(1) without prior city council approval, provided that sufficient funds have already been appropriated. 
(D)  The city manager may enter into contracts for the items set forth in C.O. §§ 138.06(B)(3) through (5), 138.06(C), and 138.06(D) without prior city council approval, provided that sufficient funds have already been appropriated, the item was specifically identified in the annual budget document approved by city council, and the contract price does not exceed the budget estimate by more than ten percent (10%). 
(E)  The city manager may enter into contracts for grants in support of community agencies involving an expenditure of not more than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) without prior city council approval. All contracts for grants in support of community agencies shall be reported to city council on a quarterly basis. 
(F)  The city manager may enter into contracts for professional services for architects, engineers, professional design firms, construction managers, or similar construction related professionals involving expenditures exceeding forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) without prior city council approval, provided that sufficient funds have already been appropriated and are available as certified by the Director of Finance, the construction project is specifically identified in the annual budget document approved by city council, the construction project is listed in the most-recently approved 10-year Capital Improvement Program, and the selection of the professional was done pursuant to the quality based selection process approved by city council. All contracts entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be reported to city council on no less than a quarterly basis. 
(G)  The city manager may enter into contracts involving expenditures exceeding forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) as provided in C.O. § 138.06(A)(2) without prior city council approval, in the amount necessary to address the real and present emergency prior to the next regularly scheduled council meeting. 
(H)  The city attorney may enter into contracts for professional services as authorized in C.O. § 138.06 involving an expenditure of not more than forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) without prior city council approval, provided that sufficient funds have already been appropriated. 
(I)  Whenever possible contracts shall be entered into for an entire project and shall not be artificially split into multiple contracts for the purpose of avoiding the dollar limitations set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 112-2009; Ord. No. 6-2012, 6-13-2012; Ord. No. 45-2013; Ord. No. 50-2015, § 3, 7-13-2015 ; Ord. No. 62-2016 , § 1, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 3, 2-13-2017) 
§ 138.10 - DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. 
(A)  The city manager may delegate to the assistant city manager the full extent of the city manager's authority to execute contracts on behalf of the city. 
(B)  The city manager may delegate to the director of finance or designee the city manager's authority to execute purchase orders involving an expenditure of not more than forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00). 
(C)  The city manager may delegate to a department director the city manager's authority to execute contracts involving an expenditure of not more than seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00). The city manager may require the department director to follow a competitive procurement process. 
(D)  The city manager may not delegate the city manager's authority to execute contracts for grants in support of community agencies. 
(Ord. No. 112-2009; Ord. No. 6-2012, 2-13-2012; Ord. No. 45-2013; Ord. No. 50-2015, § 4, 7-13-2015 ; Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 3, 2-13-2017) 
§ 138.11 - EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS. 
(A)  Except as authorized by C.O. §§ 138.10 and 139.06 or by city council ordinance or resolution, all contracts made by the city shall be executed by the city manager. 
(B)  All contracts shall be reviewed and approved as to form by the city attorney or designee before being executed by the city manager or designee. The city attorney or designee need not review a standard form contract that was prepared and approved as to form by the city attorney or designee, provided that the standard form contract has not been modified other than filling in the designated blanks. 
(C)  All contracts shall permit the finance director or designee a reasonable opportunity to inspect and copy all of the financial records in the possession or control of the contractor that pertain in any way to the contract in question. 
(D)  No contractual liability shall be created against the city except as authorized by this chapter or by council ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 112-2009) 
§ 138.12 - AWARD AND EXECUTION OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS; PRICE; PARTIAL PAYMENTS. 
(A)  With respect to the award of any construction contract made by the city, the award and execution of the contract shall be made within sixty (60) days after the date on which the bids are opened. The failure to award and execute the contract within sixty (60) days invalidates the entire bid proceedings and all bids submitted, unless the time for awarding and executing the contract is extended by mutual consent of the city and the bidder whose bid the city accepts and with respect to whom the city subsequently awards and executes a contract. The contractor, upon request, is entitled to a notice to proceed with the work by the city upon execution of the contract. No contract shall be entered into if the entire cost of the construction contract exceeds in the aggregate the amount authorized by law. 
(B)  The unit or lump sum price stated in the contract shall be used in determining the amount to be paid and shall constitute full and final compensation for all the work. 
(C)  Partial payment to the contractor for work performed under the lump sum price shall be based on a schedule prepared by the contractor and approved by the architect or engineer who shall apportion the lump sum price to the major components entering into or forming a part of the work under the lump sum price. 
§ 138.13 - BID GUARANTIES ON CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS. 
(A)  Each person bidding for a construction contract with the city is required to file with the bid a bid guaranty in the form of either: 
(1)  A bond in accordance with division (B) of this section for the full amount of the bid; or 
(2)  A cashier's check or letter of credit pursuant to ORC ch. 1305 equal to ten percent (10%) of the bid. Any such letter of credit shall be revocable only at the option of the city. 
(B)  A bid guaranty filed pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section shall be conditioned to: 
(1)  Provide that, if the bid is accepted, the bidder will, after the awarding or the recommendation for the award of the contract, whichever the city designates, enter into a proper contract in accordance with the bid, plans, details, specifications and bills of material. If, for any reason, other than as authorized by C.O. § 138.14, the bidder fails to enter into the contract, and the city awards the contract to the next lowest and best bidder, the bidder and the surety on the bond shall be liable to the city for the difference between the bidder's bid and that of the next lowest and best bidder, or for a penal sum not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the amount of the bond, whichever is less; and 
If the city does not award the contract to the next lowest and best bidder but resubmits the project for bidding, the bidder failing to enter into the contract and the surety on the bond shall be liable to the city for a penal sum not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the amount of the bid or the costs in connection with the resubmission of printing new contract documents, required advertising, and printing and mailing notices to prospective bidders, whichever is less; and 
(2)  Indemnify the city against all damage suffered by failure to perform the contract according to its provisions and in accordance with the plans, details, specifications and bills of material therefor and to pay all lawful claims of subcontractors, material suppliers and laborers for labor performed or material furnished in carrying forward, performing or completing the contract; and agree and assent that this undertaking shall be for the benefit of any subcontractor, material supplier or laborer having a just claim, as well as for the city. 
(C)  A bid guaranty filed pursuant to division (A)(2) of this section shall be conditioned to provide that: 
(1)  If the bid is accepted, the bidder will, after the awarding or the recommendation for the award of the contract, whichever the city designates, enter into a proper contract in accordance with the bid, plans, details, specifications and bills of material. If, for any reason, other than as authorized by C.O. § 138.14, the bidder fails to enter into the contract, and the city awards the contract to the next lowest and best bidder, the bidder shall be liable to the city for the difference between the bidder's bid and that of the next lowest bidder, or for a penal sum not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the amount of the bid, whichever is less. If the city does not award the contract to the next lowest and best bidder, but resubmits the project for bidding, the bidder failing to enter into the contract shall be liable to the city for a penal sum not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the amount of the bid or the costs in connection with the resubmission, of printing new contract documents, required advertising and printing and mailing notices to prospective bidders, whichever is less; and 
(2)  If the bidder enters into the contract, the bidder shall, at the time the contract is entered into, file a bond for the amount of the contract to indemnify the city against all damage suffered by failure to perform the contract according to its provisions and in accordance with the plans, details, specifications and bills of material therefor and to pay all lawful claims of subcontractors, material suppliers and laborers for labor performed or material furnished in carrying forward, performing or completing the contract; and agree and assent that this undertaking shall be for the benefit of any subcontractor, material supplier or laborer having a just claim, as well as for the city. 
(D)  Where the city accepts a bid, but the bidder fails or refuses to enter into a proper contract in accordance with the bid, plans, details, specifications and bills of material within ten (10) days after the awarding of the contract, the bidder and the surety on any bond shall be liable for the amount of the difference between the high bid and that of the next lowest bidder, but not in excess of the liability specified in division (B) or (C) of this section. Where the city then awards the bid to such next lowest and best bidder and such next lowest bidder also fails or refuses to enter into a proper contract in accordance with the bid, plans, details, specifications and bills of material within ten (10) days after the awarding of the contract, the liability of such next lowest bidder shall be the amount of the difference between the bids of such next lowest bidder and the third lowest bidder, but not in excess of the liability specified in division (B) or (C) of this section. Liability on account of an award to any lowest bidder beyond the third lowest bidder shall be determined in like manner. 
(E)  Notwithstanding division (C) of this section, where the city resubmits the project for bidding, each bidder whose bid was accepted but who failed or refused to enter into a proper contract shall be liable for an equal share of a penal sum in connection with the resubmission of printing new contract documents, required advertising and printing and mailing notices to prospective bidders, but no bidder's liability shall exceed the amount of the bid guaranty. 
(F)  All bid guaranties filed pursuant to this section shall be payable to the city, shall be for the benefit of the city, or any person having a right of action thereon, and shall be deposited with, and held by the purchasing administrator. All bonds filed pursuant to this section shall be issued by a surety company authorized to do business in this state as surety approved by the purchasing administrator. 
§ 138.14 - WITHDRAWING BIDS MADE IN ERROR ON CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS. 
(A)  A bidder for a construction contract with the city may withdraw the bid from consideration, if the price bid was substantially lower than the other bids, providing the bid was submitted in good faith, and the reason for the price bid being substantially lower was a clerical mistake as opposed to a judgment mistake, and was actually due to an unintentional and substantial arithmetic error or an unintentional omission of a substantial quantity of work, labor or material made directly in the compilation of the bid. Notice of a claim of right to withdraw such bid must be made in writing filed with the city within two (2) business days after the conclusion of the bid opening procedure. 
(B)  No bid may be withdrawn under this section when the result would be the awarding of the contract on another bid of the same bidder. 
(C)  No bidder who is permitted to withdraw a bid shall for compensation supply any material or labor to, or perform any subcontract or other work agreement for, the person to whom the contract is awarded or otherwise benefit, directly or indirectly, from the performance of the project for which the withdrawn bid was submitted, without the approval of the city. The person to whom the contract was awarded and the withdrawing bidder are jointly liable to the city in an amount equal to any compensation paid to or for the benefit of the withdrawing bidder without such approval. 
(D)  If a bid is withdrawn under authority of this section, the city may award the contract to the next lowest and best bidder or reject all bids and resubmit the project for bidding. In the event the city resubmits the project for bidding, the withdrawing bidder shall pay the costs, in connection with the resubmission, of printing new contract documents, required advertising and printing and mailing notices to prospective bidders, if the city finds that such costs would not have been incurred but for such withdrawal. 
(E)  If the city contests the right of a bidder to withdraw a bid, the city shall hold a hearing within fifteen (15) days after the opening of such bids. The city shall notify the withdrawing bidder of the time and place of the hearing. The city shall issue a decision within ten (10) days after the hearing. The bidder shall pay the costs of the hearing. 
(F)  In the event the city denies the claim for withdrawal and the bidder elects to appeal or otherwise refuses to perform, the city may reject all bids or award to the next lowest and best bidder. 
§ 138.15 - PERFORMANCE BOND. 
(A)  For all construction contracts, the finance director shall require a performance bond in the sum of one hundred percent (100%) of the contract price for the faithful execution of the work. 
(B)  For all procurement contracts, the finance director may require a performance bond in the sum of one hundred percent (100%) of the contract price for the faithful execution of the work. 
(C)  Notwithstanding payment of the full contract price, the performance bond for a construction contract will not be released and acceptance of performance will not occur until at least one (1) year after completion of construction. No department or division head shall be authorized to accept performance until such time has elapsed and performance has satisfactorily met all requirements of the contract. 
§ 138.16 - RETAINAGE AND ACCEPTANCE. 
(A)  The finance director shall retain ten percent (10%) of the amount due any contractor on a construction contract until at least fifty percent (50%) of the work has been satisfactorily completed. 
(1)  When more than fifty percent (50%) of the work has been satisfactorily completed, the retainage amount may be reduced to five percent (5%) for the satisfactorily completed work. 
(2)  When more than ninety percent (90%) of the work has been satisfactorily completed, the retainage amount may be reduced to two and one-half percent (2.5%) for the satisfactorily completed work. 
(3)  The city manager or designee may, at any time, increase the retainage by the amount necessary to protect the city's interests with respect to any (a) incomplete, defective, or unsatisfactory work; (b) costs or damages incurred by the city that are subject to the contractor's contractual obligations; or (c) back charges that the city may assess against the contractor. 
(4)  The city manager or designee shall determine the percentage of work that has been satisfactorily completed and the retainage amount necessary to protect the city's interests. 
(B)  The finance director may retain ten percent (10%) of the amount due any vendor on a procurement contract until satisfactory performance of all obligations of the vendor has been achieved. 
(C)  After the completion of all final punch list items, and with the approval of the city manager, the finance director may accept a maintenance bond in lieu of the retainage. The maintenance bond shall be in addition to the performance bond provided for in C.O. § 138.15. Acceptance of the maintenance bond shall not constitute final acceptance by the city. 
(D)  The finance director shall not deposit the retainage in an escrow account and shall not pay interest on such retainage. 
( Ord. No. 20-2016, § 1, 4-11-2016 ) 
§ 138.17 - FORM OF BONDS. 
(A)  The bond provided for in division (B) of C.O. § 138.13 shall be in substantially the form provided in ORC § 153.571. 
(B)  The bond provided for in division (C) of C.O. § 138.13 shall be in substantially the form provided in ORC § 153.57. 
(C)  The performance bond provided for in C.O. § 138.15 shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(D)  The maintenance bond provided for in C.O. § 138.16 shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. 
§ 138.18 - DEBARMENT OR SUSPENSION. 
(A)  After consulting with the city attorney, the finance director or designee is authorized to suspend an individual or legal entity from consideration for the award of city contracts if there is probable cause to believe that the individual or legal entity has engaged in any activity that might lead to debarment. The suspension shall be for a period not to exceed three (3) months. The finance director or designee shall issue a written decision to suspend and shall send a copy of the decision to the individual or legal entity. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken and inform the individual or legal entity of the right to appeal. 
(B)  After reasonable notice to the individual or legal entity involved and reasonable opportunity for that individual or legal entity to be heard, the city manager, after consulting with the city attorney, is authorized to debar a person or legal entity from consideration of award of city contracts. The debarment shall be for a period of not more than three (3) years. 
(C)  The causes for debarment include the following: 
(1)  Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract. 
(2)  Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty that significantly affects responsibility as a contractor. 
(3)  Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the submission of bids or proposals. 
(4)  Violating of contract provisions of a serious character including deliberate failure without good cause to perform in accordance with the specifications or within the time limit provided in a contract, and/or a recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one (1) or more contracts, provided that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be a basis for debarment. 
(5)  Any other cause that the city manager determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a contractor, including but not limited to debarment by another governmental entity. 
(6)  The convictions, acts, and omissions of any officer, principal, shareholder, partner, agent, employee, or other person associated with the legal entity shall be considered the convictions, acts, or omissions of the legal entity. 
(D)  The city manager shall issue a written decision to debar and shall send a copy of the decision to the individual or legal entity. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken and inform the individual or legal entity of the right to appeal. 
(E)  An individual or legal entity may appeal a suspension to the city manager. The city manager will hold a hearing and issue a decision affirming, reversing, or modifying the decision of the finance director or designee. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(F)  An individual or legal entity may appeal a debarment to the city council. The city council will hold a hearing and issue a decision affirming, reversing, or modifying the decision of the city manager. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
§ 138.19 - APPROPRIATIONS. 
No expenditure shall be authorized unless an appropriation has been made pursuant to ORC ch. 5705. 
§ 138.20 - UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT. 
(A)  As used in this section, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  Public contract means any of the following: 
(a)  The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or acquisition of property or services by or for the use of the City of Upper Arlington. 
(b)  A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair or maintenance of any public property. 
(2)  Public official means any elected or appointed officer, or employee or agent of the City of Upper Arlington whether in a temporary or permanent capacity, and including without limitation legislators and law enforcement officers. 
(3)  Knowingly is the culpable mental state required, as defined in C.O. § 501.06(B). 
(B)  No public official shall knowingly do any of the following: 
(1)  Authorize, or employ the authority or influence of his/her office to secure authorization of any public contract in which he/she, a member of his/her family, or any of his/her business associates has an interest. 
(2)  Authorize, or employ the authority or influence of his/her office to secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond, mortgage, or other security, with respect to which he/she, a member of his/her family, or any of his/her business associates either has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any brokerage, origination, or service fees. 
(3)  During his/her term of office or within one (1) year thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public contract authorized by him/her or by a legislative body, commission or board of which he/she was a member at the time of authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest and best bidder. 
(4)  Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality with which he/she is connected. 
(5)  Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract that is not let by competitive bidding if required by law and that involves more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(C)  In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official, member of his/her family, or any of his/her business associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply: 
(1)  The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested. 
(2)  The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that person as creditor does not exceed five percent (5%) of the total indebtedness of the corporation or other organization. 
(3)  That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into, files with the city clerk, an affidavit giving his/her exact status in connection with the corporation or other organization. The public contract shall be considered entered into at the time that city council, by vote, authorizes the city manager to enter into a public contract. 
(D)  This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public official, member of his/her family, or one of his/her business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply: 
(1)  The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved. 
(2)  The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established prior to the public official's becoming associated with the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved. 
(3)  The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions. 
(4)  The entire transaction is conducted at arm's length, with full knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of his/her family, or business associate, and the public official takes no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract. 
(E)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest in a public contract. Violation of division (B)(1) or (2) of this section shall proceed under state law. Violation of division (B)(3), (4), or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(F)  It is not a violation of this section for the city attorney or the city prosecutor to appoint assistants and employees in accordance with ORC §§ 733.621 and 2921.421. 
§ 138.21 - REVERSE AUCTIONS. 
(A)  The purchasing administrator may award a procurement contract by reverse auction whenever the city manager determines that the use of a reverse auction for such contract is advantageous to the city. 
(B)  The rules for reverse auctions, including but not limited to vendor notification and pre-qualification, proposal evaluation process, city's standard contract terms, performance bond requirements, and the award of the contract, shall be adopted pursuant to C.O. § 138.03(B). 
(C)  The city has the right to reject any proposal for any reason and all proposals for no reason if acceptance of the lowest and best proposal is not in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 112-2009) 
§ 138.22 - NOTICE REQUIRED FOR BREACH OF CONTRACT CLAIMS. 
(A)  A person may not file or maintain a lawsuit or claim to recover damages based on the city's alleged breach of a contract unless, as a condition precedent and a jurisdictional prerequisite to the filing of the lawsuit against the city: 
(1)  The person files a notice of claim with the city manager not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of occurrence of the event that gives rise to the alleged breach of contract; and 
(2)  The city manager neglects or refuses to pay all or part of the claim within ninety (90) days after the notice of claim is filed. 
(B)  The notice of claim must: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  State the facts giving rise to the alleged breach; 
(3)  State the legal theory justifying recovery for the alleged breach; 
(4)  State the amount the person seeks in damages; and 
(5)  Include supporting documentation indicating how those damages were calculated. 
(C)  The city attorney is authorized to investigate, evaluate, and recommend settlement or disposition of any breach of contract claim made against the city pursuant to this section. 
(D)  The city manager and the city attorney may not waive any requirements of this section unless expressly authorized by ordinance. 
(E)  This section shall not supersede, modify, or waive any other notice required by any specific contract provision or by law. 
(F)  This section shall not be construed as waiving any defenses or immunities that would otherwise be available to the city. 
(G)  The provisions of this section are hereby incorporated into all contracts entered into by the city. 
(Ord. No. 112-2009) 
§ 138.23 - LOCAL PREFERENCE. 
(A)  Local businesses shall receive a local preference credit equal to two percent (2%) of the lowest and best bid or purchase price received from a non-local business in the city's evaluation of contracts for or purchases of supplies, materials, equipment, public improvements, and services. 
(B)  This section shall not apply to contracts or purchases: 
(i)  Less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00); or 
(ii)  Financed in whole or in part by contributions, grants, or loans from any agency of the State of Ohio or the United States of America; 
(iii)  For the items set forth in C.O. §§ 138.06(B)(3)-(5) and 138.06(E). 
(C)  If the lowest and best bid or purchase price is received from a non-local business, a local business may be awarded the bid or contract if: 
(i)  It submits an affidavit verifying it meets the definition of local business under C.O. § 138.01; 
(ii)  Its bid or purchase price was within two percent (2%) of the bid or purchase price of the non-local business; and 
(iii)  It agrees to reduce its bid or purchase price to match the bid or purchase price of the non-local business. 
(D)  The local preference credit is one of the factors to be considered in determining the lowest and best bid or in making purchases and does not guarantee that the local business will be awarded the contract or purchase. 
(E)  The city shall indicate in all its invitations to bid, its requests for proposals, requests for qualifications, and its solicitations for contracts for or purchases of supplies, materials, equipment, public improvements, and services that it shall apply a local preference credit in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 55-2011) 
CHAPTER 139. - LAW DEPARTMENT 

§ 139.01 - ESTABLISHMENT. 
Under provisions of Section XII of the Charter, a law department is created under the supervision of the city attorney. 
(Ordinance No. 4-2008, 1-28-2008) 
§ 139.02 - CITY ATTORNEY. 
Under the provisions of Section XIV of the Charter, the city attorney shall be appointed by council and serve for such length of time as may be determined by council. The city attorney shall be an attorney duly licensed to practice in the State of Ohio. The city attorney shall perform all legal services for the city and its departments and shall act as counsel for the board of health. The city attorney shall not act as legal adviser and attorney for the board of education. 
(Ord. No. 113-2009) 
§ 139.03 - FIRST ASSISTANT CITY ATTORNEY. 
The city attorney, with approval of council, is authorized to appoint a first assistant city attorney who shall hold office at the pleasure of the city attorney. 
§ 139.04 - RESERVED. 
Deleted Ord. No. 115-2010. 
§ 139.05 - SUPPORT EMPLOYEES TO THE CITY ATTORNEY. 
The city attorney may appoint such support staff, including assistant city attorneys; paralegal/office managers; criminal justice administrators; legal administrative specialists, and legal interns as may be authorized by council whose duty shall be to assist the city attorney in the performance of the duties imposed upon them by the provisions of this chapter. Such support employees shall hold office at the pleasure of the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 115-2010, 3-16-2011) 
§ 139.06 - SPECIAL COUNSEL AND CONSULTANTS. 
In accordance with the provisions of C.O. § 138.06(B)(2) and § 138.09(F), the city attorney is authorized to appoint special counsel and consultants for the prosecution, investigation and defense of cases in the courts and for other legal matters. Such special counsel and consultants shall receive reasonable compensation, to be fixed by the city attorney. The city attorney shall advise city council of any such appointments prior to the next regularly scheduled council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 113-2009) 
CHAPTER 141. - ENGINEERING DIVISION 

§ 141.01 - ENGINEERING DIVISION. 
The engineering division shall be administered by the city engineer, under the general supervision and control of the city manager or designee. In addition to the city engineer, the division shall include one (1) or more assistant city engineers and such other personnel as may be authorized by council and appointed by the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 39-2015, § 1, 6-22-2015 ) 
§ 141.02 - CITY ENGINEER. 
The city engineer shall be appointed by, and shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The city engineer shall be a professional engineer, duly registered or licensed to practice in the State of Ohio. The city engineer shall perform all engineering services for the city and its departments, except on projects of such a nature as may require the assistance of consulting engineers. The selection and employment of consulting engineers shall be made by the city engineer, in accordance with the rules and procedures approved by the city manager, when authorized by council. 
(Ord. No. 115-2010, 3-16-2011) 
§ 141.03 - RESERVED. 
Deleted Ord. No. 115-2010. 
CHAPTER 143. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 

§ 143.01 - ESTABLISHMENT. 
There is created a department of public safety, which shall be administered under the general supervision and control of the city manager. A police chief and a fire chief shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city manager. Subject to the supervision and control of the city manager, each chief shall be the executive head of his/her respective division within the department of public safety. Either chief may, if so appointed by the city manager, serve as the director and/or deputy director of the division of emergency management. Both the police and fire chief shall have and exercise all authority and powers conferred upon them by law, not inconsistent with the provisions of the Charter and other ordinances of this city. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.02 - DIVISIONS WITHIN DEPARTMENT. 
The following divisions are created within the department of public safety: 
(A)  Police division; 
(B)  Fire division; 
(C)  Those class of city employees commissioned with police powers by the police chief, fire chief, and/or city manager as referenced in chapter 143; and 
(D)  Division of emergency management. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.03 - TEMPORARY APPOINTMENTS. 
In case of riot or other emergency, the city manager may appoint additional patrol officers for temporary service in the police division, or additional firefighters for temporary service in the fire division, who need not be in the classified list of such division. Such additional persons shall be employed only for the time during which the emergency exists. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.04 - COMPOSITION/SERVICES OF POLICE DIVISION. 
The police division shall consist of the police chief and such other officers and employees as may be authorized by the city manager. 
Subject to the applicable provisions of C.O. ch. 149, the police chief shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The police chief shall have been a member of the police division or have had other training and experience in law enforcement. 
Upon termination from service as police chief, he/she shall, if appointed from the police division, revert to his/her status in the classified civil service; provided, however, that if his/her service as police chief is terminated because of impairment from habitual alcohol and/or drug use or any misconduct involving moral turpitude or instances of misconduct as outlined in the personnel rules, he/she shall be subject to disciplinary action in his/her classified civil service status in the same manner as if such misconduct had been committed while he/she was serving in such status. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.05 - POWERS OF POLICE CHIEF/MANAGEMENT RIGHTS. 
(A)  The police chief shall have exclusive control of the stationing and transfer of all patrol officers and other employees in the police division, under such general rules and regulations as the city manager prescribes. The police chief shall have the right to suspend any of the officers or employees in the division and under his/her management and control, for incompetence, gross neglect of duty, gross immorality, impairment from habitual alcohol and/or drug use , failure to obey orders given to him/her by proper authority or for any other reasonable and just cause. Under such suspension, the chief, forthwith, in writing, shall certify such fact, together with the cause for such suspension, to the city manager who, within five (5) days from the receipt thereof, shall proceed to inquire into the cause of such suspension and render judgment therein, which judgment, if the charge be sustained, may be either suspension, reduction in rank or dismissal from the division. The city manager, in any such investigation, shall have the same powers to administer oaths and to secure the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers as are conferred upon the mayor by statute. 
(B)  Management rights: The city retains the exclusive right to manage the operations, control the premises, direct the working force, and maintain efficiency of operations, unless otherwise expressly provided in the collective bargaining agreement between the City of Upper Arlington and the Fraternal Order of Police Capital City Lodge No. 9. The city specifically retains the rights and responsibilities set forth in ORC § 4117.08(C) to: 
(1)  Determine matters of inherent managerial policy which include, but are not limited to, areas of discretion of policy such as the functions and programs of the public employer, standards of service, its overall budget, utilization of technology, and organizational structure; 
(2)  Direct, supervise, evaluate or hire employees; 
(3)  Maintain and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of governmental operations; 
(4)  Determine the overall methods, process, means, or personnel by which governmental operations are to be conducted; 
(5)  Suspend, discipline, demote, discharge for just cause, layoff, promote, or retain employees; 
(6)  Determine the adequacy of the work force; 
(7)  Determine the overall mission of the employer as a unit of city government; 
(8)  Effectively manage the work force; and 
(9)  Take action to carry out the mission of the public employer as a governmental unit. 
(C)  The police chief may prescribe and charge a reasonable fee for services, such as fingerprinting and background checks, provided to the public by the Department of Police, in accordance with ORC § 109.572(C)(2). 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.06 - GRANTING POLICE POWERS TO CERTAIN CITY EMPLOYEES. 
(A)  Any city employee whose duties may require the exercise of police powers within the scope of his/her employment may be commissioned a special police officer by the police chief, with the approval of the city manager. In the performance of his/her duties, such employee shall have all the powers, duties and immunities of a police officer, including the right to carry weapons and to make arrests while in the performance of his/her duty. Any such commission may be terminated by the police chief with the approval of the city manager. 
(B)  Code compliance officers may be commissioned by the city manager. Eligible job categories include, but are not limited to, the chief building official, building inspector, electrical inspector, code compliance officer and assistant code compliance officer within the department of community development. The department is responsible for the enforcement of the city's building code, unified development code, property maintenance code and portions of the administrative code, business regulation code, streets and services code, health code and general offenses code. The code compliance officers commissioned within the community development department, along with any other officers in other departments so commissioned, may issue citations for minor misdemeanor, fourth degree misdemeanor and unclassified minor offenses only. The code compliance officers do not have arrest powers or the right to carry weapons. 
(C)  The city manager may commission the public works division manager and supervisors of the department of public service as code compliance officers to enforce the provisions of C.O. ch. 931 of the streets and services code. Code compliance officers commissioned pursuant to this section may issue citations for minor misdemeanors and unclassified minor offenses only, but do not have arrest powers or the right to carry weapons. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 2, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 143.07 - SPECIAL OR PRIVATE POLICE OFFICERS, BOND AND FEE. 
The city manager is authorized to commission such special or private police officers and private detectives as deemed necessary, all to serve without compensation from the city. 
Such private or special police officers and private detectives shall give a bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to the satisfaction of the city manager and shall pay an annual fee in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). They shall act under the direction and control of the police chief and such rules and regulations as the city manager shall from time to time provide. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.08 - ESTABLISHMENT OF AN UPPER ARLINGTON RESERVE AND AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE. 
The city may create within the department of public safety a reserve and an auxiliary police force, the members of which shall be appointed by the city manager. Membership in, or appointment to, the reserve or auxiliary police force, shall not confer employee status upon any person for any reason; and members of the reserve and auxiliary police force are not subject to C.O. ch. 149, the rules and regulations of the Upper Arlington Municipal Civil Service Commission or to any provisions of the laws of the State of Ohio pertaining to civil service. 
The objective of the reserve and auxiliary police force shall be to assist the police chief and all regular officers in the performance of police work within the jurisdictional limits of Upper Arlington. 
(A)  Reserve force: Members of the reserve force shall have all police powers, but shall perform only such duties as assigned to them by the police chief and shall act only when in uniform as prescribed by the police chief. 
(1)  Reserve officers are subject to the same general orders, special orders, personnel orders, memorandum, training bulletins, rules of conduct and directives applicable to other officers as well as the standards imposed by C.O. § 143.08. 
(a)  They shall be under the general control of the police chief or his/her designee who shall report to the police chief regarding their activities and training. 
(2)  Reserve officers shall be defined as those individuals certified by the Ohio Peace Officers Training Council (OPOTC). 
(3)  Reserve officers will be commissioned persons. They will consist of civilian volunteers who will serve a minimum of eight (8) hours per month without compensation. 
(4)  Uniforms worn by reserve officers shall be the same as those worn by full-time officers. The police division will supply all necessary uniform parts and the service weapon. 
(B)  Auxiliary force: Members of the auxiliary force shall be uniformed in a manner distinct from regular officers and shall be unarmed. Members of the auxiliary police force shall have no arrest powers and shall perform only such duties as assigned to them by the police chief and shall act only when in uniform as prescribed by the police chief. 
(1)  The primary duty of the auxiliary officer is to provide additional manpower for special assignments and activities where a full-time or reserve officer is not required. Auxiliary officers may ride in police vehicles to provide for additional coverage when needed. 
(2)  Auxiliary officers are subject to the same general orders, special orders, personnel orders, memorandum, training bulletins, rules of conduct and directives applicable to other officers as well as the standards imposed by C.O. § 143.08. 
(a)  Auxiliary officers shall be under the general control of the police chief or his designee who shall report to the police chief regarding their activities and training. 
(3)  Auxiliary officers will be commissioned persons. They will consist of civilian volunteers who will serve a minimum of eight (8) hours per month without compensation. 
(C)  The strength of the Upper Arlington Reserve and Auxiliary Police Force shall not exceed the authorized strength of the police division as authorized in accordance with C.O. § 143.04. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.09 - QUALIFICATIONS AND TERMS OF RESERVE AND AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE OFFICERS. 
(A)  Members of both the reserve and auxiliary police force shall be between their 21st and 50th birthdays at the date of initial appointment. Members may be reappointed beyond their 50th birthday upon presentation of evidence of satisfactory physical condition acceptable to the city manager. 
(B)  Reserve and auxiliary officer selection criteria will be similar to that used for full-time officers with the exception that mandatory written tests are not required. 
(C)  Candidates will go before a board of review and will have a thorough background investigation prior to any appointment. 
(D)  The city manager may terminate any reserve or auxiliary appointment at any time. 
(E)  Members may resign their appointments at any time. 
(F)  Reserve and auxiliary officers shall retire from active status no later than the last day of the month in which such reserve or auxiliary officer reaches his/her seventieth (70th) birthday. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.10 - DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF AND CITY MANAGER REGARDING RESERVE AND AUXILIARY POLICE FORCES. 
The police chief shall be the commanding officer of the Upper Arlington Reserve and Auxiliary Police Force subject to the approval of the city manager and shall have sole control of the assignments, training, stationing, utilization, and direction of its members. 
Such members shall obey the chain of command of the police division, the general orders and operating procedures of the police division, the rules and regulations of the Upper Arlington Reserve and Auxiliary Police Force and shall be subject to the orders of all regular appointed police officers of this city. 
The police chief, with the approval of the city manager, shall prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct and control of the Upper Arlington Reserve and Auxiliary Police Force. The rules shall prescribe, but not be limited to: 
(A)  Application and appointment procedures. 
(B)  Residency, medical, educational, psychological and moral character standards. 
(C)  Training requirements. 
(D)  Probationary status upon initial appointment. 
(E)  Uniform, insignia and equipment. 
(F)  Disciplinary procedures. 
(G)  Termination procedures. 
(H)  Required participation and tours of duty. 
(I)  The establishment and Charter of the Upper Arlington Reserve and Auxiliary Police Association. 
(J)  Any other rules necessary for the proper control and operation of the Upper Arlington Reserve and Auxiliary Police Force. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.11 - BONDING AND LIABILITY INSURANCE COVERAGE REGARDING RESERVE AND AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE MEMBERS. 
(A)  The city manager shall insure that the members of the Upper Arlington Reserve and Auxiliary Police Force are extended the benefits of the Workers' Compensation Act available to the members of any organization, association or group of persons whose services are desired by the city, but whose members are not employees of the City as provided for by ORC § 4123.01 by means of a contract for such benefits with the Industrial Commission of Ohio as therein provided for, or as authorized by Ordinance No. 35-55, and any contracts entered into pursuant to such authorization. 
(B)  The city manager shall purchase liability insurance for any class of members of the Upper Arlington Reserve and Auxiliary Police Force, equal to that provided to full-time officers performing like functions. 
(C)  Members of the Upper Arlington Reserve and Auxiliary Police Force are to be bonded with the same coverage afforded to full-time officers providing like functions. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.12 - COMPENSATION FOR RESERVE AND AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE. 
All services performed by reserve and auxiliary police officers shall be on a voluntary basis and without pay. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.13 - PURPOSE, LIABILITY OF CITY REGARDING RESERVE AND AUXILIARY POLICE FORCES. 
The provisions of C.O. §§ 143.08 to 143.15 are declared to be an exercise by the city of its police powers for the protection of public peace, health, property, safety and general welfare, and neither the city nor any agent or representative of the city, nor any individual, firm, partnership or corporation, who in good faith executes any executive order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of C.O. §§ 143.08 to 143.15 shall be liable for injury or damage sustained to person or property as a result of such action. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.14 - EXECUTIVE ORDERS FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF RESERVE AND AUXILIARY POLICE FORCES. 
The city manager is authorized and directed to promulgate such executive orders, rules and regulations as, in his/her discretion, are either necessary or desirable in the administration of the reserve and auxiliary police force. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.15 - CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS REGARDING RESERVE AND AUXILIARY POLICE FORCES. 
The provisions of chapter 143 regarding reserve and auxiliary police forces shall not be construed as intended by council to be in conflict with any collective bargaining agreement, federal or state statute or with any lawful regulation promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.16 - COMPOSITION/SERVICES OF FIRE DIVISION. 
The fire division shall consist of the fire chief and such other officers and employees as may be authorized by the city manager. The fire division shall be responsible for the firefighting, fire prevention, fire service and emergency medical service activities of the city, as may be authorized by the city manager. 
The fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager from the fire division, or shall have had other training and experience in firefighting, fire prevention, and emergency management. 
The fire chief shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. Upon termination of his/her service as fire chief, he/she shall, if appointed from the fire division, revert to his/her status in the classified civil service, provided, however, that if his/her service as fire chief is terminated because of impairment from habitual alcohol and/or drug use, or any misconduct involving moral turpitude or instances of misconduct as outlined in the personnel rules, he/she shall be subject to disciplinary action in his/her classified civil service status in the same manner as if such misconduct had been committed while he/she was serving in such status. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.17 - POWERS OF FIRE CHIEF/MANAGEMENT RIGHTS. 
(A)  General powers: The fire chief shall have exclusive control of the stationing and transfer of all firefighters and other employees in the fire division, under such general rules and regulations as the city manager prescribes. The fire chief shall have the right to suspend any of the officers or employees in the division and under his/her management and control, for incompetence, gross neglect of duty, gross immorality, impairment from habitual alcohol and/or drug use, failure to obey orders given to him/her by proper authority or for any other reasonable and just cause. Upon such suspension, the chief, forthwith, in writing shall certify such fact, together with the cause for such suspension, to the city manager, who within five (5) days from the receipt thereof, shall proceed to inquire into the cause of such suspension and render judgment therein, which judgment, if the charge be sustained, may be either suspension, reduction in rank or dismissal from the division. The city manager, in any such investigation, shall have the same powers to administer oaths and to secure the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers as are conferred upon the mayor by statute. 
(B)  Management rights: The city retains its rights, regardless of the frequency of exercise, to operate and manage its affairs in each and every respect, unless otherwise expressly provided in the collective bargaining agreement between the City of Upper Arlington and the International Association of Firefighters Local 1521. The rights reserved to the sole discretion of the City shall include, but not be limited, to the right: 
(1)  To direct the work of firefighters. 
(2)  To determine the mission of the fire division. 
(3)  To determine the size and composition of the work force. 
(4)  To suspend, discipline, or discharge firefighters for just cause. 
(5)  To relieve firefighters from duty because of lack of work or lack of funds. 
(6)  To take actions as may be necessary to carry out the mission of the fire division in emergencies. 
(7)  To hire, schedule, promote, demote, transfer, and assign firefighters. 
(8)  To recruit, select, and determine the qualifications and characteristics of new hires. 
(9)  To schedule or not schedule overtime as required in the manner most advantageous to the requirements of efficient governmental operations. 
(10)  To train or retrain firefighters as appropriate. 
(11)  To set standards for service to be offered to the public. 
(12)  To establish, modify, combine, or abolish job positions and classifications. 
(13)  To create, modify, or delete divisional rules and regulations; except as such changes may conflict with the collective bargaining agreement. 
(C)  Control of apparatus at fire: Police powers: At all fires, the ranking fire officer at the scene shall have the sole control and command over all the fire apparatus, and of employees of the fire division and shall give such orders and adopt such measures as he/she shall deem necessary for the extinguishing of the fire, protection of persons and property and the preservation of order for which purpose he shall have all the powers of a city police officer. 
(D)  Fire marshal: The chief of the fire division shall be the fire marshal of the city, and shall be in charge of the enforcement of the fire prevention code and other ordinances and laws relative to the prevention and control of fires and the investigation of causes of fires, suspected arson and similar crimes. He/she may detail one (1) or more members of the fire division to assist in the performance of said duties, who shall, while so detailed, be known as deputy fire marshals. The fire marshal and deputy fire marshals shall have all the powers of police officers in the police division. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.18 - ESTABLISHMENT OF A COMMUNITY EMERGENCY RESPONSE TEAM (CERT). 
There may be created within the department of public safety a community emergency response team (CERT), the members of which shall be appointed by the city manager. 
Membership in, or appointment to CERT shall not confer employee status upon any person for any reason; and members of CERT are not subject to C.O. ch. 149, the rules and regulations of the Upper Arlington Municipal Civil Service Commission or to any provisions of the laws of the State of Ohio pertaining to civil service. 
Establishment of a community emergency response team (CERT) shall not prevent the fire chief and/or the city manager from seeking outside emergency assistance or utilizing mutual aid agreements previously established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.19 - QUALIFICATIONS AND TERMS OF CERT MEMBERS. 
(A)  Members of CERT shall be between their 21 st and 50 th birthdays at the date of initial appointment. Members may be reappointed beyond their 50 th birthday upon presentation of evidence of satisfactory physical condition acceptable to the city manager. 
(B)  CERT selection criteria will be similar to that used for full-time firefighters or employees with the exception that mandatory written tests are not required. 
(C)  Candidates will go before a board of review and will have a thorough background investigation prior to any appointment. 
(D)  The city manager may terminate any CERT appointment at any time. 
(E)  Members of CERT may resign their appointments at any time. 
(F)  Members of CERT shall retire from active status no later than the last day of the month in which such CERT member reaches his/her seventieth (70 th ) birthday. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.20 - DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF AND CITY MANAGER REGARDING CERT MEMBERS. 
The fire chief shall be the commanding officer of the community emergency response team (CERT) subject to the approval of the city manager and shall have control of the assignments, training, stationing, utilization, and the direction of work of such Team. 
The community emergency response team (CERT) shall be subject to call upon the order of the fire chief, and at all times when they are called upon to perform duties, to assist the fire division, they shall observe the rules, regulations and traditions of the regularly constituted fire division. CERT members shall obey the chain of command of the fire division and shall take orders from all regularly appointed officers thereof, including the rank of firefighter. 
The fire chief, with the approval of the city manager, shall prescribe the rules and regulations for the conduct and control of CERT. The rules shall prescribe, but not be limited to: 
(A)  Application and appointment procedures; 
(B)  Residency, medical, educational, psychological and moral character standards; 
(C)  Training requirements; 
(D)  Probationary status upon initial appointment; 
(E)  Uniform, insignia and equipment; 
(F)  Disciplinary procedures; 
(G)  Termination procedures; 
(H)  Required participation and tours of duty; 
(I)  The establishment and charter of the community emergency response team (CERT); and 
(J)  Any other rules necessary for the proper control and operation of CERT. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.21 - UNIFORMS FOR CERT MEMBERS. 
The city manager is authorized to prescribe the type of uniform or part thereof and insignia which shall be worn by members of CERT. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.22 - COMPENSATION FOR CERT MEMBERS. 
All services performed by the CERT shall be on a voluntary basis and without pay. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.23 - BONDING AND LIABILITY INSURANCE COVERAGE REGARDING CERT MEMBERS. 
(A)  The city manager shall insure that the members of CERT are extended the benefits of the Workers' Compensation Act available to the members of any organization, association or group of persons whose services are desired by the city, but whose members are not employees of the city as provided for by ORC § 4123.01 by means of a contract for such benefits with the Industrial Commission of Ohio as therein provided for, or as authorized by Ordinance No. 35-55, and any contracts entered into pursuant to such authorization. 
(B)  The city manager shall purchase liability insurance for any class of members of CERT, equal to that provided to full-time officers performing like functions. 
(C)  Members of CERT are to be bonded with the same coverage afforded to full-time officers providing like functions. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.24 - PURPOSE, LIABILITY OF CITY REGARDING CERT MEMBERS. 
The provisions of C.O. §§ 143.18 to 143.26 are declared to be an exercise by the city of its police powers for the protection of public peace, health, property, safety and general welfare, and neither the city nor any agent or representative of the city, nor any individual, firm, partnership or corporation, who in good faith executes any executive order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of C.O. §§ 143.18 to 143.26 shall be liable for injury or damage sustained to person or property as a result of such action. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.25 - EXECUTIVE ORDERS FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF CERT. 
The city manager is authorized and directed to promulgate such executive orders, rules and regulations as, in his/her discretion, are either necessary or desirable in the administration of CERT. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.26 - CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS REGARDING CERT. 
The provisions of chapter 143 regarding the community emergency response team shall not be construed as intended by council to be in conflict with any collective bargaining agreement, federal or state statute or with any lawful regulation promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.27 - ESTABLISHMENT OF A DIVISION OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. 
The city may create, within the department of public safety, a division of emergency management to be established for the purpose of providing assistance to the people against enemy action and other disasters. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009; amended 3/16/11 Ord. No. 115-2010) 
§ 143.28 - COMPOSITION OF THE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIVISION. 
If activated, the division of emergency management shall consist of a director and deputy director of emergency management and such other officers and employees as may be authorized by the city manager. 
Pursuant to C.O. § 143.01, the police or fire chief may, if so appointed by the city manager, serve as the director or deputy director of the division of emergency management. 
Such officers and employees as authorized by the city manager need not be current city officers or employees nor shall they be required to be residents of the city. 
Membership in, or appointment to the division of emergency management shall not confer employee status upon any person for any reason; and members of the division are not subject to C.O. ch. 149, the rules and regulations of the Upper Arlington Municipal Civil Service Commission or to any provisions of the laws of the State of Ohio pertaining to civil service. 
Membership in, or appointment to the division of emergency management shall not prevent the director and/or city manager from seeking outside emergency assistance or utilizing mutual aid agreements previously established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.29 - QUALIFICATIONS AND TERMS OF THE DIVISION OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. 
(A)  Members of the division of emergency management shall be between their 21 st and 50 th birthdays at the date of initial appointment. Members may be reappointed beyond their 50 th birthday upon presentation of evidence of satisfactory physical condition acceptable to the city manager. 
(B)  Selection criteria will be similar to that used for full-time police and/or fire division officers or employees with the exception that mandatory written tests are not required. 
(C)  Candidates will go before a board of review and will have a thorough background investigation prior to any appointment. 
(D)  The city manager may terminate any division of emergency management appointment at any time. 
(E)  Members of the division of emergency management may resign their appointments at any time. 
(F)  Members of the division of emergency management shall retire from active status no later than the last day of the month in which such division member reaches his/her seventieth (70 th ) birthday. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.30 - DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR AND MEMBERS OF THE DIVISION OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. 
The director shall be the commanding officer of the division of emergency management subject to the approval of the city manager and shall have control of the assignments, training, stationing, utilization, and the direction of work of such division. 
The division of emergency management shall be subject to call upon the order of the director, and at all times when they are called upon to perform duties to assist the city. They shall observe the rules, regulations and traditions of the regularly constituted police and fire divisions. division members shall obey the chain of command of the fire and/or police division and shall take orders from all regularly appointed officers thereof. 
The director, with the approval of the city manager, shall prescribe the rules and regulations for the conduct and control of the division of emergency management. The rules shall prescribe, but not be limited to: 
(A)  Application and appointment procedures; 
(B)  Residency, medical, education, psychological and moral character standards; 
(C)  Training requirements; 
(D)  Probationary status upon initial appointment; 
(E)  Uniform, insignia and equipment; 
(F)  Disciplinary procedures; 
(G)  Termination procedures; 
(H)  Required participation and tours of duty; 
(I)  The establishment and charter of the division of emergency management; and 
(J)  Any other rules necessary for the proper control and operation of the division. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.31 - UNIFORMS FOR DIVISION MEMBERS. 
The city manager is authorized to prescribe the type of uniform or part thereof and insignia which shall be worn by members of the division of emergency management. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.32 - COMPENSATION FOR DIVISION MEMBERS. 
All services performed by the division of emergency management shall be on a voluntary basis and without pay. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.33 - BONDING AND LIABILITY INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR THE DIVISION OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT MEMBERS. 
(A)  The city manager shall insure that the members of the division of emergency management are extended the benefits of the Workers' Compensation Act available to the members of any organization, association or group of persons whose services are desired by the city, but whose members are not employees of the city as provided for by ORC § 4123.01 by means of a contract for such benefits with the Industrial Commission of Ohio as therein provided for, or as authorized by Ordinance No. 35-55, and any contracts entered into pursuant to such authorization. 
(B)  The city manager shall purchase liability insurance for any class of members of the division of emergency management, equal to that provided to full-time officers performing like functions. 
(C)  Members of the division of emergency management are to be bonded with the same coverage afforded to full-time officers providing like functions. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.34 - PURPOSE, LIABILITY OF CITY REGARDING DIVISION MEMBERS. 
The provisions of C.O. §§ 143.27 to 143.35 are declared to be an exercise by the city of its police powers for the protection of public peace, health, property, safety and general welfare, and neither the city nor any agent or representative of the city, nor any individual, firm, partnership or corporation, who is good faith executes any executive order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of C.O. §§ 143.27 to 143.35 shall be liable for injury or damage sustained to person or property as a result of such action. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.35 - EXECUTIVE ORDERS FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE DIVISION. 
The city manager is authorized and directed to promulgate such executive orders, rules and regulations as, in his/her discretion, are either necessary or desirable in the administration of the division of emergency management. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.36 - CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS REGARDING THE DIVISION. 
The provisions of chapter 143 shall not be construed as intended by council to be in conflict with any collective bargaining agreement, federal or state statute or with any lawful regulation promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.37 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR AND DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF THE DIVISION OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. 
The director of division of emergency management shall be the executive head of the division and, under the supervision and control of the city manager, shall have and exercise all powers and duties incident to the operation, regulation and government of such division, except as otherwise provided by charter or ordinance. The deputy director of division of emergency management is authorized to act for and in place of the director during any period of vacancy in the office of the director and during any absence or disability of the director. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
§ 143.38 - RESPONSE TO EMERGENCY CALLS FROM OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS. 
The city manager is authorized to establish rules and regulations for the response for manpower and equipment of the police and fire divisions and of other divisions, if required, to emergency calls from other political subdivisions in the Central Ohio area. Such regulations may include, without limitation, the determination of the source and type of calls to be answered, the amount of administrative personnel to implement such regulations and to order responses to such calls and such other matters as may be desirable and proper in connection therewith. 
(A)  There shall be no liability or responsibility on the part of this city, if a request for assistance is denied, or if the response is delayed or inadequate or for other circumstances arising in connection with the furnishing of such assistance. 
(B)  The question of compensation to this city for the furnishing of such assistance to a political subdivision with which no contract exists shall be determined by negotiation after the rendering of assistance, if the extent thereof, in the opinion of the city manager, justifies such compensation. 
(C)  All personnel of this city, including members of the police and fire divisions, responding to such calls for assistance shall be considered as acting within the scope of their employment while enroute to, and from, and while acting within the territory of the requesting political subdivisions, and shall be entitled to all benefits of fire and police pension funds, Workers' Compensation, or otherwise, to which they would be entitled, if acting within this city. 
(D)  The adoption of this ordinance shall not be deemed to limit the authority of members of the safety department to continue presently accepted practices of serving outside the city limits, as in the attempted apprehension of persons suspected of the commission of crimes within this city, the making of investigations or otherwise. 
(E)  The city manager is directed to undertake to make arrangements with other political subdivisions with which formal mutual aid contracts do not exist, for the adoption of reciprocal policies similar to those expressed in this ordinance for the extension of emergency assistance to this city. 
(F)  The city manager is further authorized to execute agreements on behalf of the city with other political subdivisions in Franklin County, for mutual aid for additional fire protection, which agreements shall provide for the interchange of service of fire departments and the use of fire fighting apparatus and other emergency equipment and personnel, pursuant to the provisions of ORC §§ 505.44, 9.60 and 2744.02. Such agreements shall comply with the provisions of C.O. §§ 143.37 and shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney as to form and legality. 
(Ord. No. 117-2009) 
CHAPTER 145. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE 

§ 145.01 - ESTABLISHMENT. 
There is created a department of public service which shall be administered by the city manager, who shall have and exercise all authority and powers conferred upon a director of public service by law. 
§ 145.02 - DIVISIONS WITHIN DEPARTMENT. 
    The following divisions are created within the department of public service: 
(A)  Engineering division. 
(B)  Public works division. 
(Ord. No. 115-2010, 3-16-2011; Ord. No. 39-2015, § 2, 6-22-2015 ; Ord. No. 75-2015, § 1, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 145.03 - ADMINISTRATION. 
The director of public services, under the general supervision and control of the city manager, shall develop administrative procedures and regulations to carry out the responsibilities conferred upon the department of public service. 
(Ord. No. 115-2010, 3-16-2011) 
CHAPTER 147. - BOARD OF HEALTH 

§ 147.01 - ESTABLISHMENT. 
(A)  The City of Upper Arlington shall be a city health district. The Upper Arlington Board of Health is created for the city and shall be composed of five (5) members. 
(B)  If the city has not contracted for health services pursuant to ORC ch. 3709, then the Upper Arlington Board shall administer the city health district and have all the powers and duties conferred by statute. The board of health shall be composed of four (4) members appointed by the president of council and confirmed by city council and one (1) member appointed by the health district licensing council established under ORC § 3709.41. The term of office of the members shall be five (5) years from the date of appointment, except that of those first appointed one shall serve five (5) years, one for four (4) years, one for three (3) years, one for two (2) years, and one for one (1) year, and thereafter one shall be appointed each year. The members shall be compensated pursuant to ORC § 3709.05. 
(C)  If the city has contracted for health services pursuant to ORC ch. 3709, then the board of health shall act in an advisory capacity to the council and to the entity providing such health services. The board of health shall be composed of five (5) members appointed by the president of council and confirmed by council, to serve without compensation. The president of council, by virtue of his/her office, shall be president of the board. 
(D)  Any and all references in the City Code to the board of health shall mean the entity actually performing the duties required of a board of health of a city health district pursuant to ORC § 3709.05. 
CHAPTER 149. - CIVIL SERVICE 

§ 149.01 - CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION; APPOINTMENT, TERM, REMOVAL. 
Council shall appoint three (3) electors of the city as civil service commissioners, who shall be residents of the city and/or the Upper Arlington School District at the time of appointment and for the duration of their term of service. The members of the existing civil service commission shall continue in office for the terms for which they were appointed. Thereafter, members of the civil service commission shall be appointed to serve for a term of four (4) years and shall expire on the last day of February. Appointments shall commence on the date the appointment is approved by council or such other date provided by council. Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of said term. 
Council may at any time remove any commissioner from office if and when he/she no longer meets the residency requirement. 
Council may at any time remove any commissioner for inefficiency, neglect of duty, incompetence or malfeasance in office, having first given to such commissioner a copy of the charges against him/her and an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel in his/her own defense. 
(Ord. No. 8-2013) 
§ 149.02 - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. 
The commission shall designate one of its members as president, shall appoint a secretary and such other officers and employees as it may determine to be necessary and as council may approve. 
§ 149.03 - CLASSIFICATION. 
The civil service of the city is hereby divided into the unclassified and the classified service. 
(A)  The unclassified service shall include: 
(1)  All officers elected by the people; 
(2)  All officers and employees appointed by council, and all members of boards and commissions appointed by the president of council or by council; 
(3)  Each director of a department, and the deputies and/or assistants of the department head. Assistants includes, but is not limited to, management assistants; 
(4)  Appointed officials; 
(5)  One (1) secretary/administrative assistant for each of the following: 
(a)  The city manager, 
(b)  The city clerk, 
(c)  The city attorney, 
(d)  Each department of municipal government, 
(e)  Each division within a department, and 
(f)  Each board or commission appointed by council, or by the president of council with council's approval. 
(6)  The chief building inspector and building inspectors; 
(7)  All positions appointed by the city attorney; 
(8)  Community affairs director and community affairs coordinator; 
(9)  The payroll administrator; 
(10)  The deputies and assistants of elected or principal executive officers holding a fiduciary relation to such principals; and 
(11)  All part-time employees and all persons who receive interim, temporary, or intermittent appointments. 
(B)  The classified service shall comprise all positions not specifically included by this ordinance in the unclassified service. There shall be in the classified service two (2) classes, to be known as the competitive class and the noncompetitive class: 
(1)  The competitive class shall include all positions and employments for which it is practicable to determine the merit and fitness of applicants by competitive examinations. 
(2)  The noncompetitive class shall consist of all positions requiring peculiar and exceptional qualifications of a scientific, managerial, professional or educational character and unskilled positions for which it is impracticable to give competitive examinations, as may be determined by the rules of the commission. 
(C)  The civil service commission shall prescribe such reasonable requirements as they shall deem necessary as to age, sex, citizenship, physical condition, educational background and moral character for all candidates, eligibles and employees in the classified service. They shall conduct such examinations as they may deem necessary in order to determine that such requirements are met and maintained. 
§ 149.04 - RULES. 
The commission shall prescribe, amend and enforce the civil service rules and keep its proceedings and records of its examinations concerning the enforcement and effect of the civil service provisions and the rules thereunder. If there is a conflict between the civil service rules and ORC ch. 124, the rules shall supersede chapter 124; provided, that the rules may not supersede the City Charter or the Upper Arlington Codified Ordinances. The commission shall make an annual report to council. The rules shall provide for but are not limited to any requirements mandated by ORC ch. 124. 
§ 149.05 - PROBATIONARY APPOINTMENTS. 
(A)  All original and promotional appointments shall be for a probationary period of one (1) year. 
(B)  The one-year probationary period for original appointments of police officers shall begin on the date of appointment or the date of certification pursuant to ORC § 109.77, whichever occurs later. 
(C)  The commission may extend the probationary period for up to one hundred eighty (180) additional days upon the request of the appointing authority for good cause, unless otherwise provided in any applicable collective bargaining agreement. 
(D)  No appointment or promotion shall be deemed finally made until the employee has satisfactorily served his probationary period. 
All original and promotional appointments shall be for a probationary period one (1) year; except as to original appointments or promotion in the police and fire divisions. The probationary period shall be one (1) year for firefighters and one (1) year from the date of certification or promotion for police officers, pursuant to ORC § 109.77. The commission may extend the probationary period for up to one hundred eighty (180) additional days upon the request of the appointing authority for good cause. 
No appointment or promotion shall be deemed finally made until the employee has satisfactorily served his probationary period. 
( Ord. No. 62-2014, § 1, 11-24-2014 ) 
§ 149.06 - APPEALS. 
Any employee of the city in the classified service, other than a probationary employee, who is suspended, discharged or reduced in rank or compensation for disciplinary reasons, may appeal, in writing, from such disciplinary decision to the civil service commission within ten (10) days from and after the date of such decision or order. In such event, the commission shall forthwith notify the official issuing the disciplinary decision for the suspension, discharge or reduction in rank or compensation. The official, shall forthwith transmit to the commission a copy of the charges and proceedings supporting the disciplinary decision. The commission shall hear such appeal within thirty (30) days from and after the filing of the same with the commission and may affirm, disaffirm or modify the action of such officer. 
§ 149.07 - EXAMINATIONS. 
All examinations shall be practical and impartial and shall relate to those matters which will fairly test the relative capacity of the persons examined to discharge the duties of the position for which appointment is sought. Such examinations shall pertain to local departmental practices. The commission shall consult with department and division heads to obtain information needed for preparation of examinations. 
§ 149.08 - APPOINTMENTS. 
(A)  When a position in the competitive classified service is to be filled, the appointing authority shall notify the commission or its secretary of that fact. The commission or secretary shall certify to the appointing authority the names of all candidates on the eligible list for the class or grade to which such position belongs. Except as provided for exceptional appointments authorized by ORC § 124.30 and promotional appointments, the appointing authority shall appoint one (1) of the top ten (10) names on the eligible list or in the top twenty-five percent (25%) of the eligible list, whichever is greater. Where more than one position is to be filled, the commission may certify additional names as necessary to carry out the purposes of this section. When fewer than ten (10) names are certified to an appointing authority for an original appointment, appointment from the list shall not be mandatory. 
(B)  In the case of promotion, the commission or secretary shall certify to the appointing authority the names of the three (3) candidates standing highest on the eligible list for the class or grade to which such position belongs. The appointing authority shall appoint one (1) of the three (3) persons to such position. 
(C)  The commission may also adopt rules allowing for the removal from the list of a person who has been certified to the appointing authority more than three (3) times and has not been selected. 
(D)  (1)  In case of an emergency, an appointing authority may make an appointment without regard to this chapter or ORC §§ 124.01 through 124.64, but in no case to continue longer that one hundred twenty (120) days, and in no case shall successive appointments be made. The commission may except such appointments from the application of its rules. 
(2)  Where the services to be rendered by an appointee are for a temporary period, not to exceed six (6) months, and the need of such service is important and urgent, the appointing authority may select for such temporary service any person on the proper list of those eligible for permanent appointment. 
(3)  Where the services to be rendered by an employee are for seasonal employment, the appointing authority may, but is not required to, select from among persons honorably separated from the previous season. Alternatively, or in addition, the appointing authority may select from among applicants who apply for seasonal employment during an application period established by the appointing authority. Seasonal appointments are temporary appointments. 
(E)  The commission may also provide in its rules for interim and intermittent appointments, and for the suspension of competitive examinations the ORC §§ 124.01 through 124.64 for the reasons and under the circumstances set forth in ORC § 124.30(A)(2). 
(Ord. No. 8-2013) 
§ 149.10 - PAYROLLS CERTIFIED. 
It shall be unlawful for the treasurer or other public disbursing officer to pay any salary or compensation for service to any person holding a position in the classified service unless the payroll or account for such salary or compensation shall bear the certificate of the commission that the persons named therein have been appointed or employed in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and of the rules established thereunder. 
Where estimates, payrolls, or accounts are prepared by electronic data processing equipment, the commission may develop methods for controlling the input or verifying the output of such equipment to ensure compliance with the Upper Arlington Codified Ordinances governing civil service, any provisions of ORC ch. 124 made applicable by the rules of the commission, and the rules of the commission adopted thereunder. 
§ 149.11 - INVESTIGATIONS AND HEARING. 
In any investigation or hearing conducted by the commission it shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers pertinent to the investigation and to administer oaths to such witnesses. 
§ 149.12 - POLITICAL BELIEFS. 
No person in the classified service or seeking admission thereto shall be appointed, reduced, laid off, discharged or in any way favored or discriminated against because of his political opinions or affiliations. 
§ 149.13 - POLITICAL ACTIVITY. 
All persons in the civil service are subject to the provisions of C.O. ch. 105. 
§ 149.14 - PAYMENT FOR APPOINTMENT OR PROMOTION. 
No applicant for appointment or promotion in the classified service shall, directly or indirectly, pay or promise to pay any money or other valuable thing, nor shall he ask or receive any recommendation or assistance from any person upon the consideration of any political service to be rendered, for or on account of his appointment or promotion, or proposed appointment or promotion. 
§ 149.15 - ABUSE OF POLITICAL INFLUENCE. 
No person who holds any public office, or who has been nominated for or seeks a nomination, election or appointment to any public office shall use or promise to use, either directly or indirectly, any official authority or influence in order to secure or aid any person in securing for himself or another any office or employment in the classified service, or any promotion or increase of salary therein, as a reward for political influence or service, or for service in behalf of any candidate. No person shall, by means of threats or coercion, induce or seek to induce anyone in the classified service to resign his position or to waive his right to certification, appointment or promotion. 
§ 149.16 - FRAUDS IN EXAMINATIONS. 
No person or officer shall, by himself, or in cooperation with one (1) or more persons, willfully or corruptly deceive or obstruct any person in his right to be examined for admission to the service of the city or the city school district; or falsely or corruptly mark, grade or report upon the examination or proper standing of any person examined for appointment in the civil service, or aid in so doing; or willfully or corruptly make any false representation as to the results of such examination or concerning the person so examined; or willfully or corruptly furnish to any person special or secret information for the purpose of either improving or injuring the prospects or chances of any person so examined or to be examined or to be appointed, employed or promoted; or willfully impersonate any other person or permit or aid any other person to impersonate him in connection with any examination or registration, application or appointment, or request to be examined or registered; or make known or assist in making known to any applicant for examination, any question to be asked on such examination; or willfully violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
§ 149.17 - VIOLATION OF ORDINANCE OR RULE. 
After a rule has been duly established by the civil service commission, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, no person shall make an appointment to office or select a person for employment contrary to such rule, or willfully refuse or neglect to comply with or to conform to the provisions of this chapter. If any person who is convicted of violating this section holds any public office or place of public employment, such office or position shall, by virtue of such conviction, be rendered vacant. 
§ 149.18 - GENERAL LAWS INAPPLICABLE. 
The general laws of Ohio, except the constitution, shall not apply to the civil service of this city, except to the extent that they may be made applicable by ordinance or by rule of the civil service commission duly adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
§ 149.99 - PENALTY. 
(A)  Whoever violates C.O. §§ 149.12, 149.13, 149.14, 149.15 and 149.17 is guilty of a civil service violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall impose a mandatory fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), which shall not be suspended. 
(B)  In addition to any criminal penalty, any person in the civil service who violates this chapter or C.O. ch. 105 shall also be subject to disciplinary action which may include termination. 
CHAPTER 151. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD 

§ 151.01 - ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP. 
There is hereby established a city parks and recreation advisory board, consisting of the seven members appointed by the president of council and confirmed by council . The city manager and the parks and recreation department director shall serve as ex-officio members of the advisory board. 
( Ord. No. 14-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
§ 151.02 - TERMS OF OFFICE. 
(A)  The seven (7) members shall be appointed for, four-year terms ending on the last day of September of the term's final year. The terms will be staggered so that three (3) members will be appointed every-other odd-numbered year, and four (4) members will be appointed every-other even-numbered year. City council may shorten or lengthen a particular term at the time of appointment to maintain this staggered rotation. The director may request the president of council renew an appointment for additional terms. Appointments for the purpose of filling vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of terms shall be made for the unexpired term by the president of council and confirmed by council. All board members shall be residents of the City of Upper Arlington. 
(B)  Vacancies, absence from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall operate to vacate the term of the member, unless such absence is authorized or excused by vote of the board and approved by the city manager. Any term thus vacated, or vacated by resignation, shall be filled by appointment of the president of council, subject to confirmation by the council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 23-2014; Ord. No. 14-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
§ 151.03 - ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE. 
(A)  The parks and recreation advisory board shall elect its own chairperson and establish its own rules of organization and procedure for the conduct of its meetings. The rules shall not conflict with the City Charter, this chapter, the rules of council, or state law and shall be generally in accordance with Roberts Rules of Order. All Rules shall be submitted to the city clerk and kept on file. 
(B)  The board shall meet at the call of the chairperson, the director of parks and recreation, the city manager, or council. The city clerk shall appoint a person to record board minutes. The board may invite from time to time members of the public including those representing department related committees to speak on various topics. 
(C)  Recommendations by the board may be provided to council, the city manager, or the parks and recreation director. 
( Ord. No. 14-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
§ 151.04 - DUTIES. 
The parks and recreation advisory board shall act in an advisory capacity to the director, city manager or city council. The purpose of the board is to provide input and discuss park, recreational, and cultural arts services and facilities. The board shall also serve as ambassadors for the city by soliciting input from the community and by educating our citizens and facility users regarding the services provided by the department. If so directed by the director or city council, the board shall receive public input and consider matters pertaining to acquisition, development, improvement and management of parks, parkstrips and other city property. The board may also receive input on matters pertaining to recreational programs and facilities in the community, the need for improvement and extension thereof, the need and feasibility of additional recreation facilities and methods of financing the same. It shall also facilitate, as necessary, updates or reports from the chairperson or designee of each of the boards, commissions or councils related to the parks and recreation department. The board shall perform such other duties relative to the department and programs as delegated by city council or the director. 
( Ord. No. 14-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
CHAPTER 152. - UPPER ARLINGTON CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION 

§ 152.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
(A)  The terms cultural arts and arts, as used herein include but are not necessarily limited to music, literature, the theater, including motion pictures, the dance, painting, sculpture, photography, architecture, graphics and fabric design. 
(B)  Commission means the Upper Arlington Cultural Arts Commission created by this chapter of the Codified Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 13-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
§ 152.02 - ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP. 
(A)  Establishment: There is hereby established and created the Upper Arlington Cultural Arts Commission. 
(B)  Membership: The commission shall consist of the following members: 
(1)  Seven (7) regular members appointed by the president of council, subject to approval of council, for three-year terms. City council may shorten or lengthen a particular term at the time of appointment to maintain a staggered rotation so that not more than three members' terms expire in the same year. All commission members shall be residents of the City of Upper Arlington. 
(2)  Liaison consultants may be invited by the chairperson of the commission and approved by the director of parks and recreation and city. Any public agency or organization or private association whose membership is open to the general public may nominate one of their members to represent their organization and attend the commission meetings when invited. Student liaison consultants representing any public school shall be nominated by the board of education or designee. Any person nominated, as above, may be invited as liaison consultants by the chairperson of the commission and approved by the director of parks and recreation and the city manager. In addition, the chairperson may invite any individual, in an individual capacity, to address the commission based on their expertise in the area of cultural arts. Liaison consultants and invitees do not have voting rights and serve at the pleasure of the director of parks and recreation and city manager. 
(3)  The director of parks and recreation may serve as executive secretary, appointed by, and serving at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(C)  Terms: 
(1)  Terms shall commence the first day of June, and expire the last day of May. 
(2)  Vacancies, absence from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall operate to vacate the term of the member, unless such absence is authorized or excused by vote of the commission and approved by the executive secretary. Any term thus vacated, or vacated by resignation, shall be filled by appointment by the president of council, subject to approval of council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
( Ord. No. 13-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
§ 152.03 - PURPOSE, DUTIES, AND OBJECTIVES. 
(A)  The purpose of the commission is to foster and encourage the development and preservation of the arts in this community. 
(B)  The duties and objectives of the commission shall include the following: 
(1)  To preserve the art resources of the community and to share them with the entire community. 
(2)  To develop awareness and appreciation of the arts in persons of all ages. 
(3)  To encourage and support emerging arts organizations which give promise of fulfilling the needs of residents of this community for exposure to and participation in cultural arts activities. 
(4)  To promote and support professional artists. Professional artist means a person who devoted a major portion of his/her time to practicing, performing or teaching any of the arts. 
(5)  To provide an atmosphere where artist and audience can work together to preserve the citizens' cultural heritage while discovering their artistic potential. 
(6)  In carrying out its stated objectives, the commission shall not be restricted to the geographical limits of this city, but may cooperate with other groups serving the Mid-Ohio area in any aspect of the cultural arts which is approved by the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 13-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
§ 152.04 - EXECUTIVE SECRETARY-DUTIES AND POWERS. 
(A)  The executive secretary shall implement the policies and programs of the commission by the development of cultural arts programs and the allocation and utilization of resources, at his/her discretion, made available to the commission from any source whatsoever, to ensure that the interests of the community and the City of Upper Arlington are safeguarded. 
(B)  The executive secretary shall be empowered to act in the name of the commission between regular meetings of the commission. He/she shall report any such actions to the commission at its next regular meeting. 
( Ord. No. 13-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
§ 152.05 - ARTS MANAGER. 
The arts manager shall assist the commission with the duties outlined in C.O. § 152.03 and shall perform other duties as the executive secretary may prescribe. 
( Ord. No. 13-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
§ 152.06 - ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE. 
(A)  Regulations: The commission shall establish its own rules of organization and procedure for the conduct of its business. The rules shall not conflict with the provisions of the City Charter, this chapter, the Rules of Council, or state law and shall be generally in accordance with the Rules of Council and Roberts Rules of Order. All rules shall be submitted to the city clerk and kept on file. 
(B)  Meetings: The commission shall meet monthly, unless otherwise directed by a majority vote of the commission, and shall give public notice of its meetings. The director of parks and recreation may cancel a meeting at any time and provide adequate notice to the commission of the cancellation. 
(C)  Organization: The commission shall elect officers as prescribed in the by-laws at its regularly scheduled meeting in June of each calendar year, with the terms to commence in July. 
(D)  Voting and quorum: The voting members of the commission shall be the regular members of the commission as provided in C.O. § 152.02(B)(1). Four (4) regular members shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of any business to come before the commission. 
( Ord. No. 13-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
§ 152.07 - ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT. 
    The city manager may provide administrative support to the commission in the performance of its functions to the extent that resources are available. 
( Ord. No. 13-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
CHAPTER 153. - PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT 

§ 153.01 - ESTABLISHMENT. 
There is created a department of parks and recreation, which shall be administered by the director of parks and recreation, under the general supervision and control of the city manager. The director of parks and recreation shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city manager. Subject to the supervision and control of the city manager, the director shall be the executive head of the several divisions of the department of parks and recreation. 
§ 153.02 - USE OF MUNICIPAL TENNIS COURTS. 
(A)  Regulations: The city manager shall be authorized to adopt such rules and regulations as he may deem necessary or desirable for the operation of the tennis courts and the tennis program to include establishment of fees, which rules shall be on file in the department of parks and recreation. 
CHAPTER 154. - MEDICAL ADVISORY BOARD 

§ 154.01 - CREATION OF MEDICAL ADVISORY BOARD. 
(A)  There is hereby established the Upper Arlington Medical Advisory Board, the function of which shall be to provide on-going professional supervision, training and support of the city's emergency para-medical program, which program is one of the functions of the fire division. Said board shall consist of seven (7) members, who shall be appointed by the president of council, subject to the approval of the council, for four (4) year terms, except as otherwise provided herein. At least two-thirds (?) of the membership of said board shall be physicians licensed to practice in the State of Ohio. Members who are not physicians shall be persons who are qualified and active in areas directly related to the practice of medicine, such as hospital administration or the development and operation of life supportive medical equipment. All board members shall be residents of the City of Upper Arlington. 
(B)  Terms shall commence the first day of February, and expire the last day of January. City council may shorten or lengthen a particular term at the time of appointment to maintain a staggered rotation so that not more than three members' terms expire in the same year. 
(C)  Vacancies, absence from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall operate to vacate the term of the member, unless such absence is authorized or excused by vote of the board and approved by the city manager. Any term thus vacated, or vacated by resignation, shall be filled by appointment of the president of council, subject to the approval of the council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
( Ord. No. 12-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
§ 154.02 - ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE. 
(A)  The medical advisory board shall annually elect a chairman, a vice chairman and such other officers as it shall consider necessary. It shall establish its own rules of organization and procedure for the conduct of its business. The rules shall not conflict with the provisions of the City Charter, this chapter, the rules of council, or state law and shall be generally in accordance with Roberts Rules of Order. All rules shall be submitted to the city clerk and kept on file. The board shall meet on such dates as may, from time to time, be determined by it. 
(B)  The city manager shall upon request of the board, appoint a secretary to serve the board, shall provide such facilities for the meetings and activities of the board as may be available, shall offer to the board the services of members of his staff and other employees of the city who may be of assistance to the board, to the extent that such personnel are available, and shall in all other respects cooperate with the board in the performance of its functions to the extent that the same are not inconsistent with his other duties. 
(C)  Members of the board shall serve without compensation, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for actual, reasonable expenses incurred in connection with their official duties upon the approval of the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 12-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
CHAPTER 155. - PERSONNEL CODE 

§ 155.01. - DEFINITIONS. 
(A)  Anniversary date. For non-bargaining unit employees, anniversary date shall be January 1 st unless otherwise determined by the city manager. 
(B)  Applicant. A person requesting consideration for employment in a class in the classified service or unclassified service. 
(C)  Appointing authority. The officer (meaning, for purposes of defining "appointing authority," the city manager, city clerk, or city attorney as provided elsewhere in the City Charter or Upper Arlington Codified Ordinances), commission, board or body having the power of appointment to, or removal from a position in the classified service and unclassified service. 
(D)  Class or (classification). A group of positions with the same descriptive title having similar duties and responsibilities and requiring similar qualifications which can be distinguished from other groups of positions (e.g., administrative assistant). There may be only one position in a particular class (e.g., police chief). 
(E)  Class series. As adopted by the civil service commission, two (2) or more classes which are similar as to type of work but which differ as to degree of responsibility, difficulty, complexity, skill and/or technical knowledge and which have been arranged in a ladder of steps in a normal line of promotion. 
(F)  Classified service positions. Positions in the service of the city subject to examination and not specifically excluded and placed in unclassified service. 
(G)  Continuous service. The length of service as a full-time employee uninterrupted by resignation, retirement, discharge for cause or any other separation from city employment. Military leave, leave resulting from injury in the line of duty, leave for approved disability coverage, authorized leave without pay or administrative leave without pay for periods of six (6) weeks or less are not considered separation from city service. 
(H)  Department. Any department, office, commission, board or other body as defined under the City Charter or Upper Arlington Codified Ordinances. 
(I)  Eligible. A person who has satisfactorily met all qualifications and requirements for employment in the job class for which the person has made application and whose name should appear on an eligible list. 
(J)  Full-time employee. An employee that is scheduled to work not less than forty (40) hours per seven (7) consecutive calendar days. 
(K)  Health care provider. A licensed doctor of medicine or osteopathy or other person providing health services who is licensed or certified under federal or state law or any other person determined by the Secretary of Labor to be capable of providing health care services. 
(L)  Immediate family. Parents, parents-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, spouse, children, brothers, sisters, grandparents unless otherwise specified. 
(M)  Permanent part-time employee. Any employee working less than forty (40) hours per week and having been hired with the intention of working on an ongoing basis until an appropriate reason for termination of employment arises. 
(N)  Position. Any office, employment or job calling for the performance of certain duties and the exercise of certain responsibilities by one (1) individual. A position may be vacant or occupied (part-time or full-time) and it may be designated regular, part-time, seasonal, etc. 
(O)  Resignation. Voluntary separation from employment. 
(P)  Retirement. An employee separation from city service that is not by resignation, layoff, or discharge, where the separating employee's application for retirement benefits has been approved by the retirement system and the separating employee will receive payment of retirement benefits in accordance with an approved retirement immediately upon separation from city employment. Retirement shall not mean someone who is eligible but has not formally filed for retirement and has not been approved to receive retirement benefits. 
(Q)  Seasonal/temporary employee. Any employee hired to work forty (40) hours or less per week (or more than forty (40) hours, if the need arises) for a specified short term or interim period of time. 
(R)  Senior executive. Those individuals who are department heads and/or positions designated by the city manager. 
(S)  Shared position. A shared position exists only if one (1) full-time position is authorized and more than one (1) person shares the position's responsibilities providing that the hours do not exceed forty (40) in any one (1) week. 
(T)  Workday. A regularly scheduled working time assigned by a supervisor or manager. 
(U)  Workweek. A regularly recurring period of seven (7), twenty-four (24) hour days consisting of five (5) workdays of eight (8) hours per day and two (2) days off or four (4) days of ten (10) hours per day and three (3) days off except in the case of firefighters where they may work twenty-four (24) hours every seventy-two (72) hours. 
(Ord. No. 118-2009; Ord. No. 6-2012; Ord. No. 7-2013) 
§ 155.02 - COMPENSATION. 
(A)  The compensation plan is designed as a fair and equitable method for payment of employees in the city with a target market rate of 103%, inclusive of any public employees retirement system (PERS) pickup. The plan shall establish a basic salary schedule as approved by the city council. The salary schedule shall include minimum and maximum rates of pay for all positions included in the classification plan. In addition to the basic salary schedule, the compensation plan consists of two (2) components. These two (2) components, market adjustments and performance award, shall be used to determine the employee compensation. 
(1)  Market adjustment: The market adjustment is the component that is used to insure that the salary schedule is adjusted equally across-the-board to reflect changes in the wage index. Three (3) considerations, not all inclusive, dictate whether or not a wage adjustment will be administered: changes in union contract positions which cause salary compression with positions not covered by the contract, changes in the wage index based upon the Bureau of Labor Statistics wage index for state and local governments (BLS wage index) and the budgetary constraints of the city. Each year city council may vote on wage adjustment(s) to the salary schedule; a percentage increase will be applied to the salary ranges as determined by council. City council may utilize the BLS wage index to determine any wage adjustment (s) to the salary schedule. 
(2)  Performance award: The performance award component is designed to reward job performance, therefore, serving as an incentive system. Base salary increases and bonuses are awarded to employees whose performance is evaluated as consistently competent, satisfactory and/or exceed expectations. The performance appraisal is essential to the effective utilization of this component. The merit system is based upon the principle that satisfactory, or above, performance should be rewarded because such performance is a greater contribution to the city than unsatisfactory. The performance award is strictly used to monetarily reward satisfactory or above satisfactory performance. 
(B)  Employees shall be paid a salary or wage based on the salary range for their position as set forth in the salary schedule adopted by city council. Salary increases from the performance award component shall be effective beginning in the payroll period that includes the employee's anniversary date. The resulting salary shall not exceed the maximum rate for the position. New employees shall not be entitled to a salary increase from the performance award component unless they have been employed by the city for at least six (6) months. 
(C)  Permanent part-time employment: The same principles, which apply to the compensation plan for full-time regular employees shall determine salary procedures for permanent part-time employees. 
(D)  It shall be the responsibility of the appointing authority to implement the performance appraisal process by conducting or having conducted, an appraisal of performance. 
(E)  The pay schedule of all employees, except city council members, shall be on a bi-weekly basis. The pay schedule of city council members shall be on a monthly basis. 
(F)  The entry level of pay for all positions shall be recommended to the appointing authority or determined by the appointing authority at the amount necessary to employ that applicant with the best overall set of qualifications, as determined by the employment process. 
(G)  Employees shall be compensated for overtime, as follows: 
(1)  Employees working a forty-hour work week, at the rate of one and one-half (11/2) times their regular hourly rate. 
(2)  All overtime compensation shall be by cash payment unless the employee elects to receive compensatory time off in accordance with this section. An eligible full-time employee, prior to performing overtime, may elect to receive compensatory time in lieu of the cash payment. For seasonal and part-time employees, the city expressly reserves its right to require compensation of overtime by cash payment in the manner provided in C.O. § 155.02(G)(1). No one should coerce or pressure the employee to receive compensatory time instead of the cash payment. Such compensatory time shall not exceed a total accumulation over two hundred forty (240) hours. Any overtime compensation earned in excess of the two hundred forty-hour limitation or earned during the month of December shall be by cash payment. The use of compensatory time shall be approved in advance by the department head or designee. All compensatory time that has not been used by December 1 st of each year shall be paid by cash payment at the rate of pay in effect in the first December pay period unless otherwise approved by the appointing authority. An employee may be permitted to carry over compensatory time to the following year upon approval by the appointing authority. 
(H)  Reinstated employees: A reinstated employee shall be paid at a salary rate within the approved salary range for the position in which the employee is reinstated. The salary level in the range will be related to, but not limited to, such factors as performance, experience and length of previous service in the jurisdiction and shall be set by the city manager. 
(I)  Temporary work at a higher classification: An employee assigned temporarily to a position of higher classification shall be compensated at the minimum of that class or seven percent (7%) above the employee's present rate, whichever is higher, for all hours worked at the higher classification, provided a minimum of sixteen (16) consecutive hours are worked in the higher class. 
(J)  The city manager shall maintain a performance bonus program not to exceed .0066 of non-union wages as an incentive for highly meritorious service. The performance bonus may include, but is not limited to, a certificate of appreciation to a cash payment. 
(K)  The city manager shall maintain a discretionary fund to be used for acts of appreciation to employee teams, not to exceed .001 of total wages. 
(L)  The city manager shall have the authority to make salary adjustments within the established ranges, exclusive of the collective bargaining agreements, for good cause shown and to ensure that the goal of a fair and equitable compensation system is properly administered. 
(Ord. No. 6-2012; Ord. No. 6-2012, 2-13-2012; Ord. No. 54-2013) 
§ 155.03 - HOLIDAYS. 
(A)  The following days are declared paid holidays from which the full-time employees will be excused from work at the regular rate of pay: 
New Year's Day: January 1 
Martin Luther King Day: Third Monday in January 
President's Day: Third Monday in February 
Memorial Day: Last Monday in May 
Independence Day: July 4 
Labor Day: First Monday in September 
Veteran's Day: November 11 
Thanksgiving Day: Fourth Thursday in November 
Christmas Day: December 25 
(B)  When any holiday listed above falls on Saturday, the preceding work day shall be considered the holiday. When the holiday falls on a Sunday, the following work day shall be considered the holiday. 
(C)  In order for an employee to be entitled to a holiday, he must have actually worked on the day before and the day after the holiday unless utilizing permissible leave time such as vacation, sick leave (see sick leave policy), bereavement leave, jury duty or personal day. 
(D)  When any holiday listed above falls while an employee is on approved vacation time, such holiday shall not be charged against vacation leave. 
(E)  In the event the federal and state governments shall designate a day of the week for any of the holidays specified above, then said day shall be observed in accordance with said designation. 
(F)  Each full-time employee who is required to work on a day designated as a holiday shall, in addition to receiving eight (8) hours pay for the holiday, be paid at the rate of one and one-half (11/2) times his hourly rate of pay for all hours worked on the holiday. 
(G)  If an employee's work schedule is other than Monday through Friday, he shall be entitled to holiday pay for holidays observed on his day off regardless of the day of the week on which they are observed. 
(H)  Each full-time employee working four (4) workdays of ten (10) hours per day shall be paid eight (8) hours pay for a holiday. The employee has the option of supplementing the remaining two (2) hours with personal leave, vacation leave or compensatory time. Leave without pay will be charged, if the employee chooses not to supplement the remaining two (2) hours, or if no time is available to supplement the two (2) hours. 
§ 155.04 - PERSONAL LEAVE. 
(A)  Each full-time employee shall be credited with forty (40) hours of personal leave each year. An employee, after approval by his supervisor, may use personal leave, for absence due to mandatory court appearances, legal or business matters, family emergencies, unusual family obligations, medical appointments, weddings, religious holidays or any other matter of a personal nature. 
(B)  When personal leave is used, it shall be deducted from the unused balance in increments of one (1) hour. 
(C)  A newly appointed full-time employee shall receive personal leave based on the following schedule: 
Hire Month Number of Personal Leave Hours in First Calendar Year January, February 40 hours March, April 32 hours May, June 24 hours July, August 16 hours September, October 8 hours November, December 0 hours  
(D)  Any unused personal leave remaining after the last payroll period of the same fiscal year or when an employee terminates his/her employment shall lapse. 
§ 155.05 - VACATION TIME. 
(A)  Each full-time employee plans shall accrue vacation based on the following schedule: 
(1)  Full-time employees hired before January 1, 2011. 
(a)  At the rate of 3.077 hours per pay period after one (1) year of continuous service for an annual rate of eighty (80) hours. 
(b)  At the rate of 4.615 hours per pay period after five (5) years of continuous service for an annual rate of one hundred twenty (120) hours. 
(c)  At the rate of 5.385 hours per pay period after ten (10) years of continuous service for an annual rate of one hundred forty (140) hours. 
(d)  At the rate of 6.154 hours per pay period after thirteen (13) years of continuous service for an annual rate of one hundred sixty (160) hours. 
(e)  At the rate of an additional 0.308 hours per pay period for each additional three (3) years of continuous service for an annual rate of an additional eight (8) hours. 
(2)  Full-time employees hired after January 1, 2011. 
(a)  At the rate of 3.077 hours per pay period after one (1) year of continuous service for an annual rate of eighty (80) hours. 
(b)  At the rate of 4.615 hours per pay period after five (5) years of continuous service for an annual rate of one hundred twenty (120) hours. 
(B)  Vacations shall be at full pay at the current salary rate. 
(C)  All full-time employees shall begin accrual of vacation upon completion of two (2) full weeks of regular work. The accrual balance will appear to the credit of the employee, but will not be available for use as approved vacation leave until the employee has served for a period of thirteen (13) pay periods, unless otherwise approved by the appointing authority. Upon completion of the thirteenth (13th) pay period, the employee is eligible to utilize the accrued vacation balance. 
(D)  Each full-time employee shall be permitted an annual standard maximum carryover of three (3) times the employee's annual vacation accrual rate. Any accrued vacation leave in excess of the appropriate above stated annual standard maximum carryover limits standing to the credit of the employee on December 1 shall become void on after the last payroll report period of the calendar year, unless used by the employee or carried over to the subsequent calendar year following the submission by the employee and approval of such request by the Appointing Authority on December 1. Approval of such requests will be limited to instances where factors beyond the employee's control or directly related to the operational needs of the city prevented the employee from using the accrued vacation. 
(E)  No advance of vacation is permitted unless negotiated at the time of hire because of previous commitments. Only requests for vacation less than or equal to the accrued balance will be approved. 
(F)  Compensation for vacation leave in lieu of time off shall not be granted. 
(G)  Vacation leave shall be scheduled as far in advance as possible and at the discretion of the supervisor. In the event of conflicting requests, the department director shall resolve the conflict based on the operating needs of the department/division. 
(H)  Where an employee becomes deceased while in paid status in city employment, any accrued vacation leave to his credit shall be paid in a lump sum first to the surviving spouse, then to the deceased's estate. 
(I)  Any employee leaving the city shall be paid a lump sum amount for any accrued vacation leave to his credit. 
(J)  Vacation-Executive class: 
(1)  An employee in the Executive plans hired before January 1, 2011 shall be credited with vacation on an annual basis as follows: 
(a)  Level 1-One hundred twenty (120) hours, at appointment. 
(b)  Level 2-One hundred sixty (160) hours, six (6) years after appointment. 
(c)  Level 3-Two hundred (200) hours, twelve (12) years after appointment. 
(d)  After each additional three (3) years-Eight (8) hours. 
(2)  An employee in the Executive plans hired after January 1, 2011 shall be credited with vacation on an annual basis as follows: 
(a)  Level 1-One hundred twenty (120) hours, at appointment. 
(b)  Level 2-One hundred sixty (160) hours, six (6) years after appointment. 
(3)  The appointing authority may consider previous public or private employment and credit the incoming member of the executive class with time worked in the relevant positions. Such credit will be applied on an individual basis to a placement within this vacation schedule. 
(4)  The executive vacation plan is not an accrual-based vacation plan; therefore, on January 1 of each year the senior executive has at his/her disposal all the vacation allotted for the year and may use as deemed appropriate. 
(5)  Each executive employee shall be permitted an annual standard maximum carryover of up to three (3) years of accrued vacation leave. Any accrued vacation leave in excess of the appropriate above stated annual standard maximum carryover limits standing to the credit of the employee on December 1 shall become void after the last payroll report period of the calendar year, unless used by the employee or carried over to the subsequent calendar year following the submission to and approval of such request by the appointing authority on December 1. Approval of such requests will be limited to instances where factors beyond the employee's control or directly related to the operational needs of the city prevented the employee from using the accrued vacation. 
(K)  The appointing authority shall have the authority to make adjustments in the amount of vacation leave accrued or credited for new hires in non-bargaining unit positions to ensure the hiring of the best qualified candidate for the position. 
(Ord. No. 118-2009; Ord. No. 5-2011; Ord. No. 6-2012; Ord. No. 79-2012) 
§ 155.06 - SICK LEAVE. 
(A)  All full-time employees shall be credited sick leave at the rate of 4.615 hours for each pay period. 
(B)  After the third (3rd) consecutive day of illness, the employee may be required to secure a certificate from a doctor giving information as to the circumstances involved or nature of the illness. 
(C)  Unused sick leave shall be cumulative with no maximum. 
(D)  Employees may use sick leave upon approval by their supervisor or manager. The employee must give the reason for the sick leave and location of convalescence, if different than the home address. 
(E)  Absence for part of a day that is chargeable to sick leave shall be charged proportionately to an amount not smaller than one-quarter (1/4) hour. 
(F)  The office of the director of finance shall keep records of sick leave allowance, sick leave taken and balance of sick leave allowance for each employee. Any employees fraudulently obtaining sick leave, or falsely certifying sick leave allowances for absences from work may be subject to dismissal. 
(G)  Use of sick leave is limited to employee absence due to illness or non-work related injury and exposure to contagious disease which could be communicated to other employees, and to illness or injury in the employee's immediate family. Unless otherwise authorized by the appointing authority, an employee may only use a maximum of thirty-two (32) hours of sick leave for each separate occurrence of sick leave use for illness or injury involving an immediate family member that does not qualify as family medical leave pursuant to C.O. § 155.18. For family medical leave (FMLA), an employee shall comply with the requirements set forth pursuant to C.O. § 155.18. 
(H)  Sick leave may be used to keep medical appointments for the employee and the employee's immediate family, limited to travel time and appointment time. For family medical leave (FMLA), an employee shall comply with the requirements set forth pursuant to C.O. § 155.18. 
(I)  Following the fourth (4th) occurrence of sick leave absence of one (1) day or more in the calendar year, the employee may be required to secure and present a certificate from a licensed physician or health care provider giving information as to the circumstances involved or nature of the illness to receive pay for each subsequent absence due to sick leave in the remainder of that calendar year. This documentation shall be sent to the department of finance to be placed in the individual's personnel file. 
(J)  An employee may be required to furnish a satisfactory written, signed statement to justify the use of sick leave. If medical attention is required, a certificate stating the nature of the illness from a licensed physician or health care provider may be required to justify the use of sick leave. Falsification of either a written, signed statement or a physician's or health care provider's certificate shall be grounds for disciplinary action, including dismissal. 
(K)  The previously accumulated sick leave of an employee who has been separated from the city or another public agency shall be placed to the employee's credit upon re-employment provided such re-employment takes place within ten (10) years of the employee's termination date. No more than one thousand nine hundred twenty (1,920) hours can be transferred from another public agency. 
(L)  In addition to the requirements set forth in this section, an employee shall also comply with the applicable requirements of the Family and Medical Leave Policy pursuant to C.O. § 155.18. 
(M)  Payment for unused sick leave. 
(1)  All full-time employees shall at the time of their retirement, receive payment in a lump sum of one (1) hour of pay for each four (4) hours of accumulated unused sick leave to his credit for accruals up to and including one thousand nine hundred and twenty (1,920) hours. 
(2)  Executive sick leave conversion upon retirement: Executives at the time of retirement shall receive payment in a lump sum in accordance with the following schedule: 
(a)  Up to one thousand four hundred forty (1,440) hours, at the rate of one (1) hour of pay for each four (4) hours of accumulated and unused sick leave to the executive's credit. 
(b)  From one thousand four hundred forty (1,440) hours to one thousand nine hundred twenty (1,920) hours, at the rate of one (1) hour of pay for each three (3) hours of accumulated and unused sick leave to the executive's credit. 
(c)  Above one thousand nine hundred twenty (1,920) hours, at the rate of one (1) hour of pay for each two (2) hours of accumulated and unused sick leave to the executive's credit. 
(d)  For executives, the hourly rate of pay shall be computed on the basis of a forty-hour work week. 
(3)  Executives who have in excess of one thousand nine hundred twenty (1,920) hours to their credit at the end of the calendar year may convert the hours in excess of one thousand nine hundred twenty (1,920) into cash at the rate of one (1) hour of pay for each two (2) hours of sick leave. 
(4)  When any employee of the City of Upper Arlington (non-contractual and/or contractual, if not governed by a bargaining unit agreement which is contradictory to this section) has exhausted all sick leave, vacation, personal, compensatory or other time bank available to them due to a disabling illness or injury of themselves or an immediate household family member, other employees of the city may volunteer to donate sick leave, vacation, compensatory time, personal or holiday time to the affected employee according to the administrative guidelines established by the city manager 
(Ord. No. 6-2012, 2-13-2012; Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 4, 2-13-2017) 
§ 155.07 - WAGE CONTINUATION POLICY. 
(A)  Wage continuation. 
(1)  A full-time employee may be granted wage continuation not to exceed two hundred forty (240) hours per injury or occupational disease. Safety forces' executives shall be granted wage continuation not-to-exceed one thousand forty (1,040) hours per injury. Wage continuation shall be charged at the rate of one (1) hour for each hour absent. 
(2)  Wage continuation may be granted to any full-time employee only for injuries or other disabilities which are incurred in the performance of city employment and which are determined by a licensed physician to have so disabled such employee that the duties of his/her position cannot be performed. Muscoloskeletal, cardiovascular, respiratory, and pulmonary disabilities are some, but not all, possible examples of such service related injuries. 
§ 155.08 - SHORT-TERM AND LONG-TERM MEDICAL DISABILITY. 
(A)  Each full-time employee is eligible for the short-term medical disability program. Each full-time employee, not vested under the public employees retirement system or the police and fire pension fund for disability coverage, is eligible for the long-term medical disability program for non-work related illnesses and injuries. Such illnesses and injuries include, but are not limited to serious diseases; disabilities caused by pregnancy, child birth, or related medical conditions or physical impairment due to accidents. The city may require certification of an employee's continuing illness or disability by a physician. 
(B)  The short-term program provides for payment to the employee from the forty-sixth (46th) day of accident or illness for a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) days at sixty percent (60%) of the employee's gross wages. 
(C)  The long-term program provides for payment to the employee from the one hundred eighty first (181st) day of the accident or illness for a maximum of two (2) years at sixty percent (60%) of the employee's gross wages in effect at that time, or until such time the employee becomes vested in the public employees retirement system or the police and fire pension fund. 
(D)  The employee may elect to use all or part of his accumulated sick leave in order to make up any difference between one hundred percent (100%) of his gross wages and the amount which he receives under the disability programs. 
(E)  If an employee exhausts all sick leave benefits, other approved leave may be granted by the city manager. 
(F)  If, while receiving payments for short-term or long-term disability, the employee performs work for the city or another employer, the amount of payment under the disability program shall be reduced by the compensation which he receives during that time period. 
(G)  While an employee is paid short-term or long-term disability benefits pursuant to this section, vacation and sick leave accruals shall cease and step/merit increases would not be awarded until returning to work. The city shall maintain applicable insurance benefits for the employee. 
(H)  Upon returning to work following a short or long-term medical disability leave, an employee must present written certification from a physician attesting to the employee's ability to perform the duties listed in the employee's job description. 
(I)  In the event that a disability claim is denied by the third party administrator, the employee may follow the appeal process in the employee benefit plan in the employee handbook. 
(J)  The city manager or his designee shall be responsible for the administration of the short-term and long-term disability programs. 
(Ord. No. 7-2013) 
§ 155.09 - BEREAVEMENT LEAVE. 
(A)  A full-time employee may be granted up to three (3) regularly scheduled work days without loss of pay in case of a death in the immediate family. 
(B)  Sick leave, vacation, personal days or compensatory time may be used for bereavement leave up to an additional two (2) days for immediate family. 
(C)  A total of three (3) days of leave is permissible for deaths other than the immediate family, but such leave shall be charged to vacation, personal days or compensatory time. 
§ 155.10 - LEAVES OF ABSENCE. 
(A)  In an effort on behalf of the city to be flexible and provide latitude to employees in unique or special circumstances, leaves of absence may be granted to employees by the city under special circumstances. Eligibility for a leave of absence will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis and will be limited to full-time, regular employees with at least two (2) consecutive years of service or to situations where the city must accommodate a disability under the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(B)  Leaves of absence for the following situations or emergencies will be considered: 
(1)  To allow employees to attend courses in training, or recognized colleges or universities. 
(2)  Personal leave of absence may be granted to an employee to attend to personal matters in cases in which the city determines that an extended period of time off would be in the best interest of the employee and the city, including but not limited to inpatient substance abuse treatment. 
(3)  For other purposes deemed beneficial to the city and the employee. 
(C)  Leaves of absence are granted without pay except in special and unusual circumstances. Insurance benefits are continued during leaves of absence. 
(D)  Requests for a leave of absence must be made in writing by the employee. All leaves must be approved by the department director and the appointing authority. permitted leaves are limited to six (6) weeks at which time any request for additional leave must be made. 
(E)  An employee returning to work from leave shall be reinstated to the employee's former position or a comparable position. 
(F)  If an employee fails to return to work at the conclusion of a permitted leave, the employee will be terminated from employment, unless the city manager and department director grant an extension. 
(G)  Leave of absence may be paid leave by using personal days, vacation and sick leave. When an employee is on leave of absence without pay, vacation and sick leave accruals shall cease and merit increases would not be retroactive while in unpaid status. 
§ 155.11 - MILITARY LEAVE. 
(A)  Full-time employees who are members of the U.S. Army Reserves, U.S. Marine corps Reserves, Ohio National Guard, U.S. Air Force Reserves, U.S. Coast Guard Reserves or the U.S. Naval Reserves shall be granted a military leave of absence with pay, in addition to vacation leave, when ordered to temporary active duty or when ordered to military training exercises conducted in the field for a period not to exceed one hundred seventy-six (176) hours during each calendar year. If the Chief Executive Officer of the United States declares that a state of emergency exists, the employee, if ordered to active duty for purposes of that emergency, shall be paid pursuant to this section for a period, or periods whether or not consecutive, not to exceed thirty (30) days during each calendar year without special approval by the city manager. Such military leave of absence shall not be granted to persons employed by the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio for brief, non-recurrent periods. 
(B)  An employee shall be paid his regular salary for the period of time so served less whatever amount such employee may receive as military pay for those days the employee would have been regularly scheduled to work had that member not been on military leave. To receive said military leave pay, the employee must submit a military pay voucher to his appointing authority. Where it is to the advantage of the city and on the approval of the appointing authority, military leave of less than thirteen (13) calendar days may be granted. Leave shall be granted to the extent required by the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA). 
(C)  An eligible employee may be granted military caregiver leave and military qualifying exigency leave consistent with the provisions of C.O. § 155.18, Family and Medical Leave Policy. 
(Ord. No. 118-2009) 
§ 155.12 - JURY SERVICE. 
(A)  A full-time employee, while serving upon a jury in any court of record, shall be paid his regular salary for each of his workdays during the time so served. Jury duty fees paid to the employee by the court shall be returned to the city. 
(B)  The employee, upon notice of jury service, shall present such notice to his immediate supervisor. A copy of such notice shall be filed in the employee's personnel file. 
(C)  Jury service requiring less than four (4) hours of the employee's regular work day as verified by the time report, shall require the employee to report to his supervisor for completion of his/her regular work day with the city. 
§ 155.13 - MISCELLANEOUS BENEFITS. 
(A)  The city shall provide an employee assistance program (EAP) or similar mental health or substance abuse counseling services as offered by the city's chosen insurance provider, to improve the quality of life of employees and their families and as a result increase productivity of employees. The program will confidentially deal primarily, but not exclusively, with alcoholism, emotional disturbances, familial or marital crises, drug dependencies, work stress and other miscellaneous problems. 
(B)  Employee coverages: The city shall provide health, life, accidental death and dismemberment and dental coverages for all full-time employees, all in accordance with the respective plans adopted by the city governing each such benefit. 
(C)  Dependent insurance: The city shall provide health and dental coverages for the eligible dependents of employees, as defined by the city's health and dental programs. The provision of such dependent coverage shall be at the option of the employee. 
(D)  Premium costs: The city and the employee shall pay the premium costs for employee and dependent insurance coverage as follows: 
(1)  The city shall pay the premium cost minus the employee's contribution as set forth in subsections (2) and (3). 
(2)  A non-bargaining unit employee shall pay the same amount of contribution paid by the bargaining unit employees. 
(3)  The employee shall equally incur the cost of any increase in premium costs. 
(4)  The year before implementation will serve as the base year for determining the city's premium cost and the employee's contribution of any premium increase. 
(E)  Executive group term life insurance coverage has a death benefit of an amount equal to two times the executive's base salary rounded to the nearest one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(F)  Labor and Trades and CAPT plan employees' group term life insurance coverage has a death benefit of an amount of forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 79-2012; Ord. No. 71-2014, § 1, 12-8-2014 ) 
§ 155.14 - RETIREMENT. 
The city's method of payment of salary and the provision of fringe benefits to the employees covered by these rules who are participants in the Ohio Public Employees Retirement System (OPERS) and the Police and Fire Pension Fund (P/FPF) are as follows: 
(A)  (1)  Pick-up plan: In addition to the total annual salary and salary per pay period which is otherwise payable to each employee, the amount of the statutorily required employee contributions to OPERS or P/FPF that shall be picked up and paid as a fringe benefit by the city is set forth in subsection (2). The remaining amount of the statutorily required employee contributions to OPERS or P/FPF shall be withheld from the employee's gross pay of the employee and pick up by the city, commonly referred to as a salary reduction pick up. 
(2) Position or Class of Employees Employee share paid by City City council Zero percent (0%) City manager Zero percent (0%) City attorney Zero percent (0%) City clerk Zero percent (0%) Management/executive group Zero percent (0%) Fraternal Order of Police/Ohio Labor Council, Inc. International Association of Firefighters Local 1521  Effective the payroll beginning 1-22-2017 Zero percent (0%) Teamsters Local Union 284  Effective the first payroll in 2014 Zero percent (0%) Other Bargaining unit employees Per agreement All other employees Zero percent (0%)  
(3)  Amendments to plan: Council may pass a resolution changing the pick-up plan for certain positions or classes of employees. 
(B)  The amount picked up by the city shall not be included in the employee's total annual salary for the purpose of computing daily rate of pay, for determining paid salary adjustments to be made due to absence, or for any similar purpose. 
(C)  The pick up shall be designated as public employee contributions and shall be in lieu of contributions to OPERS or P/FPF by each employee. No person subject to this pick up shall have the option of choosing to receive the statutorily required contribution to OPERS or P/FPF directly instead of having it picked up by the city or of being excluded from the pick up. The city shall, in reporting and making remittance to OPERS or P/FPF, report that the public employees contribution for each person subject to the pick up has been made as provided by the statute. Therefore, contributions, although designated as employee contributions, are employer-paid, and employees do not have the option to receive the contributions directly. All contributions are paid by the employer directly to OPERS or P/FPF. 
(D)  If the pick up of employee retirement contributions should no longer be permitted by State and Federal law or regulations, employees shall be paid in cash for the amounts that otherwise would have been picked up under this provision. 
(Ord. No. 111-2008, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 4-2011, 1-24-11; Ord. No. 6-2012, 2-13-12; Ord. No. 44-2012; Ord. No. 11-2014; Ord. No. 8-2017 , § 1, 1-23-2017) 
§ 155.15 - SERVICE CREDIT COMPENSATION. 
(A)  As compensation for years of city service, each full-time employee shall be entitled to additional compensation based upon years of continuous service completed anytime within the calendar year, as follows: 
Upon completion of five (5) years of full-time service, the compensation shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00), and shall increase by fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional year of service up to a maximum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(B)  An employee who terminates city service in good standing for any reason shall be paid 8.33% of the appropriate annual compensation for each additional month he or she has completed during that calendar year. 
(C)  Safety forces executive service credit: Compensation to begin after completion of fourth year of full-time service with the city. The first year of compensation shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) and shall increase one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional year of service up to a maximum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(D)  Full-time employees shall receive service credit compensation when on short or long term disability. 
§ 155.16 - MISCELLANEOUS COMPENSATION PROVISIONS. 
(A)  Standby pay: As designated by the division superintendent, employees in the technical, labor and trades group plan shall receive the same compensation for first-call duty responsibilities consistent with the same group of employees in the bargaining unit of the public service department. 
(B)  Call out pay: An employee who is called out will be guaranteed a minimum of three (3) hours when called to duty after normal working hours at a rate of compensation of time and one-half. 
(C)  Severance pay-Senior executive class: Severance pay for senior executives is to provide interim income for individuals who are involuntarily terminated due to no fault of their own. A senior executive would only be eligible if the individual is: 
(1)  Not retiring and not eligible for retirement; 
(2)  Not resigning voluntarily or of his own choice; 
(3)  Performing at or above a satisfactory level as indicated by performance appraisal evaluations; 
(4)  Complying with the personnel rules and personnel codified ordinances; 
(5)  Not leaving the city due to permanent disability; and 
(6)  Employed by the city at least three (3) years. 
The severance pay will apply, but not be limited to, the following possible situations: 
(1)  Significant one (1) time or growing philosophical difference in administrative policy or practice with the city manager; 
(2)  Change in senior executive class position(s) initiated by a new city manager; or 
(3)  City council direction to the city manager to remove a senior class position incumbent. 
The senior executive would be eligible to receive one (1) month of severance pay for each three (3) years of employment with the city up to a maximum of three (3) months of severance pay. Payment will be made in a lump sum at the time when final termination pay is rendered. 
(D)  Service club-Senior executive class: Service club memberships will be paid for by the city, subject to the city manager's approval, with an annual maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per senior executive. 
(Ord. No. 118-2009) 
§ 155.17 - SERIOUS DISEASE POLICY. 
It is the policy of the city that employees suffering from serious or life threatening diseases be permitted to work as long as they are physically and mentally able to perform their job without undue risk to themselves, fellow employees or the public. The city is committed to providing a safe working environment for all employees. 
(A)  It is the desire of the city to be fair and non-discriminatory to an employee with a serious disease (a definite morbid process having a characteristic train of symptoms; it may affect the whole body or any of its parts...). 
(1)  Employees with a serious disease shall be treated in the same manner as other employees, encouraged to work as long as performance is satisfactory, and pose no health threat to the public or other employees. 
(2)  Human resource office will keep confidential the diagnosis and medical records of employees. 
(3)  The city may require medical information and/or a doctor's certification of an employee's ability to perform his/her duties. 
(B)  Employees with a serious infectious (caused by or capable of being communicated by infection) or contagious (capable of being transmitted from one person or another) disease have the responsibility of notifying the city of such a diagnosis because of the liability on behalf of that employee and the city. In instances of serious infectious or contagious disease, a medical advisor(s) and the employee's primary care physician (provided, the physician is authorized and agrees to disclose pertinent medical information concerning the employee and to participate) will review individual cases. 
(1)  A medical advisor(s) is a credentialed professional who is either a general medical practitioner or specialized with extensive knowledge of the serious disease(s) in question. The medical advisor(s) should be chosen based on the level of expertise. 
(2)  The determination or the need for a medical advisor(s) and whom that advisor(s) shall be is at the discretion of the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(3)  On a case-by-case basis the city's medical advisor(s) shall reach a consensus regarding job assignment, restrictive conditions and ability to work. 
(4)  The city's medical advisor(s) may maintain an active role in monitoring the medical condition of the employee who attends work. 
(5)  Any employee may appeal a medical advisor(s) determination to the city manager. If the city manager's determination is not to the satisfaction of the ill employee, the employee may appeal the decision to the civil service commission. 
(C)  The city may provide educational materials or programs to enhance employee awareness and understanding of diseases when appropriate and/or practical. 
(D)  Fellow employees concerned about possible health risks associated from working with a co-worker with a serious disease should make their concerns known to their supervisor. It is then the responsibility of the supervisor to inform the department director and human resource office by going through the chain of command. Employees who refuse to work with or perform services for a person known or suspected to have a serious disease, without first discussing their concern with a supervisor, will be subject to discipline, up to and including termination. Refusal to work with or provide service to an individual with a serious disease may be in violation of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(E)  The city will comply with applicable occupational safety regulations such as the OSHA Bloodborne Pathogens Standard, concerning employees exposed to blood or other potentially infectious materials. In order to prevent the spread of diseases, precautions and personal protective equipment will be implemented. Precautions should be taken such as: 
(1)  Identification of jobs in writing involving a risk of exposure to blood or other potentially infectious materials and the use of protective barriers by employees who are exposed to blood or bodily fluids. 
(2)  Procedure for evaluating circumstances surrounding exposure incidents and post-exposure evaluation and follow-up. 
(3)  Procedures for handling and disposing of potentially infectious materials, clothing and other items. 
(4)  Provision to, and requirement of, use of appropriate personal protective equipment and the cleaning, repair and replacement when necessary. 
(5)  Provisions for the cleaning and disinfecting of equipment contaminated with blood or bodily fluids with a suitable disinfectant. 
(6)  Procedures for providing Hepatitis vaccinations, when required, and post-exposure follow-up. 
(7)  Employee training and familiarization with appropriate work techniques, control plan, equipment, emergency procedures and post-exposure and follow-up. Employees should have access to a copy of the regulatory text of the standard. 
(8)  Confidential records are to be kept for each employee with occupational exposure. 
§ 155.18 - FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY. 
(A)  Statement of policy. In accordance with the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), the City of Upper Arlington will grant unpaid job protected family and medical leave to eligible employees for up to twelve (12) weeks per twelve (12) month period, for any one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Basic leave. 
(a)  For the birth of a child, and to care for such child, or the placement of a child with the employee for adoption or foster care (leave for this reason must be taken within the twelve-month period following the child's birth or placement with the employee); or 
(b)  In order to care for an immediate family member (spouse, child or parent) of the employee, if such immediate family member has a serious health condition; or 
(c)  The employee's own serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of his/her position. 
(2)  Military leave. Eligible employees with a spouse, son, daughter, or parent on active duty or call to active duty status, in the National Guard or Reserves in support of a contingency operation may use their twelve-week leave entitlement to address certain qualifying exigencies. Qualifying exigencies may include attending certain military events, arranging for alternative childcare, addressing certain financial and legal arrangements, attending certain counseling sessions, and attending post-deployment reintegration briefings. 
FMLA also includes a special leave entitlement that permits eligible employees to take up to twenty-six (26) weeks of leave to care for a covered service member with a serious injury or illness incurred in the line of duty on covered active duty that may render the service member medically unfit to perform his or her duties for which the service member is undergoing medical treatment, recuperation or therapy; or is in outpatient status; or is on the temporary disability retired list. 
Medical leave is a benefit and is not a right except to the extent FMLA applies. Employees are expected to make judicious use of medical leave so it will be available for true medical conditions. Excessive or unjustified use of medical leave shall be reviewed on a case by case basis and may be subject to disciplinary action up and including discharge. 
Employment elsewhere shall not be permitted while an employee is on FMLA leave of absence from the city. 
During approved FMLA leave, the city will maintain the employee's health coverage under any "group health plan" on the same terms as if the employee had continued to work. Upon return from FMLA, most employees will be restored to their original or equivalent positions with equivalent pay, benefits, and other employment terms. 
An employee shall be disqualified from bonuses or other achievement based on a job-related performance goal, such as attendance, when the employee has not met the goal because FMLA leave was taken. 
(B)  Definitions. 
(1)  Child: means a child either under eighteen (18) years of age, or eighteen (18) years of age or older who is incapable of self-care because of a mental or physical disability. An employee's child is one for whom the employee has actual day-to-day responsibility for care and includes a biological, adopted, foster or step-child. 
(2)  Continuing treatment: means a regimen that includes, for example, a course of prescription medicine (e.g. an antibiotic) or therapy requiring special equipment to resolve or alleviate the health condition. A regimen of treatment does not include the taking of over-the-counter medications such as aspirin, antihistamines, or salves; or bed-rest, drinking fluids, exercise, and other similar activities that can be initiated with a visit to a health care provider. 
(3)  Covered active duty: 
(a)  In the case of a member of a regular component of the Armed Forces, duty during the deployment of the member with the Armed Forces to a foreign country; and 
(b)  In the case of a member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces, duty during the deployment of the member with the Armed Forces to a foreign country under a call or order to active duty under a provision of the law as referred to as Section 101(a)(13)(B). 
(4)  Covered service member: 
(a)  A member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or Reserves) who is undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy, is otherwise in outpatient status, or is otherwise on the temporary disability retired list, for a serious injury or illness; or 
(b)  A veteran who is undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy, for a serious injury or illness and who was a member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or Reserves) at any time during the period of five (5) years preceding the date on which the veteran undergoes that medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy. 
(5)  Incapacity: For purposes of FMLA, is defined to mean the inability to work, attend school or perform other regular daily activities due to serious health condition, treatment therefore, or recovery therefrom. 
(6)  Serious health condition: means an illness, injury, impairment or a physical or mental condition that involves: 
(a)  Hospital care -An overnight stay (inpatient) in a hospital, hospice, or residential medical care facility, including any period of incapacity or subsequent treatment in connection with or consequent to such inpatient care; or 
(b)  Absence plus treatment -Any period of incapacity requiring absence from work for more than three (3) consecutive, full calendar days (including any subsequent treatment or period of incapacity relating to the same condition), and that involves continuing treatment by a health care provider. 
i.  Treatment two (2) or more times by a health care provider, by a nurse or physician's assistant under the direct supervision of the health care provider, or by a provider of health services (e.g. physical therapist) under orders of, or on referral by, a health care provider; or 
ii.  Treatment by a health care provider on at least one (1) occasion which results in a regimen of continuing treatment under the supervision of the health care provider. 
(c)  Pregnancy -Any period of incapacity due to pregnancy, or for prenatal care. 
(d)  Chronic conditions requiring treatments -A chronic serious health condition which: 
i.  Requires periodic visits, at least two (2) visits per year, for treatment by a health care provider, or by a nurse or physician's assistant under the direct supervision of a health care provider; 
ii.  Continues over an extended period of time (including recurring episodes of a single underlying condition); and 
iii.  May cause episodic rather than a continuing period of incapacity (e.g. asthma, diabetes, epilepsy, etc.). 
(e)  Permanent/long-term conditions requiring supervision -A period of incapacity, which is permanent or long-term due to a condition for which treatment may not be effective. The employee or family member must be under the continuing supervision of, but need not be receiving active treatment by, a health care provider. (Examples include Alzheimer's, a severe stroke, or the terminal stages of a disease.) 
(f)  Multiple treatments (non-chronic conditions) -Any period of absence to receive multiple treatments (including any period of recovery from) by a health care provider or by a provider of health care services under orders of or on referral by, a health care provider, either for restorative surgery after an accident or other injury, or for a condition that would likely result in a period of incapacity or more than three (3) consecutive calendar days in the absence of medical intervention or treatment, such as cancer (chemotherapy, radiation, etc.), severe arthritis (physical therapy), and kidney disease (dialysis). 
(7)  Serious injury or illness (military leave): 
(a)  In the case of a member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or Reserves), means an injury or illness that was incurred by the member in the line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces (or existed before the beginning of the member's active duty and was aggravated by service in line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces) and that may render the member medically unfit to perform the duties of the member's office, grade, rank, or rating; and 
(b)  In the case of a veteran who as a member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or Reserves) at any time during a period described in paragraph (15)(B) of 29 U.S.C.A. § 2611, means a qualifying (as defined by the Secretary of Labor) injury or illness that was incurred by the member in line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces (or existed before the beginning of the member's active duty and was aggravated by service in line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces) and that manifested itself before or after the member became a veteran. 
(8)  Spouse: Does not include unmarried domestic partners. If both spouses work for the city, their total leave in any twelve-month period may be limited to an aggregate of twelve (12) weeks if leave is taken for either the birth or placement for adoption or foster care of a child, or to care for a sick parent. 
(9)  Treatment: Includes examinations to determine if a serious health condition exists and evaluations of the condition. Treatment does not include routine physical examinations, eye examinations, or dental examinations. 
(10)  Twelve-month period: A twelve-month period measured forward form the employee's first FMLA leave request. 
(11)  Veteran: Has the same meaning as in 38 U.S.C.A. 101(2). 
(C)  Coverage and eligibility. To be eligible for family/medical leave an employee must: 
(1)  Work at a worksite which has fifty (50) or more employees or be within seventy-five (75) miles of a worksite that has fifty (50) or more employees; 
(2)  Have worked for the city for at least twelve (12) months; and 
(3)  Have worked at least one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) hours over the previous twelve-month period. 
(D)  Intermittent or reduced leave. 
(1)  An employee may take leave intermittently (a few days or a few hours at a time) or on a reduced leave schedule to care for an immediate family member with a serious health condition or because of a serious health condition of the employee when medically necessary. 
(a)  Medically necessary: means there must be a medical need for the leave and that the leave can best be accomplished through an intermittent or reduced leave schedule. Medical certification must be provided by the employee within fifteen (15) days after requested, unless it is not practicable under the particular circumstances to do so despite the employee's diligent, good faith efforts. 
(b)  The employee may be required to transfer temporarily to a position with equivalent pay and benefits that better accommodates recurring periods of leave when the leave is planned based on scheduled medical treatment. 
(c)  Employee must make reasonable efforts to schedule leave for planned medical treatment so as not to unduly disrupt the employer's operations. 
(2)  An employee may take leave intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule for birth or placement for adoption or foster care of a child only with the department head's consent. 
(3)  Leave due to qualifying exigencies may be also taken on an intermittent basis. 
(4)  For eligible part-time employees and those who work variable hours, the FMLA leave entitlement is calculated on a pro rata basis. A weekly average of the hours worked over the twelve (12) weeks prior to the beginning of the leave will be used for calculating the employee's normal work week. 
(E)  Substitution of paid leave time. 
(1)  Employees may choose or the city may require an employee to substitute accrued paid leave (sick leave, vacation leave, personal leave or comp time) time for any part of a family/medical leave taken for any reason normal leave policies apply. If paid leave time is used as part of family/medical leave, including parental leave, it will be counted as part of the total twelve (12) weeks or twenty-six (26) weeks, whichever is permitted under FMLA eligibility requirements. The city reserves the right to designate any qualifying leave under this policy as family/medical leave counted toward the employee's job-protected FMLA leave during the twelve-month period. The city may so designate such leave of its own initiative and regardless of an employee's request to count leave toward the FMLA total. 
(2)  Employees covered by a labor agreement that provides for the limited use of sick leave for the care of a family member up to seventy-two (72) hours may be granted family/medical leave in accordance with this policy. 
(3)  When an employee has exhausted all accrued paid time for a portion of family/medical leave, the employee may request an additional period of unpaid leave, which may be granted, provided the total of paid and unpaid leave provided does not exceed twelve (12) weeks or twenty-six (26) weeks, whichever is permitted under the FMLA eligibility requirements. 
(4)  In order to use paid leave for FMLA leave, employee must comply with the city's normal paid leave policies. 
(F)  Medical certification. 
(1)  For leaves taken because of the employee's or a covered family member's serious health condition or for military leave, the employee must submit a completed department of labor applicable certification form (available from the department of finance) and return the certification to the department of finance. Medical certification must be provided by the employee within fifteen (15) days after requested, unless it is not practicable under the particular circumstances to do so despite the employee's diligent, good faith efforts. 
(2)  The city may require a second or third opinion (at its own expense), periodic reports on the employee's status and intent to return to work, and a fitness-for-duty report to return to work. 
(3)  All documentation related to the employee's or family member's medical condition will be held in strict confidence and maintained in the employee's medical records file. 
(G)  Effect on benefits. 
(1)  An employee granted a leave under this policy will continue to be covered under the city's group health insurance plan, life insurance plan and long-term disability plan (if applicable) under the same conditions as coverage would have been provided, if they had been continuously employed during the leave period. 
(2)  Employee contributions will be required either through payroll deduction or by direct payment to the department of finance. The employee will be advised in writing at the beginning of the leave period as to the amount and method of payment. Employee contribution amounts are subject to any change in rates that occurs while the employee is on leave. 
(3)  If an employee's contribution is more than thirty (30) days late, the city may terminate the employee's insurance coverage. 
(4)  If the city pays the employee contributions missed by the employee while on leave, the employee will be required to reimburse the city for delinquent payments (on a payroll deduction schedule) upon return from leave. The employee will be required to sign a written statement at the beginning of the leave period authorizing the payroll deduction for delinquent payments. 
(5)  If the employee fails to return from unpaid family medical leave for reasons other than (1) the continuation of a serious health condition of the employee or a covered family member, or (2) circumstances beyond the employee's control (certification required within thirty (30) days of failure to return for either reason), the city may seek reimbursement from the employee for the portion of the premiums paid by the city on behalf of the employee (also known as the employer contribution) during the period of leave. It shall be considered an unauthorized absence if the employee does not return from FMLA on the date the physician approved as the employee's "return to work" date. 
(6)  An employee is not entitled to seniority or benefit accrual during periods of unpaid leave, but will not lose anything accrued prior to leave. An employee shall be disqualified from bonuses or other achievement awards, based on job-related performance goals, such as attendance, when the employee has not met the goal because FMLA was taken. 
(7)  Worker's continuation and Worker's Compensation: If the employee is on FMLA leave as a result of an on-the-job accident or injury, the provisions of the Worker's Compensation laws shall apply and the leaves shall run concurrently. 
(H)  Job protection. 
(1)  If the employee returns to work within the applicable limitation of twelve (12) weeks for family/medical leave or twenty-six (26) weeks, for military caregiver leave, he/she will be reinstated to his/her former position or an equivalent position with equivalent pay, benefits, status and authority. 
(2)  The employee's restoration rights are the same as they would have been had the employee not been on leave. Thus, if the employee's position would have been eliminated or the employee would have been terminated, but for the leave, the employee would not have the right to be reinstated upon return from leave. 
(3)  If the employee fails to timely return following an approved FMLA leave, the employee may be reinstated to his/her same or similar position at the city's discretion. While the city observes all applicable laws, employment may be terminated at that time or thereafter. 
(I)  Employee responsibilities. Employees must provide thirty (30) days advance notice of the need to take FMLA leave when the need is foreseeable. When thirty (30) days notice is not possible, the employee must provide notice as soon as practicable and generally must comply with the city's normal call-in procedures. 
Employees must provide sufficient information for the city to determine if the leave may qualify for FMLA protection and the anticipated timing and duration of the leave. Sufficient information may include that the employee is unable to perform job functions, the family member is unable to perform daily activities, the need for hospitalization or continuing treatment by a health care provider, or circumstances supporting the need for military family leave. Employees also must inform the city if the requested leave is for a reason for which FMLA leave was previously taken or certified. Employees also may be required to provide a certification and periodic recertification supporting the need for leave. 
(J)  Employer responsibilities. The city shall notify employees whether the employee is eligible under FMLA. If the employee is eligible, the city's notice shall specify any additional information required as well as the employee's rights and responsibilities. If the employee is not eligible, the city must provide a reason for the ineligibility. The city shall inform the employee if the requested leave will be designated as FMLA-protected and the amount of leave counted against the employee's leave entitlement. If the city determines that leave is not FMLA-protected, the city will notify the employee. 
(K)  Unlawful acts by employers. FMLA makes it unlawful for any employer to: 
(1)  Interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of any right provided under FMLA; or 
(2)  Discharge or discriminate against any person for opposing any practice made unlawful by FMLA or for involvement in any proceeding under or relating to FMLA. 
(L)  Enforcement. An employee may file a complaint with the U.S. Department of Labor or may bring a private lawsuit against an employer. FMLA does not affect any federal or state law prohibiting discrimination, or supersede any state or local law or collective bargaining agreement which provides greater family or medical leave rights. 
(Ord. No. 118-2009; Ord. No. 115-2010, 3-16-2011; Ord. No. 6-2012, 2-13-2012; Ord. No. 7-2013; Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 4, 2-13-2017; Ord. No. 41-2018 , § 2, 5-29-2018) 
§ 155.19 - PARENTAL LEAVE. 
(A)  Each permanent full-time non-bargaining unit employee with at least one-year of service and at least one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) hours worked in the past year is eligible, upon the birth or adoption of a child, for a paid parental leave of absence. Employees covered under a collective bargaining agreement are eligible for parental leave as negotiated and detailed in their respective contracts. 
(B)  Parental leave shall begin on the date of the birth of an employee's child or on the day on which custody is taken by the employee for adoption placement. 
(C)  To be eligible for leave, the employee must be the biological parent of a newly born child or the legal guardian of and reside in the same household as a newly adopted child. If an employee adopts multiple children, the adoption shall be considered a single qualifying event, and will not serve to increase the length of leave for the employee, so long as the children are adopted within six (6) weeks of each other. 
(D)  Parental leave under this section shall not exceed six (6) continuous weeks immediately following the birth or adoption of a minor child, which shall include four (4) weeks or one hundred sixty (160) hours of paid leave. All employees granted parental leave shall serve a waiting period of fourteen (14) days that begins on the day parental leave beings and during which they shall not receive paid leave under this section. During the fourteen (14) day waiting period, employees may choose to work at the direction of the employee's appointing authority or may use any form of accrued paid leave or compensatory time for which the employee is qualified. During the remaining four (4) weeks of the leave period, employees shall receive paid leave equal to seventy percent (70%) of their base rate of pay. 
(E)  All the following apply to employees granted parental leave: 
(1)  They remain eligible to receive all employer-paid benefits and continue to accrue all other forms of paid leave as if they were in active pay status, regardless of whether they are receiving payment at seventy percent (70%) or supplementing to one-hundred percent (100%) of their regular rate of pay. 
(2)  They are ineligible to receive overtime pay, and no portion of their parental leave shall be included in calculating their overtime pay. 
(3)  They are ineligible to receive holiday pay. A holiday occurring during the leave period shall be counted as one (1) day of parental leave and be paid as such. 
(F)  Employees receiving parental leave may utilize available sick leave, personal leave, vacation leave, or compensatory time balances in order to be paid during the fourteen-day waiting period and to supplement the seventy percent (70%) of their base rate received during the remaining part of their parental leave period, in an amount sufficient to give them up to one hundred percent (100%) of their pay for the time on parental leave. 
Use of parental leave does not affect an employee's eligibility for other forms of paid leave and does not prohibit an employee from taking leave under the "Family and Medical Leave Act" except that parental leave shall be included in any leave time provided under that act. 
(G)  The city manager or his designee shall be responsible for the administration of parental leave. Employees seeking to receive parental leave shall apply in writing to the human resources director, including verification of birth or adoption. 
(Ord. No. 41-2018 , § 3, 5-29-2018) 
CHAPTER 156. - BOARD OF TAX REVIEW[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 76-2015, § 6, adopted November 23, 2015 , amended chapter 156 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 156, §§ 156.01-156.03, pertained to board of tax appeals. 

§ 156.01 - ESTABLISHMENT. 
(A)  There is hereby established and created the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review pursuant to ORC § 718.11. 
(B)  The details concerning the membership, organization, duties, and authority of the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review are set forth in C.O. § 203.21. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 6, 11-23-2015 ) 
CHAPTER 157. - BOARD OF ZONING AND PLANNING 

§ 157.01 - ESTABLISHMENT. 
Pursuant to its authority under Section XV of the Charter of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio, the city council hereby establishes and creates a body which shall hereafter be referred to as the board of zoning and planning. 
( Ord. No. 15-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
§ 157.02 - MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS. 
(A)  The board of zoning and planning shall be composed of seven (7) citizens of this city, who shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of council. 
(B)  Terms of office shall be for three (3) years and shall expire on the last day of February. Appointments shall commence on the date the appointment is approved by council or such other date provided by council. Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of said term. City council may shorten or lengthen a particular term at the time of appointment to maintain a staggered rotation so that not more than three members' terms expire in the same year. 
( Ord. No. 15-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
§ 157.03 - ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES. 
(A)  The board of zoning and planning shall elect its chairman and establish its own rules of procedure for the conduct of its business. The term of the chairman shall be as prescribed in the rules. The rules shall not conflict with the provisions of the City Charter, this chapter, the rules of council, or state law and shall be generally in accordance with Roberts Rules of Order. All rules shall be submitted to the city clerk and kept on file. 
(B)  The director of community development, his/her designee or such other person as may be directed by the city manager shall be the secretary of the board of zoning and planning. It shall have such assistance and such other employees as the council may from time to time authorize. 
( Ord. No. 15-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
§ 157.04 - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
(A)  The board of zoning and planning shall exercise all powers and perform all duties as prescribed in the Unified Development Ordinance or as hereafter may be invested by ordinance, resolution or other action of council in the board of zoning and planning. 
(B)  Four (4) members of the board of zoning and planning shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. No action may be taken by the board without the concurrence of a majority of the members present and voting. The foregoing notwithstanding, a minimum of three (3) affirmative votes shall be required to pass or approve any board action. 
(C)  Vacancies, absence from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall operate to vacate the term of the member, unless such absence is authorized or excused by vote of the board. Any term thus vacated, or vacated by resignation, shall be filled by appointment by the mayor subject to the approval of council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
( Ord. No. 15-2016, § 1, 3-14-2016 ) 
CHAPTER 158. - CITY TREE COMMISSION 

§ 158.01 - ESTABLISHMENT. 
There is hereby created and established the City Tree Commission of the City of Upper Arlington, County of Franklin, State of Ohio. 
§ 158.02 - PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES. 
The primary purposes and objectives of the city tree commission shall include the following: 
(A)  To study the problems and determine the needs of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio relative to a municipal tree care and tree planting program, and to make such recommendations from time to time to the city council as to desirable legislation concerning the tree program and activities of the municipality. 
(B)  To establish the recommended species and varieties of trees to be planted in the treelawns or parks. 
(C)  To disseminate news and information regarding the selection, planting and maintenance of trees within the corporate limits, whether the same be on private or public property. 
(D)  To hold regular and special meetings at which the subject of trees insofar as it relates to the municipality may be discussed by the members of the commission, officers and personnel of the municipality and its several divisions, and all others interested in the tree program. 
(E)  The commission, shall serve as the administrative board for matters pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 115-2010, 3-16-2011) 
§ 158.03 - MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS. 
(A)  The commission shall consist of seven (7) members, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Upper Arlington. 
(B)  All members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of city council. 
(C)  The chairman shall preside over all meetings of the commission and act as parliamentarian. The vice chairman shall assume the duties of the chairman in his or her absence. 
(D)  Appointments to the commission shall be for three-year terms, provided that the term of two (2) of the members appointed to the first commission shall be for one (1) year and two (2) of the members appointed to the first commission shall be for two (2) years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of said term. 
§ 158.04 - MEETINGS AND PROCEDURE. 
The commission shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A simple majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. All plans, findings, advices, reports and recommendations made by the commission shall be in writing and designate by name those members of the commission approving or concurring therein, and members who do not so approve or concur therein shall have the right, as a part of such report, to state their reasons for refusing to approve or concur. 
§ 158.05 - TREE PLANTING FUND. 
All contributions, donations and gifts made directly to the Upper Arlington Tree Commission, or to the City of Upper Arlington for the express purpose of carrying out tree related activities, commemorative gifts, or beautification projects, shall be deposited in the tree planting fund, hereby created in the city treasury, including contributions toward the purchase of trees through the city's cost-share street tree program. 
Expenditures from said Fund are subject to appropriation by city council and shall be made for the furtherance of tree planting and care, and related beautification activities. 
CHAPTER 159. - WARDS AND BOUNDARIES 

§ 159.01 - DIVISION OF THE CITY INTO WARDS. 
The City of Upper Arlington is hereby subdivided into six (6) wards as shown on the map attached to and made a part of Ordinance No. 43-2014, passed September 8, 2014. Said wards are described by metes and bounds as follows: 
Ward 1: Beginning at the point of intersection of North Star Road and Berkshire Road and thence southerly along the centerline of North Star Road crossing Northwest Boulevard to the south corporation line of the City of Upper Arlington (north of King Avenue); thence westerly along the corporation line and north of King Avenue to a point east of Andover Road midway between Wyandotte Road and Andover Road; thence following the corporation line south crossing King Avenue to the centerline of Fifth Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Fifth Avenue which is the corporation line to the Penn Central Railroad and northerly along the Penn Central Railroad which is the corporation line, crossing Riverside Drive and continuing in a northwesterly direction along the corporation line to Trabue Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Trabue Road crossing Riverside Drive which then becomes Cambridge Boulevard, and continuing along the centerline of Cambridge Boulevard to the intersection of Hillside Drive; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Hillside Drive to Waltham Road; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Waltham Road to Upper Chelsea Road; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Upper Chelsea Road to Chelsea Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Chelsea Road to Roxbury Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Roxbury Road to Stanford Road; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Stanford Road to Arlington Avenue; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Arlington Avenue crossing Guilford Road and Westover Road to Tremont Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Tremont Road to Lane Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of Lane Avenue to Beaumont Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Beaumont Road to Berkshire Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Berkshire Road the point of beginning at North Star Road. 
Ward 2: Beginning at the point of intersection of the corporation line of the City of Upper Arlington and the centerline of Trabue Road west of Riverside Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of Trabue Road crossing Riverside Drive which is Cambridge Boulevard; thence along the centerline of Cambridge Boulevard to the intersection of Hillside Drive; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Hillside Drive to Waltham Road; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Waltham Road to Upper Chelsea Road; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Upper Chelsea Road to Chelsea Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Chelsea Road to Roxbury Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Roxbury Road to Stanford Road; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Stanford Road to Arlington Avenue; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Arlington Avenue crossing Guilford Road and Westover Road to Tremont Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Tremont Road crossing Lane Avenue continuing in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Tremont Road to Kentwell Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Kentwell Road to Redding Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Redding Road to Zollinger Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Zollinger Road to Avalon Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Avalon Road Cimmaron Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Cimmaron Road to Eastcleft Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Eastcleft Drive to Kioka Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Kioka Avenue to Nottingham Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Nottingham Road to Riverside Drive; thence southeasterly following the corporation line of the City of Upper Arlington along Riverside Drive to the point of beginning at Trabue Road. 
Ward 3: Beginning at a point of intersection of North Star Road and Berkshire Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Berkshire Road to Beaumont Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Beaumont Road to Lane Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Lane Avenue to Tremont Road; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Tremont Road to Kentwell Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Kentwell Road to Redding Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Redding Road to Ridgecliff Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Ridgecliff Road to Tremont Road; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Tremont Road to Fishinger Road; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Fishinger Road to a point 48.56 feet east of Pemberton Drive; thence southerly along a property line to a point in Trentwood Road, said point being 59.96 feet easterly from the centerline of Bembridge Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Trentwood Road to the east corporation line to Lane Avenue; thence easterly, southerly, and westerly along the east corporation line to North Star Road; thence southerly along the east corporation line to the point of beginning at Berkshire Road. 
Ward 4: Beginning at the point of intersection of Riverside Drive and McCoy Road; thence easterly along the centerline of McCoy Road to Windemere Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Windemere Road to Haviland Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Haviland Road to Mountview Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Mountview Road to Lytham Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Lytham Road to Reed Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Reed Road to Fishinger Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Fishinger Road to Redding Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Redding Road to Cresthill Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Cresthill Drive to Mountview Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Mountview Road to Ridgecliff Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Ridgecliff Road to Redding Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Redding Road to Zollinger Road; thence westerly along Zollinger Road to Cimmaron Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Cimmaron Road to Eastcleft Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Eastcleft Drive to Kioka Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Kioka Avenue to Nottingham Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Nottingham Road to Riverside Drive and the west corporation line of the City of Upper Arlington; thence northerly along the corporation line and Riverside Drive to the point of beginning at McCoy Road. 
Ward 5: Beginning at the point of intersection of Kenny Road and Fishinger Road which is also the corporation line of the City of Upper Arlington; thence westerly along the corporation line and Fishinger Road then southerly along the corporation line to Trentwood Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Trentwood Road to a point 59.96 feet easterly from Bembridge Road; thence northerly on a property line to Fishinger Road, said point being 48.56 feet easterly from Pemberton Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Fishinger Road to Tremont Road; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Tremont Road to Ridgecliff Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Ridgecliff Road to Mountview Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Mountview Road to Cresthill Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of Cresthill Drive to Redding Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Redding Road to Fishinger Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Fishinger Road to Reed Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Reed Road to the north corporation line of the City of Upper Arlington at Henderson Road; thence easterly, southerly, and easterly along said corporation line to the east corporation line of the City of Upper Arlington at Kenny Road; thence southerly along the east corporation line to the point of beginning at Fishinger Road. 
Ward 6: Beginning at the centerline of Reed Road and the north corporation line of the City of Upper Arlington; thence southerly along the centerline of Reed Road to Lytham Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Lytham Road to Mountview Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Mountview Road to Haviland Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Haviland Road to Windemere Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Windemere Road to McCoy Road; thence westerly along the centerline of McCoy Road to the west corporation line of the City of Upper Arlington at Riverside Drive; thence northerly along the west corporation line of the City of Upper Arlington and Riverside Drive to the north corporation line of the City of Upper Arlington at Bethel Road; thence easterly, southerly, and easterly along the north corporation line to the point of beginning at Reed Road. 
CHAPTER 171. - MAYOR'S COURT 

§ 171.01 - DUTIES AND COMPENSATION OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS SERVING IN MAYOR'S COURT. 
The mayor and vice-mayor shall be paid eighty-four dollars ($84.00) per court session worked. If the mayor is unavailable to preside on a scheduled date(s), the mayor shall appoint either the vice mayor or magistrate to preside on that particular date(s). 
A person appointed as a mayor's court magistrate, other than the mayor or vice-mayor, shall be paid four hundred dollars ($400.00) per mayor's court session worked not to exceed an annual salary of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). 
The mayor has the authority to create rules and procedures to govern the court. These rules prescribe the conduct and procedures to be followed in mayor's court and sets forth the fines, fees and court costs to be imposed by the court. 
The mayor and vice-mayor shall be paid a total fixed annual salary of four thousand two hundred dollars ($4,200.00) for performance of their duties as judges of the mayor's court in accordance with ORC §1905.21. This fixed annual salary for the mayor and vice-mayor shall be distributed between the mayor and vice-mayor on a proportionate basis, such proportions to be based on the number of sessions at which each presides during the annual period. 
(Ord. No. 115-2010, 3-16-2011) 
§ 171.02 - CLERK OF COURT. 
The city manager shall appoint a clerk of court who shall maintain the records of the mayor's court in accordance with applicable state law and rules of court. The clerk of court shall be part of the finance department and supervised by the finance director unless otherwise determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 5-2019 , § 1, 2-11-2019) 
§ 171.03 - DEPUTY CLERKS. 
The city manager may appoint, such deputy clerks of court as are necessary to fulfill his/her duties in accordance with applicable state law and rules of court. 
(Ord. No. 5-2019 , § 1, 2-11-2019) 
§ 171.04 - VIOLATIONS BUREAU. 
(A)  A traffic violations bureau is hereby established in accordance with Rule 13, Ohio Traffic Rules. It shall have authority to process and dispose of those traffic offenses for which no court appearance is required by law or by the arresting officer in reasonable exercise of his discretion. The traffic violations bureau shall be administered by the clerk of court for the mayor's court in accordance with the applicable law and the fine and bail schedules established by the rules of mayor's court. 
(B)  A minor misdemeanor violations bureau is hereby established in accordance with Rule 4.1, Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure. It shall have authority to process and dispose of those minor misdemeanor offenses for which no court appearance is required by law or by the arresting officer in the reasonable exercise of his discretion. The minor misdemeanor violations bureau shall be administered by the clerk of court for the mayor's court in accordance with the applicable law and the fine and bail schedules established by the rules of the mayor's court. 
(C)  The violations bureau shall keep accurate records of all of their activities and submit summarized reports, no less than quarterly to the mayor, of all notices issued and arrests made for violations of city ordinances and of fines collected by the bureau of the court, and of the final disposition and present status of every case of violation of city ordinances. 
§ 171.05 - MAYOR'S COURT COMPUTER FUND. 
A fee, not to exceed three dollars ($3.00), shall be collected on each case and deposited into the mayor's court computer fund, which is hereby established. Such fee shall be established as a cost pursuant to the rules of court. Said fund shall be used to pay the cost of computerization of the mayor's court and for computerized legal research services. 
Expenditures from said fund are subject to appropriation by city council and shall be made only for the furtherance of maintaining and replacing the computer software and hardware of the mayor's court and for computerized legal research or as set out in ORC § 1901.261(A)(1). 
§ 171.06 - CLERK OF COURTS' FUND. 
A fee, not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00), shall be collected on each case and deposited into the clerk of courts fund, which is hereby established. Such fee shall be established as a cost pursuant to the rules of court. Said fund shall be used to pay the cost of computerization of the clerk of courts' office. 
Expenditures from said fund are subject to appropriation by city council and shall be made only for the furtherance of maintaining and replacing the computer software and hardware of the clerk of courts' office or as set out in ORC § 1901.261(B)(1). 
§ 171.07 - PROBATION FEE. 
A fee, not to exceed sixty dollars ($60.00) shall be collected on each case where a person is placed on probation. A fee not to exceed thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be collected on each case where a person is placed on provided no convictions (P.N.C.) status. Such fee shall be established as cost pursuant to the rules of court and deposited into the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 5-2019 , § 1, 2-11-2019) 
§ 171.08 - MAYOR'S COURT SPECIAL PROJECT FUND. 
(A)  A fee, not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00), shall be collected on each case and is to be deposited into the mayor's court special project fund. 
(B)  A fee, not to exceed two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50), shall be collected from each first-time OVI offender who is the subject of an order issued under ORC § 4510.022. This fee shall be deposited into the mayor's court special project fund. For purposes of this provision, a first-time OVI offender is a person whose driver's license or commercial driver's license or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended for being convicted of, or pleading guilty to, an OVI offense under C.O. § 353.01. 
(C)  Expenditures from this fund are to be used to acquire and pay for special projects of the court including, but not limited to, the acquisition of additional facilities or the rehabilitation of existing facilities, the acquisition of equipment, the hiring and training of staff, community service programs, which includes purchasing of bus passes for Pilot Drug Court participants, mediation or dispute resolution services, the employment of magistrates, the training and education of magistrates, and other related services. 
(D)  Expenditures from said fund are subject to appropriation by city council and shall be made only for the furtherance of special projects for the operation of the court or as set out in ORC § 1901.26(B)(1). 
(Ord. No. 32-2013; Ord. No. 14-2017 , § 1, 2-27-2017; Ord. No. 74-2018 , § 1, 10-22-2018) 
CHAPTER 173. - ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE PROGRAM 

§ 173.01 - MAYOR'S COURT DIVERSION PROGRAM. 
The Upper Arlington City Prosecutor may use his or her discretion to refer cases filed in the Upper Arlington Mayor's Court to the mayor's court diversion program established within the city attorney's office. Cases referred to the mayor's court diversion program will be assessed a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee to deter the costs incurred from the operation of and participation in this program. Individuals who successfully complete the requirements of the mayor's court diversion program will have their charges dismissed upon payment of court costs. Court costs will be determined and assessed pursuant to the rules of court. 
(Ord. No. 70-2010; Ord. No. 115-2010, 3-16-2011) 
§ 173.02 - COMMUNITY DISPUTE RESOLUTION/MEDIATION PROGRAM. 
(A)  The Upper Arlington City Prosecutor may refer community disputes to the community dispute resolution/mediation program established within the city attorney's office. This program is intended to resolve pending conflicts and may be used at the prosecutor's discretion in lieu of filing criminal charges. 
(B)  A fee totaling not more than thirty dollars ($30.00) may be assessed to participants in the community dispute resolution/ mediation program to defer the costs and expenses incurred from the operation of and participation in this program. The prosecutor may waive any fee, either using his or her discretion or when the parties are unable to pay. 
§ 173.03 - PASSING BAD CHECK PROGRAM. 
(A)  In lieu of filing criminal charges, check cases may be referred to the passing bad check program within the city attorney's office upon approval of the prosecuting attorney. Cases referred to the passing bad check program will be assessed a thirty dollar ($30.00) fee to defer the costs incurred from the operation of and participation in this program. The prosecutor may waive any fee, either using his or her discretion or when an individual is unable to pay. 
(B)  Check cases that have been filed in the Upper Arlington Mayor's Court may be referred to the passing bad check program, established within the city attorney's office, upon approval of the prosecuting attorney. Individuals who successfully complete the requirements of the passing bad check program will have their charges dismissed upon payment of court costs. Court costs will be determined and assessed pursuant to the rules of court. 
§ 173.04 - JUVENILE CRIMINAL DIVERSION PROGRAM. 
The police department and probation officer may refer cases involving juvenile offenders into the juvenile diversion program. Participation in the juvenile diversion program will be confidential. A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) may be assessed to program participants to defer the costs and expenses incurred by the operation of and participation in this program. The probation officer may waive any fee, either using his or her discretion or when the parties are unable to pay. 
All of the proceedings and informational items regarding the juvenile and his/her family are confidential and not a matter of public record. 
(Ord. No. 70-2010) 
§ 173.05 - TRAFFIC DIVERSION PROGRAM. 
The prosecutor at his/her discretion may divert a person charged with a traffic offense into the traffic diversion program. When making this decision, the prosecutor may consider the following factors: defendant's prior record; aggravating circumstances involved in the stop; the police officer's objection or request for diversion; any other factors deemed relevant to the decision; and whether the offense is a Traffic Rule 13 offense. 
Once in the program, a hearing will be set and conditions set forth to complete the diversion process. 
There shall be a traffic diversion fee of two hundred and twenty five dollars ($225.00) payable as court costs, once the program conditions have been met. The conditions of the program may consist of, but not be limited to: community service; defensive driving program; victim impact panel; and other types of programs relating to traffic issues. 
Failure to comply with the conditions of this program will result in removal from the diversion program and reinstatement of the original traffic charge. 
(Ord. No. 70-2010) 
§ 173.06 - ENVIRONMENTAL DISPUTE PROGRAM. 
(A)  The Upper Arlington City Attorney may refer community environmental disputes to the environmental dispute program established within the city attorney's office. This program is intended to resolve pending environmental conflicts or code compliance disputes and may be used at the city attorney's discretion in lieu of filing charges. 
(B)  A fee totaling not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) may be assessed to participants in the environmental dispute program to defer the costs and expenses incurred from the operation of and participation in this program. The city attorney may waive any fee, either using his or her discretion or when the parties are unable to pay. 
(C)  Failure to comply with the conditions of this program may result in removal from the environmental dispute program and result in filing of charges for code compliance violations. 
§ 173.07 - JUVENILE TRAFFIC DIVERSION PROGRAM. 
(A)  The Upper Arlington Division of Police and/or the Upper Arlington City Attorney, at their discretion, may divert a juvenile charged with a traffic violation into the juvenile traffic diversion program. When making this decision, the following factors may be considered: the defendant's prior record; aggravating circumstances involved in the stop; the police officer's request for objection to diversion; and any other information deemed relevant to the decision. 
(B)  A hearing will be set and the conditions would then be set forth to complete the diversion process. 
(C)  A fee of two hundred twenty five dollars ($225.00) will be assessed to participants of the juvenile traffic diversion program. The conditions of the program may consist of, but not be limited to: community service work; victim's impact panel; restitution; and other types of programs relating to traffic offenses. 
(D)  Failure to comply with and/or complete the conditions of this program will result in the removal from the diversion program and the filling of the original citation(s). 
(E)  The Upper Arlington City Attorney retains the right to remove any individual from the program for any cause. 
§ 173.08 - DOMESTIC VIOLENCE DIVERSION PROGRAM. 
(A)  The prosecutor at his/her discretion may divert a person accused or charged with domestic violence into the domestic violence diversion program. This program is intended to resolve pending domestic violence conflicts and may be used at the city attorney's discretion. The following criteria must be met for consideration for admittance into the program. This criterion does not guarantee acceptance into the domestic diversion program nor does failure to meet all criteria preclude an alleged offender's participation in the program. 
(1)  The current domestic violence allegation is a first offense by the alleged offender of either Domestic Violence or offense of violence against others, as defined in ORC § 2901.01(A)(9)(a) within ten (10) years prior to the date of the offense currently alleged; 
(2)  The alleged offender has no prior convictions of charges which were the result of a reduction from domestic violence charges within ten (10) years prior to the date of the now alleged offense; 
(3)  The alleged victim did not suffer visible injury or injuries requiring medical treatment; 
(4)  The alleged offender did not make threats or convey intent to cause serious physical harm; 
(5)  No deadly weapon was used, as defined by ORC § 2923.11(A), by alleged offender or possessed by alleged offender in the commission of the incident leading to the domestic violence offense currently alleged; 
(6)  The alleged offender has not undergone prior domestic violence counseling within then (10) years prior to the date of the offense currently alleged; 
(7)  The alleged offender consents to participate in the domestic violence diversion program; 
(8)  The alleged victim consents to the alleged offender being admitted to the domestic violence diversion program; 
(9)  The alleged offender has had no previous participation in this or any other domestic violence diversion program; 
(10)  The Upper Arlington Police Division has no objection to the alleged offender being placed into the Program; and 
(11)  Admission to the program is subject to any other information deemed relevant by the city attorney to the decision. 
(B)  Once in the program, a hearing will be set and conditions set forth to complete the diversion process. 
(C)  The conditions of the program may consist of, but is not limited to: community service work; victim impact panel; restitution; counseling; and other types of programs relating to domestic violence and family issues. 
(D)  Failure to comply with the conditions of this program will result in removal from the domestic diversion program and prosecution of pending charges. 
(E)  The city attorney retains the right to remove any individual from the program for any cause. 
(F)  There shall be a domestic violence diversion program fee of two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00) assessed to the alleged offender. 
(Ord. No. 75-2010) 
CHAPTER 175. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 87-2015, § 1, adopted December 14, 2015 , amended chapter 175 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 175, §§ 175.01-175.03, pertained to community and economic development department. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

§ 175.01 - ESTABLISHMENT. 
(A)  Under the provisions of Section XII of the Charter, a community development department is created under the supervision of the director of community development. 
(B)  The department shall be responsible for administering the Unified Development Code, inspections of commercial and residential construction, and enforcement of the zoning, building, and property maintenance codes. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 1, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 175.02 - DIRECTOR. 
(A)  The director of community development shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the city manager. 
(B)  The director of community development shall perform his or her functions in accordance with the laws of the State of Ohio and the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. The director of community development shall administer the Unified Development Ordinance in accordance with UDO § 3.03 and perform such other duties as set forth in the Codified Ordinances and as directed by the city manager. The director shall be responsible for formulating policies and implementing strategies related to the long and short range physical development of the city, including the administering of zoning, planning, code enforcement, and community development activities. 
(C)  All references to the "Director of Development" in the Unified Development Ordinance or the Codified Ordinances shall mean the director of community development. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 1, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 175.03 - FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS. 
(A)  The city hereby adopts and accepts the provisions and procedures set forth in ORC § 3929.86 providing for the transfer and receipt of portions of fire insurance proceeds. 
(B)  The director of community development is hereby designated as the officer of the city authorized to carry out the duties under ORC § 3929.86. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 1, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 175.04 - DIGITAL SUBMISSION OF BONDS. 
The director of the community development department may permit any bond required under C.O. Part 7, Business Regulation Code, to be submitted digitally in the electronic format designated by the director. 
(Ord. No. 58-2016 , § 1, 11-7-2016) 
Part 2 - REVENUE & FINANCE CODE 
CHAPTER 201. - INCOME TAX FOR TAX YEARS PRIOR TO JANUARY 1, 2016 

§ 201.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except as and if the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    Association: means a partnership, limited partnership or any other form of unincorporated enterprise owned by two (2) or more persons. 
    Business: means an enterprise, activity, profession or undertaking of any nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by an individual, partnership, fiduciary, trust, association, corporation or any other entity. 
    Corporation: means a corporation or joint stock association organized under the laws of the United States, State of Ohio or any other state, territory or foreign country or dependency. 
    Employee: means one (1) who works for wages, salary, commissions or other type of compensation in the service of an employer. 
    Employer: means an individual, partnership, association, corporation, governmental body, unit or agency or any other entity whether or not organized for profit, that employs one (1) or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis. 
    Finance department: means the Finance Department of the City of Upper Arlington. 
    Finance director: means the individual charged with the responsibility of managing the fiscal affairs of the City of Upper Arlington. 
    Fiscal year: means an accounting period of twelve (12) months or less ending on any day other than December 31. 
    Fundamental change: means any substantial alteration by an employer including liquidation, dissolution, bankruptcy and reorganizations such as merger, consolidation, acquisition, transfer or change in identity, form or organization. 
    Gross receipts: means the total income from any source whatsoever. 
    Limited liability company: means a limited liability company formed under ORC ch. 1705 or under the laws of another state. 
    Manager: means any of the employer's officers, responsible persons, employees having control or supervision, and employees charged with the responsibility of filing the return, paying taxes and otherwise complying with this chapter. 
    Net profits: means net gain from the operation of a business, profession, enterprise or other activity (whether or not such business, profession, enterprise or other activity is conducted for profit or is ordinarily conducted for profit) after provision for all ordinary and necessary expenses either paid or accrued in accordance with the accounting system used by the taxpayer for Federal Income Tax purposes. Net gain shall be computed using the taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income as defined and provided for in ORC § 718.01. 
    Nonqualified Plan: means a nonqualified deferred compensation plan as defined in Section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code or any plan, agreement, method, or arrangement, that does not satisfy all of the requirements of Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, regardless of whether the plan, agreement, method or arrangement is a trust. 
    Non-resident individual: means an individual who is not domiciled in the City of Upper Arlington and whose usual place of abode is outside the City of Upper Arlington. 
    Non-resident unincorporated business entity: means an unincorporated business entity not having an office or place of business within the City of Upper Arlington. 
    Ohio Business Gateway: means the online computer network system, initially created by the department of administrative services under ORC § 125.30, that allows private businesses to electronically file business reply forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic filing and payment system. 
    Pass-through entity: means a partnership, limited liability company or any other class of entity the income or profits from which are given pass-through treatment under the Internal Revenue Code (excluding S corporations). 
    Pass-through entity (income from): means partnership income of partners, membership interests of members of a limited liability company, or other distributive or proportionate ownership shares of other pass-through entities. 
    Person: means every natural person, partnership, fiduciary, association or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term person as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the parties or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
    Place of business: means any bona fide office (other than a mere statutory office), factory, warehouse or other place which is occupied and used by the taxpayer in carrying on any business activity individually or through any one (1) or more of his regular employees regularly in attendance. 
    Resident individual: means any individual who is domiciled in the City of Upper Arlington or whose usual place of abode is in the City of Upper Arlington. 
    Resident unincorporated business entity: means an unincorporated business entity having an office or place of business within the City of Upper Arlington. 
    S corporation: means a corporation that has made an election under Subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its taxable year. 
    Schedule E: means internal revenue service schedule E filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
    Singular and plural, gender: The singular shall include the plural; the masculine gender shall include the feminine and the neuter genders. 
    Tax administrator: means the person designated by the finance director to administer or enforce the provisions of the municipal income tax, or his designee. 
    Taxable income: means wages, salaries, commissions and other compensation paid by an employer or employers before any deductions and/or the net profits from the operation of a business, profession or other enterprise or activity adjusted in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
    Taxable year: means the calendar year or the fiscal year upon the basis of which the net profits are to be computed under this ordinance and, in the case of a return for a fractional part of a year, the period for which such return is required to be made. 
    Wages: means qualifying wages as defined under ORC § 718.03. 
(Ord. No. 114-2009) 
§ 201.02 - IMPOSITION OF TAX. 
To provide for the purposes of general municipal operations, capital improvements, maintenance and repair of equipment, streets and other physical properties, purchase of new equipment, and the payment of principal and interest on debt issued by the city, there is hereby levied a tax at the rate of tow and one-half percent (2.5%) per annum upon the following: 
(A)  On all salaries, wages, commissions, gambling/lottery winnings, prize monies or value thereof and other compensation earned by residents of the city. 
(B)  On all salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned by non-residents of the city for work done or services performed or rendered in the city. 
(C)  On the net profits of all unincorporated businesses, professions or other activities conducted by residents of the city. 
(D)  On the net profits of all unincorporated businesses, professions or other activities conducted in the city by non-residents. 
(E)  For the purposes of C.O. §§ 201.02(C) and (D) above, an association shall not be taxable as an entity, but any member thereof who is a resident of the city shall be taxed individually on his entire share, whether distributed or not, of the annual net profits of the association, and any non-resident member thereof shall be taxed individually only on that portion of his share, whether distributed or not, of the annual net profits of the association as is derived from work done, services performed or rendered, and business or other activities conducted in the city. 
(F)  On the net profits of all corporations, estates and trusts derived from work done or services performed or rendered and business or other activities conducted in the city, whether or not such corporations, estates and trusts have their principal or any place of business located. 
(G)  On a resident's entire distributive share income from pass-through entities conducting business outside the city. Income from a pass-through entity includes partnerships, limited liability companies and trusts. Credit on the tax imposed by the paragraph shall be given for tax paid to any other municipality under C.O. § 201.20 of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 73-2014, § 1, 12-8-2014 ) 
§ 201.03 - ALLOCATION OF NET PROFITS. 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (B) below, net profit from a business or profession conducted both within or without the boundaries of the city shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the city in the same proportion as the average ratio of the following: 
(1)  The average original cost of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession in the city during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period, wherever situated. 
As used in the preceding paragraph, real property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight. 
(2)  Wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the taxable period to persons employed in the business or professions for services performed in the city, to wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the same period to persons employed in the business or profession, wherever their services are performed, excluding compensation that is not taxable under ORC § 718.011. 
(3)  Gross receipts of the business or profession from sales made and services performed during the taxable period in the city to gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from sales and services, wherever made or performed. 
(B)  In the event that the foregoing allocation formula does not produce an equitable result, another basis may, under uniform regulations, be substituted by the finance director so as to produce such result. 
(C)  As used in this chapter, sales made in the city mean: 
(1)  All sales of tangible personal property delivered within the city regardless of where title passes if shipped or delivered from a stock of goods within the city. 
(2)  All sales of tangible personal property which is delivered within the city regardless of where title passes even though transported from a point outside the city if the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the city and the sales result from such solicitation or promotion. 
(3)  All sales of tangible personal property which is shipped from a place within the city to purchasers outside the city regardless of where title passes, if the taxpayer is not through its own employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation of promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made. 
(D)  Add together the percentages determined in accordance with C.O. §§ 201.03(A)(1), (2) and (3) or such of the aforesaid percentages as are applicable to the particular taxpayer and divide the total so obtained by the number of percentages used in deriving such total in order to obtain the business allocation percentage referred to in C.O. § 201.03(A). A factor is applicable even though it may be allocable entirely in or outside the City of Upper Arlington. 
(Ord. No. 114-2009) 
§ 201.04 - LEVY OF TAX. 
The income tax at the rate of two and one-half percent (2.5%) shall be levied, collected and paid with respect to the salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation, and with respect to the net profits of business, professions or other activities. 
( Ord. No. 73-2014, § 2, 12-8-2014 ) 
§ 201.05 - RENTALS. 
Rental income received by a taxpayer shall be included in the computation of net profits in the same amount as the net profit from rental activities required to be reported by the taxpayer on Schedule E for the taxable year. 
(Ord. No. 114-2009) 
§ 201.06 - OPERATING LOSS. 
(A)  Commencing with taxable years beginning subsequent to December 31, 1998, a net operating loss sustained in any taxable year may not be carried forward or backward to any other taxable year. 
(B)  The net loss from an unincorporated business activity may not be used to offset salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation. However, if a taxpayer is engaged in two (2) or more taxable business activities to be included in the same return, the net loss of one (1) unincorporated business activity (except any portion of a loss separately reportable for municipal tax purposes to another taxing entity) may be used to offset the profits of another for purposes of arriving at overall net profits. 
§ 201.07 - EXEMPTIONS. 
The tax provided for herein shall not be levied on the following: 
(A)  Pay or allowance of active members of the armed forces of the United States or the income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific, literary or educational institutions to the extent that such income is derived from tax exempt real estate, tax exempt tangible or intangible property or tax exempt activities. 
(B)  Poor relief, unemployment insurance benefits, old age pensions or similar payments including disability benefits received from local, state or federal governments or charitable, religious or educational organizations. 
(C)  Proceeds of insurance paid by reason of the death of the insured; pensions, disability benefits, annuities or gratuities not in the nature of compensation for services rendered from whatever source derived. 
(D)  Receipts from seasonal or casual entertainment, amusements, sports events and health and welfare activities when any such are conducted by bona fide charitable, religious or educational organizations and associations. 
(E)  Alimony received. 
(F)  Personal earnings of any natural person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(G)  Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property by way of insurance or otherwise. 
(H)  Interest, dividends and other revenue from intangible property. 
(I)  Gains from involuntary conversion, cancellation of indebtedness, interest on federal obligations, items of income already taxed by the State of Ohio from which the municipality is specifically prohibited from taxing, and income of a decedent's estate during the period of administration (except such income from the operation of a business). 
(J)  Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation and net profits, the taxation of which is prohibited by the United States Constitution or any act of Congress limiting the power of the states or their political subdivisions to impose net income taxes on income derived from interstate commerce. 
(K)  Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation and net profits, the taxation of which is prohibited by the Constitution of the State of Ohio or any act of the Ohio General Assembly limiting the power of the municipality to impose net income taxes. 
(L)  A non-resident individual who works in the City of Upper Arlington for twelve (12) or fewer days per calendar year shall be considered an occasional entrant pursuant to ORC § 718.01(F)(8), and shall not be subject to Upper Arlington municipal income tax for those twelve (12) days. For purposes of the twelve-day calculation, any portion of a day worked in the City of Upper Arlington shall be counted as one (1) day worked in Upper Arlington. Beginning with the thirteenth (13 th ) day, the individual can no longer be considered to have been an occasional entrant and thus the employer is further required to remit taxes on income earned in Upper Arlington by the individual for the first twelve (12) days. The twelve-day occasional entry rule does not apply to entertainers or professional athletes, their employees or individuals who perform service on their behalf or to promoter and booking agents of such entertainment events and sporting events. If the individual is self-employed, it shall be the responsibility of the individual to remit the appropriate income tax to the City of Upper Arlington. 
(M)  Payments received from a nonqualified plan are not exempted under this section and shall be subject to taxation as wages or other compensation. 
(Ord. No. 114-2009) 
§ 201.08 - RETURNS. 
(A)  Any person who has taxable income must file a tax return with the tax administrator. Any person who has exempt income must file a return and declare to the tax administrator the nature of his exemption. Any person who has no taxable income need not file an annual return, but must file a declaration of no taxable income with the tax administrator. 
(B)  (1)  Except as provided for in subsection (C)(1) below, persons required to file a return or declaration of exemption or no taxable income shall do so on or before April 15 of the year following the year for which they are filing. When the return is made for a fiscal year or other period different from the calendar year, the return shall be filed on or before the 15 th day of the fourth month following the end of such fiscal year or period. 
(C)  (1)  Any person that has requested an extension for filing a federal income tax return may request an extension for filing a return with the city. Except as provided for in subsection (C)(2) below, the person shall make the request by filing a copy of the person's request for a federal filing extension with the tax administrator no later than the last day for filing the city income tax return. The city may deny the request for an extension if the person fails to timely file the request, fails to file a copy of the request for the federal extension, owes the city any delinquent income tax or any penalty, interest, assessment, or other charge for the late payment or nonpayment of income tax, or has failed to file any required income tax return, report, or other related document for a prior tax period. 
(2)  Any person subject to tax on the net profit from a business or profession that has received an extension to file the federal income tax return shall not be required to notify the city of the federal extension and shall not be required to file any municipal income tax returns until the last day of the month to which the due date for filing the federal return has been extended, provided that, on or before the date for filing the municipal income tax return, the person notifies the tax commissioner of the federal extension through the Ohio Business Gateway. 
(3)  An extension of time to file is not an extension of time to pay any tax due. Interest shall apply to any unpaid tax during the period of extension at the rate set out by C.O. § 201.22. 
(D)  Except as provided for in subsection (E), the return shall be filed with the tax administrator on a form or forms furnished by or obtainable upon request from such tax administrator, setting forth: 
(1)  The aggregate amounts of salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned and gross income from business, profession or other activity, less allowable expenses incurred in the acquisition of such gross income earned during the preceding year and subject to such tax. 
(2)  The amount of the tax imposed by this chapter on such earnings and profits. 
(3)  Such other pertinent statements, information returns or other information as the tax administrator may require. 
(E)  A person subject to the city's tax on net profits from a business or profession may file any municipal income tax return or estimated municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway. 
(F)  A consolidated income tax return shall be filed by any affiliated group of corporations subject to the city's net profits tax if that affiliated group filed a consolidated return for federal income tax purposes pursuant to Section 1501 of the Internal Revenue Code for the same tax reporting period. For non-corporate taxpayers, the filing of consolidated returns may be permitted or required in accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the tax administrator. 
(G)  In the case of a corporation that carried on transactions with its stockholders or with other corporations related by stock ownership, interlocking directorates or some other method, or in case any person operates a division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or activity within the City of Upper Arlington constituting a portion only of its total business, the tax administrator shall require such additional information as he may deem necessary to ascertain whether net profits are properly allocated to the city. If the tax administrator finds that net profits are not properly allocated to the city by reason of transactions with stockholders or with other corporations related by stock ownership, interlocking directorates or transactions with such division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or activity or by some other method, he shall make such allocation as he deems appropriate to produce a fair and proper allocation of net profits to the city. 
(H)  A husband and wife, in any taxable year, may elect to file separate or joint returns. 
(Ord. No. 114-2009) 
§ 201.09 - AMENDED RETURNS. 
Where necessary, an amended return must be filed in order to report additional income and pay any additional tax due, or claim a return of tax overpaid, subject to the requirements, limitations, or both, contained in C.O. §§ 201.13 and 201.20. Such amended return shall be on a form obtainable on request from the tax administrator. A taxpayer may not change the method of accounting or apportionment of net profits after the due date for filing the original return. 
Within three (3) months from the final determination of any federal tax liability affecting the taxpayer's municipal tax liability, such taxpayer shall make and file an amended city return showing income subject to the city tax based upon such final determination of federal tax liability, and pay any additional tax shown due thereon or make claim for refund of any overpayment. 
§ 201.10 - PAYMENT OF TAX. 
(A)  The taxpayer making a return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the tax administrator the amount of taxes shown as due thereon; provided, however, that: 
(1)  Where any portion of the tax so due shall have been deducted at the source pursuant to the provisions of C.O. § 201.11. 
(2)  Where any portion of such tax shall have been paid by the taxpayer pursuant to the provisions of C.O. § 201.12. 
(3)  Where an income tax has been paid on the same income to another municipality, credit for the amount so deducted or paid, or credit to the extent provided for in C.O. § 201.20, shall be deducted from the amount shown to be due and only the balance, if any, shall be due and payable at the time of filing such return. 
(B)  A taxpayer who has overpaid the amount of tax to which the City of Upper Arlington is entitled under the provisions of this chapter may have such overpayment applied against any subsequent liability hereunder, or, at his election, indicated on the return, such overpayment (or part thereof) shall be refunded, provided that no additional taxes or refunds of less than one dollar ($1.00) shall be collected or refunded. 
(C)  If any employer which is liable for tax obligations imposed by this chapter undergoes a fundamental change, then the employer and its manager shall be liable for taxes due up to the date of the fundamental change. Taxes and final tax returns shall be due immediately after the fundamental change. Any successor employer shall withhold from any purchase price that the successor owes to the predecessor an amount sufficient to pay all unpaid taxes, interest and penalty which the predecessor employer owes pursuant to this chapter. The successor employer shall make such withholding until such time that the predecessor employer has paid such taxes, interest and penalties. If the successor fails to withhold such amount, then the successor and, in a personal manner, the successor's manager shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of such taxes, interest and penalty. 
§ 201.11 - COLLECTION AT SOURCE. 
(A)  Each employer within or doing business within the city, shall deduct at the time of payment of such salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation, the tax of two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the gross salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation due by the said employer to said employee and shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, make a return showing the amount of taxes so deducted and a record of payments showing that all taxes deducted during the quarter have been paid to the city in accordance with the payment schedule prescribed by C.O. § 201.11(A)(1), (2) and (3). 
Employers shall pay to the city all income taxes withheld or required to be deducted and withheld on either a semi-monthly, monthly or quarterly basis depending on the amount of taxes involved according to the following payment schedule: 
(1)  Semi-monthly payments of the taxes deducted are to be made by an employer if, (1) the total taxes deducted in the prior calendar year were twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) or more or, (2) the amount of taxes deducted for any month in the preceding quarter exceeded one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such payment shall be paid to the city within five (5) banking days after the fifteenth (15 th ) and the last day of each month. 
(2)  Monthly payments of taxes withheld shall be made by an employer, if the taxes withheld in the prior calendar year were less than twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) but more than three thousand five hundred ninety-nine dollars ($3,599.00); or, if the taxes withheld during any month for the preceding quarter exceeded three hundred dollars ($300.00). Such payments shall be paid to the city within fifteen (15) days after the close of each calendar month. However, those taxes accumulated for the third month of a calendar quarter by employers making monthly payments pursuant to this paragraph need not be paid until the last day of the month following such quarter. 
(3)  All employers not required to make semi-monthly or monthly payments of taxes withheld under C.O. § 201.11(A)(1) and (2) shall make quarterly payments no later than the last day of the month following the end of each quarter. 
(B)  (1)  Except as provided in subsection (B)(2) below, all employers required to file returns of withheld taxes shall make such returns on a form or forms prescribed or acceptable to the tax administrator and shall be subject to the rules and regulations prescribed therefore by the tax administrator. 
(2)  An employer may report the amount of income tax withheld, and may make remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway. 
(3)  An employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax required to be deducted and withheld whether or not such taxes have, in fact, been withheld. 
(C)  Such employer in collecting such tax shall be deemed to hold the same until payment is made by such employer to the City of Upper Arlington as a trustee for the benefit of the city, and any such tax collected by such employer from his employees shall, until the same is paid to the city, be deemed a trust fund in the hands of such employer. 
(D)  No person shall be required to withhold the tax on wages or other compensation paid domestic servants employed by him exclusively in or about such person's residence, even though such residence is in the municipality, but such employee shall be subject to all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(E)  Manager's obligation. 
(1)  Every manager is deemed to be a trustee of the City of Upper Arlington in collecting and holding the tax required under this chapter to be withheld and the funds so collected by such withholding are deemed to be trust funds. Every manager is liable directly to the city for payment of such trust, whether actually collected by such employer or not. Any tax deducted and withheld is to be considered paid to the city, whether or not the employer actually remits the tax to the city, for purposes of determining employee payments or credits. 
(2)  All managers shall be personally liable to the extent of the tax, interest and penalty, jointly and severally, for failure to file the employer's return or to pay the employer's tax, interest and penalty as required under this chapter. 
(3)  No change in structure by an employer, including a fundamental change, discharges its managers from liability for the employees' or manager's failure to remit funds held in trust, to file a tax return or to pay taxes. 
(Ord. No. 114-2009; Ord. No. 73-2014, § 3, 12-8-2014) 
§ 201.12 - DECLARATIONS. 
(A)  Every person who anticipates any taxable income which is not subject to C.O. § 201.11, or who engages in any business, profession, enterprise or activity subject to the tax imposed by C.O. §§ 201.02(C) and (D) shall file a declaration setting forth such estimated income or the estimated profit or loss from such business activity together with the estimated tax due thereon, if any; provided, however, if a person's income is wholly from wages, salaries, commissions or other compensation from which the tax will be withheld and remitted to the city in accordance with C.O. § 201.11, such person need not file a declaration. If the estimated tax amounts to not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), no declaration or payment of estimated tax is required. 
(B)  For individual taxpayers such declarations and the estimated tax due thereon shall be remitted as set forth in subsections (1) through (4) below: 
(1)  Twenty-two and one-half percent (221/2%) of the taxpayer's estimated tax liability for the current year shall be remitted on or before the fifteenth day of April; 
(2)  Forty-five percent (45%) of the taxpayer's estimated tax liability for the current year shall be remitted on or before the thirty-first day of July; 
(3)  Sixty-seven and one-half percent (671/2%) of the taxpayer's estimated tax liability for the current year shall be remitted on or before the thirty-first day of October; 
(4)  Ninety percent (90%) of the taxpayer's estimated tax liability for the year referred to in subsection (B)(1), (2), and (3) shall be remitted on or before the thirty-first day of January. 
(C)  For taxpayers that are not individuals, such declarations and the estimated tax to be paid to the city shall be remitted as set forth in subsections (1) through (4) below: 
(1)  Twenty-two and one-half percent (221/2%) of the taxpayer's estimated tax liability for the current year shall be required to be remitted on or before the fifteenth day of April or, in the case of a fiscal year taxpayer, the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the taxpayer's taxable year; 
(2)  Forty-five percent (45%) of the taxpayer's estimated tax liability for the current year shall be remitted on or before the fifteenth day of June or, in the case of a fiscal year taxpayer, the fifteenth day of the sixth month of the taxpayer's taxable year; 
(3)  Sixty-seven and one-half percent (671/2%) of the taxpayer's estimated tax liability for the current year shall be remitted on or before the fifteenth day of September or, in the case of a fiscal year taxpayer, the fifteenth day of the ninth month of the taxpayer's taxable year; 
(4)  Ninety percent (90%) of the taxpayer's estimated tax liability for the current year shall be remitted on or before the fifteenth day of December or, in the case of a fiscal year taxpayer, the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the taxpayer's taxable year. 
(D)  Such declaration shall be filed upon a form furnished by or obtainable from the tax administrator provided, however, credit shall be taken for the city tax to be withheld from any portion of such income. In accordance with the provisions of C.O. § 201.10, credit may be taken for tax to be paid to or to be withheld and remitted to another taxing municipality. A taxpayer subject to the city's tax on net profits from a business or profession may file the declaration and remit payment of the estimated tax by using the Ohio Business Gateway. 
(E)  The original declaration or any subsequent amendment thereof may be increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as provided for herein. 
(F)  On or before the last day of the fourth (4 th ) month of the year following that for which such declaration or amended declaration was filed, an annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due the city shall be paid therewith in accordance with the provisions of C.O. § 201.10. 
(G)  No penalty for failure to pay estimated tax will apply to a taxpayer whose tax for the year, after credit for tax withheld, is less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). A declaration of estimated tax which is less than eighty percent (80%) of the tax shown to be due on the final return shall not be considered filed in good faith. The difference shall be subject to penalties and interest as provided for in C.O. § 201.22. 
(Ord. No. 114-2009) 
§ 201.13 - REFUNDS OF OVERPAYMENTS. 
(A)  Claims for refunds of municipal income taxes must be brought within the time limitation provided in ORC § 718.12. 
(B)  If a claim for refund is timely made, the city shall pay interest on any overpayment by a taxpayer of any municipal income tax obligation in accordance with ORC § 718.12. 
(C)  Amounts of less than one dollar ($1.00) shall not be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 114-2009) 
§ 201.14 - REGISTRATION OF TENANTS, CONTRACTORS AND EMPLOYEES. 
(A)  Each owner, or the duly designated agent thereof, of one (1) or more units of real property located within the city and which are rented or available for rent as of January 1, 1992, and thereafter, shall submit to the tax administrator, or the designee thereof, on or before September 30 of each year a list of tenants presently occupying those rental units and those units vacant. For the purposes of this section, rented units includes any unit of real property which is subject to a rental agreement, whether oral or written, for residential, commercial or industrial purposes. 
(B)  All employers, contractors or subcontractors who do work in the city shall register with the tax administrator. The tax administrator may request a list of all employees, subcontractors, contractors or others who may do work for them whose profits, wages or earnings are not presently subject to withholding of the city of Upper Arlington income tax. 
§ 201.15 - DUTIES OF THE FINANCE DIRECTOR. 
(A)  It shall be the duty of the finance director to collect and receive the tax imposed by this chapter in the manner prescribed by said chapter, and it shall also be his duty to keep an accurate record showing the payment received by him from each taxpayer and the date of said payment. The finance director may appoint an income tax administrator and designate others as agents to carry out the duties of this chapter. 
(B)  The finance director is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and they are hereby empowered, to adopt and promulgate and to enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of said chapter, including provisions for the re-examination and correction of returns and payments. 
    In any case where a taxpayer has failed to file a return or failed to pay the tax due on a return or has filed a return which does not show the proper amount of tax due, the finance director may determine the amount of tax appearing to be due the city from the taxpayer based on any information in his possession and shall send to such taxpayer a written statement showing the amount of tax so determined, together with interest and penalties thereon, if any. 
§ 201.16 - INVESTIGATION POWERS OF THE FINANCE DIRECTOR. 
The finance director, or any authorized employee, is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers, records and Federal Income Tax returns of any employer or of any taxpayer or person subject to, or who the finance director believes is subject to the provisions of this chapter for the purposes of verifying the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter, and every such employer, supposed employer, taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed and required to furnish upon written request by the finance director, or his duly authorized agent, the means, facilities, and opportunity for making such examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized. 
The finance director is each hereby authorized to order any person presumed to have knowledge of the facts to appear before him and may examine such person, under oath, concerning any income which was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect such income and for this purpose may compel the production of books, papers, records and Federal Income Tax returns and the attendance of all persons before him, whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he believes such persons have knowledge of such income or information pertinent to such inquiry. 
§ 201.17 - TAX INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL. 
Any information gained as the result of any returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this chapter shall be confidential, except for official purposes, or except in accordance with proper judicial order, or except as hereinafter provided. The finance director may furnish the Internal Revenue Service, Treasury Department of the United States, the Tax Commissioner of the State of Ohio and the duly authorized income tax administrator of any other city or state with copies of the returns filed. The finance director is also authorized to enter into agreements for the exchange of any information with any of the foregoing federal, state or city officials. Any person divulging such information, except as hereinbefore authorized, shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. Each disclosure shall constitute a separate offense. 
§ 201.18 - COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAXES. 
(A)  All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collectible, together with any interest and penalties thereon, by suit, as other debts of like amount are recoverable. 
(B)  The finance director is authorized to institute civil lawsuits to collect delinquent taxes due and owing the city by virtue of the provisions of this chapter. The finance director is authorized to waive penalties and interest and compromise tax liability and the right to accept waiver of state statutes of limitations. 
(C)  Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes, penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the time limitations of ORC § 718.12. However, in those cases in which the Commissioner of the Internal Revenue and the taxpayer have executed a waiver of the federal statute of limitations, the period within which an additional assessment may be made by the tax administrator shall be one (1) year from the date of the final determination of the federal tax liability. 
(D)  Amounts of less than one dollar ($1.00) shall not be collected. 
(Ord. No. 114-2009) 
§ 201.19 - AUTHORITY TO ARRANGE INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS. 
The finance director is authorized to arrange for the payment of unpaid taxes, interest and penalties on a schedule of installment payments, when the taxpayer has proved to the finance director that, due to certain hardship conditions, he is unable to pay the full amount of the tax due. Such authorization shall not be granted until proper returns are filed by the taxpayer for all amounts owed by him under this chapter. 
Failure to make any deferred payment when due, shall cause the total unpaid amount, including penalty and interest, to become payable on demand and the provisions of C.O. §§ 201.13 and 201.22 of this chapter shall apply. 
§ 201.20 - CREDITS. 
(A)  Every individual taxpayer who resides in the city and received net profits, salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation for work done or services performed or rendered outside of the city, if it be made to appear that he has paid a municipal income tax or excise tax based on income, on such net profits, salaries, wages, commissions or compensation in another municipality, shall be allowed a credit for the amount so paid by him or in his behalf in such other municipality, this credit to be applied only to the extent of the tax assessed by this chapter, by reason of such net profits, salaries, wages, commissions or compensation earned in such other municipality where such tax is paid. 
(B)  Every individual taxpayer who resides in the city, and is taxed on the net profits of a pass-through entity pursuant to UACO 201.02(G), shall be allowed a credit for taxes paid by the pass-through entity to another municipal corporation if the pass-through entity does not conduct business in the city. The amount of the credit shall equal the lesser of the following amounts: 
(1)  The owner's proportionate share of the amount, if any, of tax paid by the pass-through entity to another municipal corporation in this state; 
(2)  The owner's proportionate share of the amount of tax that would be imposed on the pass-through entity by the city if the pass-through entity conducted business in the city. 
(C)  A refundable credit shall be allowed against the income tax imposed by the city for each qualifying loss sustained by the taxpayer during the taxable year related to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan. The availability and amount of the credit shall be determined pursuant to ORC § 718.021. 
(Ord. No. 114-2009) 
§ 201.21 - CONTRACT PROVISIONS. 
No contract on behalf of the city for works or improvements of the city shall be binding or valid unless such contract contains the following provisions: 
"Said _________________ hereby further agrees to withhold all City income taxes due or payable under the provisions of Chapter 201 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio, for wages, salaries and commissions paid to its employees and further agrees that any of its subcontractors shall be required to agree to withhold any such City income taxes due under said Chapter for services performed under this contract." 
§ 201.22 - INTEREST AND PENALTIES. 
(A)  All taxes imposed by this chapter and remaining unpaid after they become due shall bear interest, in addition to the amount of the unpaid tax, at the rate of one and five tenths percent (1.5%) per month or fraction thereof, and the taxpayers upon whom said taxes are imposed by this chapter shall be liable in addition thereto, to a penalty of one and five tenths percent (1.5%) per month or ten percent (10%) of the amount of the unpaid tax, whichever is greater. Except in the case of fraud, the penalty shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the unpaid tax. 
(B)  A penalty shall not be assessed on an additional tax assessment made by the finance director when a return has been filed in good faith and the tax paid thereon within the time prescribed by the finance director; provided further, that, in the absence of fraud, neither penalty nor interest shall be assessed on any additional tax assessment resulting from a federal audit, provided an amended return is filed and the additional tax is paid within three (3) months after final determination of the federal tax liability. 
(C)  The penalty shall not be assessed against a taxpayer for the late payment or nonpayment of estimated tax liability in either of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the city but was not domiciled there on the first day of January of the current calendar year; or 
(2)  The taxpayer remitted an amount at least equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the taxpayer's tax liability for the preceding year as shown on the return filed by the taxpayer for the preceding year; provided that the return for the preceding year reflected a twelve-month period and the taxpayer filed a return for the preceding year. 
(Ord. No. 114-2009) 
§ 201.23 - INTEREST ON UNPAID WITHHELD TAXES. 
All taxes deducted by an employer or required to be deducted and withheld by an employer and remaining unpaid after they become due pursuant to C.O. § 201.11(A)(1), (2) or (3) shall bear interest on the amount of such unpaid taxes at the rate of one and five tenths percent (1.5%) per month or fraction thereof and in addition a penalty of five percent (5%) per month or fraction thereof or ten percent (10%) of the amount of the unpaid taxes, whichever is greater. Except in the case of fraud, the penalty shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the unpaid tax. 
§ 201.24 - PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO WITHHOLD OR EVASION. 
Any person required to withhold the tax who fails to withhold the tax or pay over the tax, or attempts in any manner to evade or defeat the tax or the payment thereof, shall pay a penalty equal to the total amount of the tax evaded, not withheld, or not paid over. No other penalty shall be applied to any offense to which this penalty is applied. 
§ 201.25 - LATE FEE FOR NOT FILING. 
(A)  Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any return or declaration required by this chapter shall be subject to the levy and imposition of a fifty dollar ($50.00) late fee. 
(B)  The late fee shall be in addition to any interest or penalty that may be imposed pursuant to C.O. § 201.22 or 201.99. 
(C)  The finance director may waive the late fee for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 114-2009) 
§ 201.26 - ALLOCATION OF FUNDS. 
The funds collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be applied for the following purpose and in the following order, to wit: 
(A)  Such part thereof as shall be necessary to defray all costs of collecting the taxes levied by this chapter and enforcing the provisions hereof. 
(B)  Such part thereof as council may appropriate to the general fund for the purpose of paying the cost of general municipal operations. 
(C)  Such part thereof as council may appropriate for the purpose of paying the cost of maintenance of, and the purchase of new equipment, including motorized equipment. 
(D)  Such part thereof as the council may appropriate for the purpose of paying the cost of the acquisition, construction, repair and/or maintenance of streets and/or other permanent improvements. 
(E)  (1)  In any event, at least twenty percent (20%) of all monies collected under this chapter, shall be deposited in the Capital Asset Management Fund and shall be dedicated to capital improvements, the maintenance and repair of streets and other physical properties, and the payment of principal and interest on debt issued by the city for such purposes. 
Interest and principal due on bonds and notes issued for the purposes described in the preceding sentence in excess of the one percent (1%) limitation as authorized by Article XII, Section 2, of the Constitution of the State of Ohio, shall be first paid from said Fund before any payment may be made on interest or principal due on other notes or bonds. 
Provided, however, that in any year when monies are used to pay interest or principal on bonds or notes other than those issued in excess of the one percent (1%) limitation, as authorized by Article XII, Section 2, of the Constitution of the State of Ohio, the additional monies accruing to the general fund thereby shall be used only for permanent improvements as defined in Ohio Revised Code § 133.01. 
No monies derived from the previously mentioned twenty percent (20%) of all monies collected under this chapter shall be used for any purpose other than capital improvements, maintenance and repair of streets and other physical properties, and the payment of principal and interest on debt issued by the city for such purposes. 
(2)  Provided, further, that additional monies, meaning monies in excess of the minimum twenty percent (20%) of income tax revenues required to be deposited in the Capital Asset Management Fund pursuant to division (E)(1) of this section, may be deposited in the Capital Asset Management Fund and may be appropriated to pay for permanent improvements, as defined in Ohio Revised Code § 133.01, to pay principal and interest on debt issued by the city for such permanent improvements, and to pay costs of permanent improvements, as described in Ohio Revised Code § 133.15. Additional monies may also be appropriated to defray the cost of engineering plans and specifications. 
(3)  Except with regard to interest and principal due on bonds and notes issued in excess of the one percent (1%) limitation, as authorized by Article XII, Section 2, of the Constitution of the State of Ohio, no monies from the Fund shall be expended without special authorization of city council. 
(Ord. No. 73-2014, § 4, 12-8-2014) 
Section 5 of Ord. No. 73-2014 states, "That, as provided in the amendment to C.O. § 201.26(E)(1) pursuant to Section 4 of this Ordinance, the revenue resulting from the one-half percent (0.5%) increase provided for in Sections 1 and 2 shall be dedicated to capital improvements, the maintenance and repair of streets and other physical properties, and the payment of principal and interest on debt issued by the City for such purposes." 
Section 6 of Ord. No. 73-2014 states, "That this Ordinance shall take effect on January 1, 2015, as an emergency measure necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety, such emergency arising from the need to bring these sections of the Code into conformance with the Ordinance adopted by the electors on November 4, 2014, and to be effective at the beginning of the 2015 tax year." 
§ 201.27 - RIGHT TO APPEAL. 
(A)  Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the tax administrator and who has filed with the city the required returns or other documents pertaining to the municipal income tax obligation at issue in the decision may appeal the decision to the board of tax appeals established pursuant to C.O. ch. 156 by filing a written request with the city clerk. 
(B)  The request shall state why the decision is incorrect or unlawful and must be filed within thirty (30) days after tax administrator issues the decision. failure to timely file the request shall result in dismissal of the appeal. 
(C)  The city clerk shall provide the person filing the request with a copy of the board of tax appeals rules governing the procedures. The city clerk shall promptly notify the board and the tax administrator that a request has been filed. 
(D)  Whenever the tax administrator issues a decision regarding a municipal income tax obligation that is subject to appeal as provided in ORC § 718.11, the tax administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing of the taxpayer's right to appeal the decision and the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 114-2009) 
§ 201.90 - COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT AFTER JANUARY 1, 2016 
(A)  This chapter shall continue in full force and effect insofar as the levy of taxes is concerned until December 31, 2015, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied hereunder and actions and proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue in full force and effect until all of the taxes levied prior to January 1, 2016 are fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter have been fully terminated, subject to the limitations contained in C.O. § 201.18. 
(B)  Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of this chapter shall be due on the date provided in C.O. § 201.08 as though the same were continuing. 
(C)  The penalties, interest, and fees provided in C.O. §§ 201.22, 201.23, 201.24, and 201.25 shall apply to: 
(1)  Any return required to be filed under this chapter for taxable years beginning prior to January 1, 2016; and 
(2)  Any income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required to be paid or remitted to the city prior to January 1, 2016. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 2, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 201.91 - SAVINGS CLAUSE 
    If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax imposed against, or exemption from tax granted to, any taxpayer or forms of income specified herein is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this chapter so found and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of city council that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 2, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 201.99 - ENUMERATION OF VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. 
(A)  No person shall fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration imposed by this chapter. 
(B)  No employer shall fail, neglect or refuse to deduct and withhold the taxes or pay the taxes imposed by this chapter. 
(C)  No taxpayer shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, interest and penalties imposed by this chapter. 
(D)  No person shall refuse to permit the finance director, or his duly authorized agent or employee, to examine the bonds, records and papers of a taxpayer or fraudulent return. 
(E)  No person shall attempt to do anything whatever to evade payment of the whole or any part of the tax under this chapter. 
(F)  Whoever violates any provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree as defined in ORC ch. 2929 for each offense. 
(G)  Violations of this section are intended to be strict liability offenses. The failure of an employer or taxpayer to receive or produce a return or declaration form, shall not excuse the person from making a return or declaration or paying the tax levied under this chapter. 
(H)  All prosecutions under this chapter shall be commenced within the time limits provided in ORC § 718.12. 
(Ord. No. 5-2008; Ord. No. 114-2009) 
CHAPTER 203. - INCOME TAX EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2016 

§ 203.01 - AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSE OF TAX. 
(A)  To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations, capital improvements, maintenance and repair of equipment, streets and other physical properties, purchase of new equipment, extension and enlargement of municipal services and facilities, and the payment of principal and interest on debt issued by the city, there is hereby levied an annual municipal income tax on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided. 
(B)  (1)  The annual tax is levied at a rate of 2.5% (two and one-half percent). The tax is levied at a uniform rate on all persons residing in or earning or receiving income in the city. The tax is levied on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided in C.O. § 203.3 of this chapter and other sections as they may apply. 
(2)  The funds collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be applied for the following purpose and in the following order, to wit: 
(a)  Such part thereof as shall be necessary to defray all costs of collecting the taxes levied by this chapter and enforcing the provisions hereof. 
(b)  Such part thereof as council may appropriate to the general fund for the purpose of paying the cost of general municipal operations. 
(c)  Such part thereof as council may appropriate for the purpose of paying the cost of maintenance of, and the purchase of new equipment, including motorized equipment. 
(d)  Such part thereof as the council may appropriate for the purpose of paying the cost of the acquisition, construction, repair and/or maintenance of streets and/or other permanent improvements. 
(e)  (i)  In any event, at least twenty percent (20%) of all monies collected under this chapter, shall be deposited in the capital asset management fund and shall be dedicated to capital improvements, the maintenance and repair of streets and other physical properties, and the payment of principal and interest on debt issued by the city for such purposes. Interest and principal due on bonds and notes issued for the purposes described in the preceding sentence in excess of the one percent (1%) limitation as authorized by Article XII, Section 2, of the Constitution of the State of Ohio, shall be first paid from said Fund before any payment may be made on interest or principal due on other notes or bonds. Provided, however, that in any year when monies are used to pay interest or principal on bonds or notes other than those issued in excess of the one percent (1%) limitation, as authorized by Article XII, Section 2, of the Constitution of the State of Ohio, the additional monies accruing to the general fund thereby shall be used only for permanent improvements as defined in ORC § 133.01. No monies derived from the previously mentioned twenty percent (20%) of all monies collected under this chapter shall be used for any purpose other than capital improvements, maintenance and repair of streets and other physical properties, and the payment of principal and interest on debt issued by the city for such purposes. 
(ii)  Provided, further, that additional monies, meaning monies in excess of the minimum twenty percent (20%) of income tax revenues required to be deposited in the capital asset management fund pursuant to division (E)(1) of this section, may be deposited in the capital asset management fund and may be appropriated to pay for permanent improvements, as defined in ORC § 133.01, to pay principal and interest on debt issued by the city for such permanent improvements, and to pay costs of permanent improvements, as described in ORC § 133.15. Additional monies may also be appropriated to defray the cost of engineering plans and specifications. 
(iii)  Except with regard to interest and principal due on bonds and notes issued in excess of the one percent (1%) limitation, as authorized by Article XII, Section 2, of the Constitution of the State of Ohio, no monies from the fund shall be expended without special authorization of city council. 
(C)  The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this chapter 203 are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution. The tax is levied in accordance with, and is intended to be consistent with, the provisions and limitations of Ohio Revised Code Chapter 718 (ORC 718). 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
(A)  Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of the United States relating to federal income taxation or in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code, unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall control over the use of the term in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(B)  The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the gender-neutral. 
(C)  As used in this chapter: 
(1)  "Adjusted federal taxable income," for a person required to file as a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation under division (C)(24)(e) of this section, means a C corporation's federal taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows: 
(a)  Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held for the production of income. 
(b)  Add an amount equal to five percent (5%) of intangible income deducted under division (C)(1)(a) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property described in Section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(c)  Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in Section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(d)  (i)  Except as provided in (C)(1)(d)(ii) of this section, deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in Section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(ii)  Division (C)(1)(d)(i) of this section does not apply to the extent the income or gain is income or gain described in Section 1245 or 1250 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(e)  Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income; 
(f)  In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income; 
(g)  Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under ORC § 4313.02; 
(h)  Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in computing adjusted federal taxable income. 
(i)  Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with division (V)(3)(b) of C.O. § 203.5. 
(j)  Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with division (V)(3)(b) of C.O. § 203.5. 
(k)  If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity that has made an election described in division (C)(48)(b) of this section, is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in division (C)(24)(e) of this section, and is not an individual, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as payment of interest under Section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United States treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deduction. 
(l)  Nothing in division (C)(1) of this section shall be construed as allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes of federal self-employment tax. 
(2)  (a)  "Assessment" means a written finding by the tax administrator that a person has underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation that commences the person's time limitation for making an appeal to the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review pursuant to C.O. § 203.21, and has "ASSESSMENT" written in all capital letters at the top of such finding. 
(b)  "Assessment" does not include a notice denying a request for refund issued under division (C)(3) of C.O. § 203.9, a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due balances owed to the municipal corporation, a tax administrator's request for additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors, or a tax administrator's other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer that does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (C)(2)(a) of this section. 
(3)  "Audit" means the examination of a person or the inspection of the books, records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before the Tax Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal income tax. 
(4)  "Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review" means the entity created under C.O. § 203.21. 
(5)  "Calendar quarter" means the three-month period ending on the last day of March, June, September, or December. 
(6)  "Casino operator" and "casino facility" have the same meanings as in ORC § 3772.01. 
(7)  "Certified mail," "express mail," "United States mail," "postal service," and similar terms include any delivery service authorized pursuant to ORC § 5703.056. 
(8)  "Disregarded entity" means a single member limited liability company, a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company, subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes. 
(9)  "Domicile" means the true, fixed, and permanent home of a taxpayer and to which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return. A taxpayer may have more than one residence but not more than one domicile. 
(10)  "Employee" means an individual who is an employee for federal income tax purposes. 
(11)  "Employer" means a person that is an employer for federal income tax purposes. 
(12)  "Exempt income" means all of the following: 
(a)  The military pay or allowances of members of the armed forces of the United States or members of their reserve components, including the national guard of any state. 
(b)  Intangible income. However, a municipal corporation that taxed any type of intangible income on March 29, 1988, pursuant to Section 3 of S.B. 238 of the 116th general assembly, may continue to tax that type of income if a majority of the electors of the municipal corporation voting on the question of whether to permit the taxation of that type of intangible income after 1988 voted in favor thereof at an election held on November 8, 1988. 
(c)  Social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits, unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from private industry or local, state, or federal governments or from charitable, religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident, or liability insurance policies. As used in division (C)(12)(c) of this section, "unemployment compensation" does not include supplemental unemployment compensation described in Section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(d)  The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific, literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-exempt activities. 
(e)  Compensation paid under ORC § 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the taxable year. Such compensation in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation. 
(f)  Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by charitable, religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions, lodges, and similar organizations. 
(g)  Alimony and child support received. 
(h)  Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost salaries or wages or compensation from punitive damages. 
(i)  Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject to the tax levied under ORC § 5727.24 or 5727.30. Division (C)(12)(i) of this section does not apply for purposes of ORC Ch. 5745. 
(j)  Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income of a decedent's estate during the period of administration except such income from the operation of a trade or business. 
(k)  Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income under Section 107 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(l)  Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in division (C)(35) of this section. 
(m)  Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of a United States air force base under the jurisdiction of the United States air force that is used for the housing of members of the United States air force and is a center for air force operations, unless the person is subject to taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile. 
(n)  An S corporation shareholder's share of net profits of the S corporation, other than any part of the share of net profits that represents wages as defined in Section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code or net earnings from self-employment as defined in Section 1402(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(o)  A portion of the income earned by individuals under eighteen years of age to the same extent authorized under C.O. § 201.07(F) adopted by the City before January 1, 2016, specifically exempting the personal earnings of individuals under eighteen years of age. 
(p)  (i)  Except as provided in divisions (C)(12)(p)(ii), (iii), and (iv) of this section, qualifying wages described in division (C)(2) or (5) of Section 203.4 to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to withholding for the city under either of those divisions. 
(ii)  The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(p)(i) of this section does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the employee resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages. 
(iii)  The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(p)(i) of this section does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold under division (C)(4)(b) of Section 203.4. 
(iv)  The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(p)(i) of this section does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions apply: 
(a)  For qualifying wages described in division (C)(2) of Section 203.4, the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee's principal place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in division (C)(5) of Section 203.4, the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer's fixed location is located; 
(b)  The employee receives a refund of the tax described in division (C)(12)(p)(iv)(a) of this section on the basis of the employee not performing services in that municipal corporation. 
(q)  (i)  Except as provided in division (C)(12)(q)(ii) or (iii) of this section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident individual for personal services performed in the city on not more than twenty (20) days in a taxable year. 
(ii)  The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(q)(ii) of this section does not apply under either of the following circumstances: 
(a)  The individual's base of operation is located in the municipal corporation. 
(b)  The individual is a professional athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance of services in the individual's capacity as a professional athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of division (C)(12)(q)(ii)(b) of this section, "professional athlete," "professional entertainer," and "public figure" have the same meanings as in Section 203.4(C). 
(iii)  Compensation to which division (C)(12)(q) of this section applies shall be treated as earned or received at the individual's base of operation. If the individual does not have a base of operation, the compensation shall be treated as earned or received where the individual is domiciled. 
(iv)  For purposes of division (C)(12)(q) of this section, "base of operation" means the location where an individual owns or rents an office, storefront, or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and at which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation. 
(r)  Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed for a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision, regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to ORC § 709.023 on or after March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence, municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of residence. 
(s)  Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the constitution or laws of the United States. 
(t)  Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through entity under division (C) of this section is exempt income of each owner of the pass-through entity to the extent of that owner's distributive or proportionate share of that item of the entity's income. 
(13)  "Form 2106" means internal revenue service form 2106 filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(14)  "Generic form" means an electronic or paper form that is not prescribed by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for reporting taxes withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, estimated municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability or for filing a refund claim. 
(15)  "Gross receipts" means the total revenue derived from sales, work done, or service rendered. 
(16)  "Income" means the following: 
(a)  (i)  For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by the resident, including the resident's distributive share of the net profit of pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net profit of the resident, except as provided in division (C)(24)(e) of this section. 
(ii)  For the purposes of division (C)(16)(a)(i) of this section: 
(a)  Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the taxable year and the resident's distributive share of any net operating loss generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that taxable year and the following five (5) taxable years, against any other net profit of the resident or the resident's distributive share of any net profit attributable to the resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity until fully utilized, subject to division (C)(16)(a)(iv) of this section; 
(b)  The resident's distributive share of the net profit of each pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity's net profit for the current taxable year. 
(iii)  Division (C)(16)(a)(ii) of this section does not apply with respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership interest in an S corporation unless shareholders' shares of net profits from S corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in division (C)(12)(n) or (C)(16)(e) of this section. 
(iv)  Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer's net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to a taxpayer's net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net operating loss available to that taxpayer. 
(b)  In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or activities conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the net profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the nonresident. 
(c)  For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the taxpayer; 
(d)  Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings from games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings. 
(17)  "Intangible income" means income of any of the following types: income yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from the ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as those terms are defined in ORC Ch. 5701, and patents, copyrights, trademarks, tradenames, investments in real estate investment trusts, investments in regulated investment companies, and appreciation on deferred compensation. "Intangible income" does not include prizes, awards, or other income associated with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings, or other similar games of chance. 
(18)  "Internal Revenue Code" has the same meaning as in ORC § 5747.01. 
(19)  "Limited liability company" means a limited liability company formed under ORC Ch. 1705 or under the laws of another state. 
(20)  "Municipal corporation" includes a joint economic development district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under ORC § 715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74. 
(21)  (a)  "Municipal taxable income" means the following: 
(i)  For a person other than an individual, income apportioned or sitused to the city under C.O. § 203.3, as applicable, reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the person for the city. 
(ii)  (a)  For an individual who is a resident of the city, income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income, then reduced as provided in division (C)(21)(b) of this section, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for the municipal corporation. 
(b)  For an individual who is a nonresident of the city, income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipal corporation under C.O. § 203.3, then reduced as provided in division (C)(21)(b) of this section, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for the city. 
(b)  In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is an individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division (C)(21)(a)(ii)(a) or (C)(21)(b) of this section, the amount of the individual's employee business expenses reported on the individual's form 2106 that the individual deducted for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation imposed by Section 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all such expenses allowed for federal income tax purposes, but to the extent the expenses do not relate to exempt income. For a municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to the extent the expenses are related to the taxpayer's performance of personal services in that nonresident municipal corporation and are not related to exempt income. 
(22)  "Municipality" means the City of Upper Arlington. If the word is capitalized, it is referring to the City of Upper Arlington. If not capitalized, it is referring to a municipal corporation other than the City of Upper Arlington. 
(23)  "Net operating loss" means a loss incurred by a person in the operation of a trade or business. "Net operating loss" does not include unutilized losses resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or passive activity loss limitations. 
(24)  (a)  "Net profit" for a person who is an individual means the individual's net profit required to be reported on schedule C, schedule E, or schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes of this section, the net operating loss carried forward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in division (C)(24)(c) of this section. 
(b)  "Net Profit" for a person other than an individual means adjusted federal taxable income reduced by any net operating loss incurred by the person in the taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2017, subject to the limitations of division (C)(24)(c) of this section. 
(c)  (i)  The amount of such operating loss shall be deducted from the net profit to the extent necessary to reduce municipal taxable income to zero, with any remaining unused portion of the net operating loss carried forward to not more than five (5) consecutive taxable years following the taxable year in which the loss was incurred, but in no case for more years than necessary for the deduction to be fully utilized. 
(ii)  No person shall use the deduction allowed by division (C)(24)(c) of this section to offset qualifying wages. 
(iii)  (a)  For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, a person may not deduct more than fifty percent (50%) of the amount of the deduction otherwise allowed by division (C)(24)(c) of this section. 
(b)  For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person may deduct the full amount allowed by division (C)(24)(c) of this section without regard to the limitation of division (C)(24)(c)(iii)(a) of this section. 
(iv)  Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that is available may be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant to division (C)(24)(c) of this section. 
(v)  Nothing in division (C)(24)(c)(iii)(a) of this section precludes a person from carrying forward, for use with respect to any return filed for a taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized by operation of division (C)(24)(c)(iii)(a) of this section. To the extent that an amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in one (1) or more taxable years by operation of division (C)(1)(h)(iii)(a) of this section is carried forward for use with respect to a return filed for a taxable year beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, the limitation described in division (C)(24)(c)(iii)(a) of this section shall apply to the amount carried forward. 
(d)  For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division (C)(24)(b) of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be taxable as against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in the net profit of the owner of the disregarded entity. 
(e)  A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes, and that is subject to tax on its net profits by the city, may elect to be treated as a C corporation for the city. The election shall be made on the annual return for the city. The city will treat the publicly traded partnership as a C corporation if the election is so made. 
(25)  "Nonresident" means an individual that is not a resident of the city. 
(26)  "Ohio Business Gateway" means the online computer network system, created under ORC § 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file business reply forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic filing and payment system. 
(27)  "Other payer" means any person, other than an individual's employer or the employer's agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the federal gross income of the individual. "Other payer" includes casino operators and video lottery terminal sales agents. 
(28)  "Pass-through entity" means a partnership not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a limited liability company not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other class of entity from which the income or profits of the entity are given pass-through treatment for federal income tax purposes. "Pass-through entity" does not include a trust, estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity. 
(29)  "Pension" means any amount paid to an employee or former employee that is reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or successor form. Pension does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to nonqualified deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an IRS form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form. 
(30)  "Person" includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity. 
(31)  "Postal service" means the United States postal service. 
(32)  "Postmark date," "date of postmark," and similar terms include the date recorded and marked in the manner described in ORC § 5703.056(B)(3). 
(33)  (a)  "Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward" means any net operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 2017, to the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution or ordinance of the municipal corporation that was adopted by the municipal corporation before January 1, 2016, to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net profit generated in such municipal corporation in future taxable years. 
(b)  For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward to any taxable year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully utilized, whichever is earlier. 
(34)  "Publicly traded partnership" means any partnership, an interest in which is regularly traded on an established securities market. A "publicly traded partnership" may have any number of partners. 
(35)  "Qualifying wages" means wages, as defined in Section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as follows: 
(a)  Deduct the following amounts: 
(i)  Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes compensation attributable to a plan or program described in Section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(ii)  Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer. 
(iii)  Any amount included in wages that is exempt income. 
(b)  Add the following amounts: 
(i)  Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986. 
(ii)  Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock purchased under a stock option and the municipal corporation has not, by resolution or ordinance, exempted the amount from withholding and tax adopted before January 1, 2016. Division (C)(35)(b)(ii) of this section applies only to those amounts constituting ordinary income. 
(iii)  Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount described in Section 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code. Division (C)(35)(b)(ii) of this section applies only to employee contributions and employee deferrals. 
(iv)  Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation benefits described in Section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not included in wages. 
(v)  Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income for federal tax purposes in accordance with Section 1402(a)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(vi)  Any amount not included in wages if all of the following apply: 
(a)  For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation that is earned outside the United States and that either is included in the taxpayer's gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been included in the taxpayer's gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did not elect to exclude the income under Section 911 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(b)  For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute wages as defined in Section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(c)  For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute wages; and 
(d)  For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been added to wages pursuant to either division (C)(35)(b) of this section or C.O. § 203.4, as that section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the 130th General Assembly, March 23, 2015. 
(36)  "Related entity" means any of the following: 
(a)  An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder's family enumerated in Section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the stockholder and the members of the stockholder's family own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock; 
(b)  A stockholder, or a stockholder's partnership, estate, trust, or corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, estates, trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock; 
(c)  A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or from the party to the corporation under division (C)(36)(d) of this section, provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of the corporation's outstanding stock; 
(d)  The attribution rules described in Section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership requirements in divisions (C)(36)(a) to (c) of this section have been met. 
(37)  "Related member" means a person that, with respect to the taxpayer during all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a component member as defined in Section 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a person to or from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance with Section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of determining whether a person is a related member under this division, " twenty percent (20%)" shall be substituted for "five percent (5%)" wherever "five percent (5%)" appears in Section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(38)  "Resident" means an individual who is domiciled in the municipal corporation as determined under C.O. § 203.3(E). 
(39)  "S corporation" means a person that has made an election under subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its taxable year. 
(40)  "Schedule C" means internal revenue service schedule C (form 1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(41)  "Schedule E" means internal revenue service schedule E (form 1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(42)  "Schedule F" means internal revenue service schedule F (form 1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 
(43)  "Single member limited liability company" means a limited liability company that has one direct member. 
(44)  "Small employer" means any employer that had total revenue of less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this division, "total revenue" means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not limited to, sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends, and other investment income; compensation; commissions; premiums; money; property; grants; contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient service revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees; tuition payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of payment from a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and any other similar receipts reported for federal income tax purposes or under generally accepted accounting principles. "Small employer" does not include the federal government; any state government, including any state agency or instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a government for financial accounting and reporting purposes. 
(45)  (a)  "Tax administrator" means the individual charged with direct responsibility for administration of an income tax levied by the city in accordance with this chapter. Tax administrator does not include the state tax commissioner. 
(45)  (b)  "Tax commissioner" means the tax commissioner appointed under section ORC § 121.03. 
(46)  "Tax return preparer" means any individual described in Section 7701(a)(36) of the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15. 
(47)  "Taxable year" means the corresponding tax reporting period as prescribed for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code. 
(48)  (a)  "Taxpayer" means a person subject to a tax levied on income by a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter. "Taxpayer" does not include a grantor trust or, except as provided in division (C)(48)(b)(i) of this section, a disregarded entity. 
(b)  (i)  A single member limited liability company that is a disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The limited liability company's single member is also a limited liability company. 
(b)  The limited liability company and its single member were formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at least five years before January 1, 2004. 
(c)  Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate taxpayer under division (C)(38) of this section as this section existed on December 31, 2004. 
(d)  The limited liability company was not formed for the purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability of the limited liability company or its single member. 
(e)  The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to the election. 
(ii)  For purposes of division (C)(48)(b)(ii) of this section, a municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability company if, for the limited liability company's taxable year ending in 2003, its income tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least four hundred thousand dollars ($400,000.00). 
(49)  "Taxpayers' rights and responsibilities" means the rights provided to taxpayers in C.O. §§ 203.9, 203.12, 203.13, 203.19(B), 203.20, 203.21, and ORC §§ 5717.011 and 5717.03, and the responsibilities of taxpayers to file, report, withhold, remit, and pay municipal income tax and otherwise comply with ORC ch. 718 and resolutions, ordinances, and rules and regulations adopted by the city for the imposition and administration of a municipal income tax. 
(50)  "Video lottery terminal" has the same meaning as in ORC § 3770.21. 
(51)  "Video lottery terminal sales agent" means a lottery sales agent licensed under ORC ch. 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf of the state pursuant to ORC § 3770.21. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 16-2018 , §§ 2-7, 2-27-2018) 
§ 203.03 - IMPOSITION OF TAX. 
The income tax levied by the city at a rate of two and one-half percent (2.5%) is levied on the municipal taxable income of every person residing in and/or earning and/or receiving income in the city. 
Individuals. 
(A)  For residents of the city, the income tax levied herein shall be on all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by the resident, including the resident's distributive share of the net profit of pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net profit of the resident. This is further detailed in the definition of income (C.O. § 203.2(C)(16)). 
(B)  (1)  For nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or activities conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the net profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the nonresident. 
(2)  Only if the city is the municipal corporation of residence shall the income tax be levied on the income of any member or employee of the Ohio General Assembly, including the Lieutenant Governor, whose income is received as a result of services rendered as such member or employee and is paid from appropriated funds of this state. 
(3)  Only if the city is the municipal corporation of residence shall the income tax be levied on the income of the Chief Justice or a Justice of the Supreme Court received as a result of services rendered as the Chief Justice or Justice. Only if the city is the municipal corporation of residence shall the income tax be levied on the income of a judge sitting by assignment of the Chief Justice or on the income of a district court of appeals judge sitting in multiple locations within the district, received as a result of services rendered as a judge. 
(C)  For residents and nonresidents, income can be reduced to "Municipal Taxable Income" as defined in C.O. § 203.2(C)(21). Exemptions which may apply are specified in C.O. § 203.2(C)(12). 
Refundable credit for Nonqualified Deferred Compensation Plan. 
(D)  (1)  As used in this division: 
(a)  "Nonqualified deferred compensation plan" means a compensation plan described in Section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  "Qualifying loss" means the amount of compensation attributable to a taxpayer's nonqualified deferred compensation plan, less the receipt of money and property attributable to distributions from the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. Full loss is sustained if no distribution of money and property is made by the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. The taxpayer sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the taxpayer receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(c)  (i)  "Qualifying tax rate" means the applicable tax rate for the taxable year for which the taxpayer paid income tax to the city with respect to any portion of the total amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(ii)  If different tax rates applied for different taxable years, then the "qualifying tax rate" is a weighted average of those different tax rates. The weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to the city each year with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(d)  "Refundable credit" means the amount of the city income tax that was paid on the non-distributed portion, if any, of a nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(2)  If, in addition to the city, a taxpayer has paid tax to other municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal corporation shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation's proportionate share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the taxpayer to all municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(3)  In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to the city for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 
(4)  The credit allowed under this division is allowed only to the extent the taxpayer's qualifying loss is attributable to: 
(a)  The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or 
(b)  The employee's failure or inability to satisfy all of the employer's terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred compensation. 
Domicile. 
(E)  (1)  (a) ;hg;An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the city for all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in the city on the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if the tax administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in the city for all or part of the taxable year. 
(b)  An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in division (E)(1)(a) of this section if the individual establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the city for all or part of the taxable year. 
(2)  For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled in the city for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be considered include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(a)  The individual's domicile in other taxable years; 
(b)  The location at which the individual is registered to vote; 
(c)  The address on the individual's driver's license; 
(d)  The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual's residence or domicile; 
(e)  The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the individual; 
(f)  Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding the individual's residency; 
(g)  The primary location at which the individual is employed; 
(h)  The location of educational institutions attended by the individual's dependents as defined in Section 152 of the Internal Revenue Code, to the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the residency of the individual or the individual's spouse in the municipal corporation where the educational institution is located; 
(i)  The number of contact periods the individual has with the city. For the purposes of this division, an individual has one "contact period" with the city if the individual is away overnight from the individual's abode located outside of the city and while away overnight from that abode spends at least some portion, however minimal, of each of two consecutive days in the city. 
(3)  All additional applicable factors are provided in the Rules and Regulations. 
Businesses. 
(F)  This division applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or profession in the city, unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides in the city or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company, or telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports under ORC ch. 5745. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in division (F)(2) of this section, net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the boundaries of the city shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the city for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the average ratio of the following: 
(a)  The average original cost of the real property and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession in the City during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period, wherever situated. 
As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight; 
(b)  Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services performed in the City to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from which taxes are not required to be withheld under C.O. § 203.4(C); 
(c)  Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the city to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed. 
(2)  (a)  If the apportionment factors described in division (F)(1) of this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business activity in the city, the taxpayer may request, or the tax administrator of the city may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one or more of the following: 
(i)  Separate accounting; 
(ii)  The exclusion of one or more of the factors; 
(iii)  The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the municipal corporation; 
(iv)  A modification of one or more of the factors. 
(b)  A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the requested alternative method unless the tax administrator denies the request in an assessment issued within the period prescribed by C.O. § 203.12(A). 
(c)  The tax administrator may require a taxpayer to use an alternative apportionment method as described in division (F)(2)(a) of this section, but only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by C.O. § 203.12(A). 
(d)  Nothing in division (F)(2) of this section nullifies or otherwise affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by the tax administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the tax administrator and taxpayer before January 1, 2016. 
(3)  As used in division (F)(1)(b) of this section, "wages, salaries, and other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations: 
(a)  A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or under the possession of one of the following: 
(i)  The employer; 
(ii)  A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient; 
(iii)  A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described in division (F)(3)(a)(ii) of this section, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient. 
(b)  Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation, inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits the employer. 
(c)  Any other location, if the tax administrator determines that the employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in lieu of a location described in division (F)(3)(a) or (b) of this section solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax liability. If the tax administrator makes such a determination, the employer may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the tax administrator's determination was unreasonable. 
(4)  For the purposes of division (F)(1)(c) of this section, receipts from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to a municipal corporation as follows: 
(a)  Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation only if, regardless of where title passes, the property meets either of the following criteria: 
(i)  The property is shipped to or delivered within the city from a stock of goods located within the city. 
(ii)  The property is delivered within the city from a location outside the city, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the city and the sales result from such solicitation or promotion. 
(b)  Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the City to the extent that such services are performed in the city. 
(c)  To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of real property located in the city shall be sitused to the city. 
(d)  To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and royalties from real property located in the city shall be sitused to the city. 
(e)  Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal property shall be sitused to the city based upon the extent to which the tangible personal property is used in the city. 
(5)  The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental of real estate owned directly by the individual, or by a disregarded entity owned by the individual, shall be subject to the city's tax only if the property generating the net profit is located in the city or if the individual taxpayer that receives the net profit is a resident of the city. The city shall allow such taxpayers to elect to use separate accounting for the purpose of calculating net profit sitused under this division to the municipal corporation in which the property is located. 
(6)  (a)  Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to the city, if applicable, based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in the city to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the taxable year. 
(b)  An individual who is a resident of the city shall report the individual's net profit from all real estate activity on the individual's annual tax return for the city. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the extent that such a credit is allowed under the city's income tax code. 
(7)  When calculating the ratios described in division (F)(1) of this section for the purposes of that division or division (F)(2) of this section, the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity. 
(8)  The city, by ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer for the purpose of fostering job creation or job retention in the city pursuant to ORC §§ 718.15 and 718.151. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 36-2018 , § 2, 5-14-2018) 
§ 203.04 - COLLECTION AT SOURCE. 
Withholding provisions. 
(A)  Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located or doing business in the city shall withhold an income tax from the qualifying wages earned and/or received by each employee in the city. Except for qualifying wages for which withholding is not required under C.O. § 203.3 or division (B)(4) or (6) of this section, the tax shall be withheld at the rate, specified in C.O. § 203.3 of this chapter, of two and one-half percent (2.5%). An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall deduct and withhold the tax from qualifying wages on the date that the employer, agent, or other payer directly, indirectly, or constructively pays the qualifying wages to, or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit of, the employee. 
(B)  (1)  Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to the tax administrator of the city the greater of the income taxes deducted and withheld or the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer according to the following schedule: 
(a)  Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted monthly to the tax administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer on behalf of the city in the preceding calendar year exceeded two thousand three hundred ninety-nine dollars ($2,399.00), or if the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld on behalf of the city in any month of the preceding calendar quarter exceeded two hundred dollars ($200.00). Payments shall be made to the tax administrator not later than fifteen (15) days after the last day of each month for which the tax was withheld. 
(b)  Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer not required to make payments under division (B)(1)(a) or (B)(1)(c) of this section of taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the tax administrator not later than the last day of the month following the last day of each calendar quarter. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section (B)(1)(a) and (b) of this section, taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted semimonthly to the tax administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld on behalf of the city in the preceding calendar year exceeded eleven thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($11,999.00), or if in any month of the preceding calendar year exceeded one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Payments shall be made to the tax administrator not later than one of the following: i) if the taxes were deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld during the first fifteen (15) days of a month, the third banking day after the fifteenth day of that month; (ii) if the taxes were deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld after the fifteenth day of a month and before the first day of the immediately following month, the third banking day after the last day of the month. 
(2)  If the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is required to make payments electronically for the purpose of paying federal taxes withheld on payments to employees under Section 6302 of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 C.F.R. 31.6302-1, or any other federal statute or regulation, the payment shall be made by electronic funds transfer to the tax administrator of all taxes deducted and withheld on behalf of the city. The payment of tax by electronic funds transfer under this division does not affect an employer's, agent's, or other payer's obligation to file any return as required under this section. 
(3)  An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make and file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the tax administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under this division shall be accepted by tax administrator and the city as the return required of an nonresident employee whose sole income subject to the tax under this chapter is the qualifying wages reported by the employee's employer, agent of an employer, or other payer. 
(4)  An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not required to withhold the city income tax with respect to an individual's disqualifying disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation's successor entity. 
(5)  (a)  An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the tax as required under this chapter or by the employer's, agent's, or other payer's exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax. 
(b)  The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to remit to the city the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld. 
(6)  Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to the city income tax or income tax withholding requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not constitute qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or distributed. 
(7)  Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required to withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city until such time as the withheld amount is remitted to the tax administrator. 
(8)  On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the tax administrator listing: 
(a)  The names, addresses, and social security numbers of all employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been withheld for the city during the preceding calendar year; 
(b)  The amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee, the total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the preceding calendar year; 
(c)  The name of every other municipal corporation for which tax was withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during the preceding calendar year; 
(d)  Any other information required for federal income tax reporting purposes on Internal Revenue Service form W-2 or its equivalent form with respect to such employee; 
(e)  Other information as may be required by the tax administrator. 
(9)  The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not discharge the officer's or employee's liability for a failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due. 
(10)  An employer is required to deduct and withhold the city income tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer's employees and constituting qualifying wages, but only to the extent that the tips and gratuities are under the employer's control. For the purposes of this division, a tip or gratuity is under the employer's control if the tip or gratuity is paid by the customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or if the customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or other electronic means. 
(11)  The tax administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an employer at the request of an employee, when such tax is not otherwise required to be withheld by this chapter, to be tax required to be withheld and remitted for the purposes of this section. 
Occasional Entrant - Withholding. 
(C)  (1)  As used in this division: 
(a)  "Employer" includes a person that is a related member to or of an employer. 
(b)  "Fixed location" means a permanent place of doing business in this state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned or controlled by an employer. 
(c)  "Principal place of work" means the fixed location to which an employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, "principal place of work" means the worksite location in this state to which the employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location or worksite location, "principal place of work" means the location in this state at which the employee spends the greatest number of days in a calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee's employer. If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the employee spent the "greatest number of days in a calendar year" performing services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee's qualifying wages subject to division (C)(2)(a)(i) of this section among those two or more municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall be the employee's "principal place of work" with respect to those qualifying wages for the purposes of this section. For the purposes of this division, the location at which an employee spends a particular day shall be determined in accordance with division (C)(2)(b) of this section, except that "location" shall be substituted for "municipal corporation" wherever "municipal corporation" appears in that division. 
(d)  "Professional athlete" means an athlete who performs services in a professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration. 
(e)  "Professional entertainer" means a person who performs services in the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis. 
(f)  "Public figure" means a person of prominence who performs services at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar events, for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis. 
(g)  "Worksite location" means a construction site or other temporary worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for more than twenty (20) days during the calendar year. "Worksite location" does not include the home of an employee. 
(2)  (a)  Subject to divisions (C)(3), (5), (6), and (7) of this section, an employer is not required to withhold the city income tax on qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services in the city if the employee performed such services in the city on twenty (20) or fewer days in a calendar year, unless one of the following conditions applies: 
(i)  The employee's principal place of work is located in the city. 
(ii)  The employee performed services at one or more presumed worksite locations in the city. For the purposes of this division, "presumed worksite location" means a construction site or other temporary worksite in the city at which the employer provides or provided services that can reasonably be, or would have been, expected by the employer to last more than twenty (20) days in a calendar year. Services can "reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than twenty (20) days" if either of the following applies at the time the services commence: 
(a)  The nature of the services are such that it will require more than twenty (20) days of the services to complete the services; 
(b)  The agreement between the employer and its customer to perform services at a location requires the employer to perform the services at the location for more than twenty (20) days. 
(iii)  The employee is a resident of the city and has requested that the employer withhold tax from the employee's qualifying wages as provided in C.O. § 203.4. 
(iv)  The employee is a professional athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the performance of services in the employee's capacity as a professional athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure. 
(b)  For the purposes of division (C)(2)(a) of this section, an employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in the city only if the employee spent more time performing services for or on behalf of the employer in the city than in any other municipal corporation on that day. For the purposes of determining the amount of time an employee spent in a particular location, the time spent performing one or more of the following activities shall be considered to have been spent at the employee's principal place of work: 
(i)  Traveling to the location at which the employee will first perform services for the employer for the day; 
(ii)  Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing services for the employer to any other location; 
(iii)  Traveling from any location to another location in order to pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished, processed, remanufactured, or improved by the employee's employer; 
(iv)  Transporting or delivering property described in division (C)(2)(b)(iii) of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the employee's employer; 
(v)  Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the employee's final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee's principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform services for the employer. 
(3)  If the principal place of work of an employee is located in another Ohio municipal corporation that imposes an income tax, the exception from withholding requirements described in division (C)(2)(a) of this section shall apply only if, with respect to the employee's qualifying wages described in that division, the employer withholds and remits tax on such qualifying wages to that municipal corporation. 
(4)  (a)  Except as provided in division (C)(4)(b) of this section, if, during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing personal services in the city exceeds the twenty-day threshold, the employer shall withhold and remit tax to the city for any subsequent days in that calendar year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for personal services performed in the city. 
(b)  An employer required to begin withholding tax for the city under division (C)(4)(a) of this section may elect to withhold tax for the city for the first twenty (20) days on which the employer paid qualifying wages to the employee for personal services performed in the city. 
(5)  If an employer's fixed location is the city and the employer qualifies as a small employer as defined in C.O. § 203.2, the employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the employee's qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the city, regardless of the number of days which the employee worked outside the corporate boundaries of the city. To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer for a taxable year, the employer will be required to provide the tax administrator with the employer's federal income tax return for the preceding taxable year. 
(6)  Divisions (C)(2)(a) and (4) of this section shall not apply to the extent that a tax administrator and an employer enter into an agreement regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements of C.O. § 203.4. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 16-2018 , § 8, 2-27-2018) 
§ 203.05 - ANNUAL RETURN; FILING. 
(A)  An annual city income tax return shall be completed and filed by every individual taxpayer eighteen (18) years of age or older and any taxpayer that is not an individual for each taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the tax, whether or not a tax is due thereon. 
(1)  The tax administrator may accept on behalf of all nonresident individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer under this section when the nonresident individual taxpayer's sole income subject to the tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, and no additional tax is due the city. 
(2)  Retirees having no municipal taxable income for city income tax purposes may file with the tax administrator a written exemption from these filing requirements on a form prescribed by the tax administrator. The written exemption shall indicate the date of retirement and the entity from which retired. The exemption shall be in effect until such time as the retiree receives municipal taxable income taxable to the city, at which time the retiree shall be required to comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent's executor, administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent. 
(C)  If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice required by the city, the return or notice required of that individual shall be completed and filed by the individual's duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged with the care of the person or property of that individual. 
(D)  Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust. 
(E)  The city shall permit spouses to file a joint return. 
(F)  (1)  Each return required to be filed under this division shall contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer. The return shall include the taxpayer's social security number or taxpayer identification number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of perjury. 
(2)  The tax administrator shall require a taxpayer who is an individual to include, with each annual return and amended return, copies of the following documents: all of the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form W-2, "Wage and Tax Statements," including all information reported on the taxpayer's federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or withheld for any municipal corporation; the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1040 or, in the case of a return or request required by a qualified municipal corporation, Ohio form IT-1040; and, with respect to an amended tax return, any other documentation necessary to support the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files the annual return required by this section electronically is not required to provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the tax administrator unless the tax administrator requests such copies after the return has been filed. 
(3)  The tax administrator may require a taxpayer that is not an individual to include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit return, or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the following documents: the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form 1065, form 1120, form 1120-REIT, form 1120F, or form 1120S, and, with respect to an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary to support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return. A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual net profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some other manner shall either mail the documents required under this division to the tax administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is available, submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway. 
(4)  After a taxpayer files a tax return, the tax administrator may request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or documents required by the city to determine and verify the taxpayer's municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under division (F) of this section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form or on a form prescribed by the tax administrator. 
(G)  (a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be completed and filed as required by the tax administrator on or before the date prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under ORC § 5747.08(G). The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms prescribed by the tax administrator or on generic forms, together with remittance made payable to the city. No remittance is required if the net amount due is ten dollars ($10.00) or less. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net profit return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer that is not an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the fifteenth (15 th ) day of the fourth month following the end of the taxpayer's taxable year. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with remittance made payable to the city. No remittance is required if the net amount due is ten dollars ($10.00) or less. 
(2)  Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of the city's income tax return. The extended due date of the city's income tax return shall be the fifteenth (15 th ) day of the tenth (10 th ) month after the last day of the taxable year to which the return relates. An extension of time to file under this division is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the tax administrator grants an extension of that date. 
(a)  A copy of the federal extension request shall be included with the filing of the city's income tax return. 
(b)  A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may request that the tax administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for filing the taxpayer's city income tax return. If the request is received by the tax administrator on or before the date the city income tax return is due, the tax administrator shall grant the taxpayer's requested extension. 
(3)  If the tax commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for filing state income tax returns under ORC § 5747.08(G), a taxpayer shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of the city's income tax return. The extended due date of the city's income tax return shall be the same as the extended due date of the state income tax return. 
(4)  If the tax administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure the payment of the tax imposed by the city, the tax administrator may require taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this division, including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns. 
(5)  To the extent that any provision in this division (G) of this section conflicts with any provision in divisions (N), (O), (P), or (Q) of this section, the provisions in divisions (N), (O), (P), or (Q) prevail. 
(H)  (1)  For taxable years beginning after 2015, the city shall not require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the net amount due is ten dollars ($10.00) or less. 
(2)  Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the city for a taxable year pursuant to division (H)(1) of this section shall file with the city an annual net profit return under division (F)(3) of this section, unless the provisions of division (H)(3) apply. 
(3)  (a)  A person may notify the tax administrator that the person does not expect to be a taxpayer subject to city income tax for a taxable year if both the following apply: 
(i)  The person was required to file a tax return with the city for the immediately preceding taxable year because the person performed services at a worksite location (as defined in C.O. § 203.4(C)(1)(g)) within the city. 
(ii)  The person no longer provides services in the city and does not expect to be subject to city income tax for the taxable year. 
(b)  The person shall provide the notice in a signed affidavit that briefly explains the person's circumstances, including the location of the previous worksite and the last date on which the person performed services or made any sales within the city. The affidavit shall also include the following statement: "The affiant has no plans to perform any services or make any sales within the City of Upper Arlington, or otherwise become subject to the tax levied by the city during the taxable year. If the affiant does become subject to the tax levied the city for the taxable year, the affiant agrees to be considered a taxpayer and to comply with the city income tax ordinance and rules and regulations." The person shall sign the affidavit under penalty of perjury. 
(c)  If a person submits an affidavit as described in division (H)(3)(b) the Tax Administrator shall not require the person to file a tax return for the taxable year unless the tax administrator possesses information that conflicts with the affidavit or if the circumstances described in the affidavit change. 
(d)  Nothing in division (H)(3) of this section prohibits the Tax Administrator from performing an audit of the person. 
(I)  If a payment under this chapter is made by electronic funds transfer, the payment shall be considered to be made on the date of the timestamp assigned by the first electronic system receiving that payment. 
(J)  Taxes withheld for the city by an employer, the agent of an employer, or other payer as described in C.O. § 203.4 shall be allowed to the taxpayer as credits against payment of the tax imposed on the taxpayer by the city, unless the amounts withheld were not remitted to the city and the recipient colluded with the employer, agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the amounts withheld. 
(K)  Each return required by the city to be filed in accordance with this division shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate with the tax administrator about matters pertaining to the return. 
(L)  The tax administrator shall accept for filing a generic form of any income tax return, report, or document required by the city, provided that the generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information required by ordinance, resolution, or rules and regulations adopted by the city or the tax administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return preparer filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter and of the city's ordinance, resolution, or rules and regulations governing the filing of returns, reports, or documents. 
Filing via Ohio Business Gateway. 
(M)  (1)  Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect to the taxpayer's net profit from a business or profession may file the city's income tax return, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway. 
(2)  Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway. 
(3)  Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer withholding tax returns. 
Extension for service in or for the armed forces. 
(N)  Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the president of the United States or an act of the congress of the United States, and each civilian serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in support of the armed forces, may apply to the tax administrator of the city for both an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of time for payment of taxes required by the city during the period of the member's or civilian's duty service, and for one hundred eighty (180) days thereafter. The application shall be filed on or before the one hundred eightieth day after the member's or civilian's duty terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as the tax administrator considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension. 
(O)  (1)  If the tax administrator ascertains that an applicant is qualified for an extension under this section, the tax administrator shall enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in installments that begin on the 181st day after the applicant's active duty or service terminates. The tax administrator may prescribe such contract terms as the tax administrator considers appropriate. However, taxes pursuant to a contract entered into under this division are not delinquent, and the tax administrator shall not require any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period. 
(2)  If the tax administrator determines that an applicant is qualified for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be required to file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to pay any tax otherwise due to the municipal corporation before the 181st day after the applicant's active duty or service terminates. 
(3)  Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under (O)(1) of this division are not delinquent. The tax administrator shall not require any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period. 
(P)  (1)  Nothing in this division denies to any person described in this division the application of divisions (N) and (O) of this section. 
(2)  (a)  A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension under the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in which to file any return, report, or other tax document and an extension of time in which to make any payment of taxes required by a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter. The length of any extension granted under division (P)(2)(a) of this section shall be equal to the length of the corresponding extension that the taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used in this division, "qualifying taxpayer" means a member of the national guard or a member of a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the president of the United States or an act of the congress of the United States, or a civilian serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in support of the armed forces. 
(b)  Taxes whose payment is extended in accordance with division (P)(2)(a) of this section are not delinquent during the extension period. Such taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the extension period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The tax administrator shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period. The tax administrator shall not include any period of extension granted under division (C)(2)(a) of this section in calculating the penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax. 
(Q)  For each taxable year to which division (N), (O), or (P) of this section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (O)(2) and (3) of this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the filing status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that year. 
Consolidated municipal income tax return. 
(R)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Affiliated group of corporations" means an affiliated group as defined in Section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included in the group. 
(2)  "Consolidated federal income tax return" means a consolidated return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to Section 1501 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(3)  "Consolidated federal taxable income" means the consolidated taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. "Consolidated federal taxable income" does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under division (R)(1) of this section. 
(4)  "Incumbent local exchange carrier" has the same meaning as in ORC § 4927.01. 
(5)  "Local exchange telephone service" has the same meaning as in ORC § 5727.01. 
(S)  (1)  For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least one (1) member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the city's income tax in that taxable year, and if the affiliated group of corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is required under federal law. The election continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax returns under division (S)(2) of this section or a taxpayer receives permission from the tax administrator. The tax administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown. 
(2)  An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax returns under this section must be made in the first year following the last year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election period in effect under division (S)(1) of this section. The election to discontinue filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election. 
(3)  An election made under division (S)(1) or (2) of this section is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a municipal income tax. 
(4)  When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under C.O. § 203.80, a valid election made by a taxpayer under division (S)(1) or (2) of this section is binding upon the tax commissioner for the remainder of the five-year period. 
(5)  When an election made under C.O. § 203.80 is terminated, a valid election made under C.O. § 203.86 is binding upon the tax administrator for the remainder of the five-year period. 
(T)  A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated city income tax return for that taxable year if the tax administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net profits to the city. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated city income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated city income tax return for all subsequent taxable years, unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission from the tax administrator to file a separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances. 
(U)  A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated city income tax return in the same manner as is required under the United States department of treasury regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member. 
(V)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in divisions (V)(2), (3), and (4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in C.O. § 203.2, by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income" for "federal taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income" appears in that division and by substituting "an affiliated group of corporation's" for "a C corporation's" wherever "a C corporation's" appears in that division. 
(2)  No corporation filing a consolidated city income tax return shall make any adjustment otherwise required under C.O. § 203.2(C)(1) to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the computation of consolidated federal taxable income. 
(3)  If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least eighty percent (80%) of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the corporation filing a consolidated city income tax return shall do one of the following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or loss for that taxable year: 
(a)  Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purpose of making the computations required in divisions (R) through (Y) of C.O. § 203.5, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
(b)  Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purpose of making the computations required in C.O. § 203.5(R) through (Y), include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
(4)  If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than eighty percent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all of the following shall apply: 
(a)  The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purposes of making the computations required in C.O. § 203.5(R) through (Y), exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to the city; 
(b)  The pass-through entity shall be subject to the city income taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
(W)  Corporations filing a consolidated city income tax return shall make the computations required under C.O. § 203.5(R) through (Y) by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income attributable to" for "net profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in that section and by substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever "taxpayer" appears in that section. 
(X)  Each corporation filing a consolidated city income tax return is jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges, or other amounts imposed by the city in accordance with this chapter on the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an affiliated group. 
(Y)  Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered into an agreement with the city before January 1, 2016, to file a consolidated or combined tax return with the city may continue to file consolidated or combined tax returns in accordance with such election or agreement for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2016. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 16-2018 , § 9, 2-27-2018; Ord. No. 36-2018 , §§ 3, 4, 5-14-2018) 
§ 203.06 - CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES. 
(A)  Every individual taxpayer domiciled in the city who is required to and does pay, or has acknowledged liability for, a municipal tax to another municipality on or measured by the same income, qualifying wages, commissions, net profits or other compensation taxable under this chapter may claim a nonrefundable credit upon satisfactory evidence of the tax paid to the other municipality. Subject to division (C) of this section, the credit shall not exceed the tax due the city under this chapter. 
(B)  The city shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a resident of the city who works in a joint economic development zone created under ORC § 715.691 or a joint economic development district created under ORC § 715.70, 715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a credit against its tax on income to its residents who are employed in another municipal corporation. 
(C)  If the amount of tax withheld or paid to the other municipality is less than the amount of tax required to be withheld or paid to the other municipality, then for purposes of division (A) of this section, "the income, qualifying wages, commissions, net profits or other compensation" subject to tax in the other municipality shall be limited to the amount computed by dividing the tax withheld or paid to the other municipality by the tax rate for that municipality. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.07 - ESTIMATED TAXES. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Estimated taxes" means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably estimates to be the taxpayer's tax liability for the city's income tax for the current taxable year. 
(2)  "Tax liability" means the total taxes due to the city for the taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled, and after applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or credit from another taxable year. 
(B)  (1)  Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the tax administrator, if the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least two hundred dollars ($200.00). For the purposes of this section: 
(a)  Taxes withheld for the city from qualifying wages shall be considered as paid to the city in equal amounts on each payment date unless the taxpayer establishes the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld, in which case they shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the amounts were actually withheld. 
(b)  An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic funds transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division, "date of the postmark" means, in the event there is more than one (1) date on the cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service. 
(2)  Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of estimated taxes. A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by the tax administrator. A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than twelve (12) months shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the tax administrator. 
(3)  The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under C.O. § 203.5(G) or on or before the fifteenth (15 th ) day of the fourth month after the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time. 
(4)  Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration on or before the fifteenth (15 th ) day of the fourth month after the beginning of each fiscal year or period. 
(5)  The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as provided in this section. 
(C)  (1)  The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the city, including the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and withholding on or before the applicable payment date, shall be as follows: 
(a)  On or before the fifteenth (15 th ) day of the fourth month after the beginning of the taxable year, twenty-two and one-half percent (22.5%) of the tax liability for the taxable year; 
(b)  On or before the fifteenth (15 th ) day of the sixth month after the beginning of the taxable year, forty-five percent (45%) of the tax liability for the taxable year; 
(c)  On or before the fifteenth (15 th ) day of the ninth month after the beginning of the taxable year, sixty-seven and one-half percent (67.5%) of the tax liability for the taxable year; 
(d)  For an individual, on or before the (15 th ) day of the first month of the following taxable year, ninety percent (90%) of the tax liability for the taxable year. For a person other than an individual, on or before the fifteenth (15 th ) day of the twelfth month of the taxable year, ninety percent (90%) of the tax liability for the taxable year. 
(2)  When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal installments on or before the remaining payment dates. 
(3)  On or before the fifteenth (15 th ) day of the fourth month of the year following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid with the return in accordance with ORC § 718.05. 
(D)  (1)  In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to C.O. § 203.18 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (E) of this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows: 
(a)  For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, twenty-two and one-half percent (22.5%) of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
(b)  For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, forty-five percent (45%) of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
(c)  For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, sixty-seven and one-half percent (67.5%) of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
(d)  For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, ninety percent (90%) of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment. 
(2)  The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty. 
(E)  An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under division (D) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least ninety percent (90%) of the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due. 
(2)  The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least one hundred percent (100%) of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a period of twelve (12) months and the taxpayer filed a return with the city under C.O. § 203.5 for that year. 
(3)  The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the city but was not domiciled here on the first day of January of the calendar year that includes the first day of the taxable year. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 16-2018 , § 10, 2-27-2018) 
§ 203.08 - ROUNDING OF AMOUNTS. 
A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document required under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds fifty cents ($0.50) shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part of a dollar that is less than fifty cents ($0.50) shall be dropped. If a person chooses to round amounts entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered on the document. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.09 - REQUESTS FOR REFUNDS. 
(A)  As used in this section, "withholding tax" has the same meaning as in C.O. § 203.18. 
(B)  Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the tax administrator, in accordance with this section, shall refund to employers, agents of employers, other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or withholding tax levied by the municipal corporation: 
(1)  Overpayments of more than ten dollars ($10.00) or more; 
(2)  Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested exceeds ten dollars ($10.00) or more. 
(C)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, requests for refund shall be filed with the tax administrator, on the form prescribed by the tax administrator within three (3) years after the tax was due or paid, whichever is later. The tax administrator may require the requestor to file with the request any documentation that substantiates the requestor's claim for a refund. 
(2)  On filing of the refund request, the tax administrator shall determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the appropriate municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, the administrator shall issue an assessment to any taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially denied. The assessment shall state the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment. 
(3)  If a tax administrator denies in whole or in part a refund request included within the taxpayer's originally filed annual income tax return, the tax administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for requesting an assessment that may be appealed under C.O. § 203.21. 
(D)  A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing specified in division (C) of this section shall be considered to have been filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist: 
(1)  The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not later than the last day for filing the request. 
(2)  The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the request, and the request is received within seven (7) days of such last day. 
(3)  The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven days of the last day for making the request. 
(E)  Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is refunded within ninety (90) days after the final filing date of the annual return or ninety (90) days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in C.O. § 203.18(A)(4). 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.10 - SECOND MUNICIPALITY IMPOSING TAX AFTER TIME PERIOD ALLOWED FOR REFUND. 
(A)  Income tax that has been deposited with the city, but should have been deposited with another municipality, is allowable by the city as a refund but is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds. 
(B)  Income tax that was deposited with another municipality but should have been deposited with the city is subject to recovery by the city. If the city's tax on that income is imposed after the time period allowed for a refund of the tax or withholding paid to the other municipality, the city shall allow a nonrefundable credit against the tax or withholding the city claims is due with respect to such income or wages, equal to the tax or withholding paid to the first municipality with respect to such income or wages. 
(C)  If the city's tax rate is less than the tax rate in the other municipality, then the nonrefundable credit shall be calculated using the city's tax rate. However, if the city's tax rate is greater than the tax rate in the other municipality, the tax due in excess of the nonrefundable credit is to be paid to the city, along with any penalty and interest that accrued during the period of nonpayment. 
(D)  Nothing in this section permits any credit carryforward. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.11 - AMENDED RETURNS. 
(A)  (1)  If a taxpayer's tax liability shown on the annual tax return for the city changes as a result of an adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with the city. The amended return shall be filed on a form required by the tax administrator. 
(2)  If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax return, the taxpayer shall notify the tax administrator before filing the amended return. 
(B)  (1)  In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due, together with any penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is ten dollars ($10.00) or less, no payment need be made. The amended return shall reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously filed return that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return only: 
(a)  To determine the amount of tax that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were reopened; or, 
(b)  If the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or prosecutions under C.O. § 203.12 has not expired for a previously filed return. 
(2)  The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were reopened; i.e., the payment shall be the lesser of the two (2) amounts. 
(C)  (1)  In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed under this division within the period prescribed by C.O. § 203.12(A)(2) for filing the amended return, even if it is filed beyond the period prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of that division. If the amount of the refund is less than ten dollars ($10.00), no refund need be paid by the city. A request filed under this division shall claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations only to those facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return, unless it is also filed within the time prescribed in C.O. § 203.9. 
(2)  The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were reopened. All facts, figures, computations, and attachments may be reopened to determine the refund amount due by inclusion of all facts, figures, computations, and attachments. 
(D)  Within sixty (60) days after the final determination of any federal or state tax liability affecting the taxpayer's city's tax liability, that taxpayer shall make and file an amended city return showing income subject to the city income tax based upon such final determination of federal or state tax liability. The taxpayer shall pay any additional city income tax shown due thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or overpayment is less than ten dollars ($10.00). 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.12 - LIMITATIONS. 
(A)  (1)  (a) ;hg;Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the later of: 
(i)  Three (3) years after the tax was due or the return was filed, whichever is later; or 
(ii)  One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral period, if any. 
(b)  The time limit described in division (A)(1)(a) of this section may be extended at any time if both the tax administrator and the employer, agent of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in writing to the extension. Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time limit described in division (C) of this section. 
(2)  As used in this section, "qualifying deferral period" means a period of time beginning and ending as follows: 
(a)  Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment files with the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review the request described in C.O. § 203.21. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision, finding, or holding by any administrative body or court that the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review did not have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part of that assessment. 
(b)  Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the final determination of the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any party appeals from the determination of the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review, the sixtieth day after the date on which the final determination of the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review is either ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately reversed and no further appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part, or that reversal is available or taken. 
(B)  Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three (3) years after the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to file a return, or the omission of twenty-five percent (25%) or more of income required to be reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six (6) years after the commission of the offense. 
(C)  A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within the time limitation provided in C.O. § 203.9. 
(D)  (1)  Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the city does not prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal. 
(2)  If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the assessment is corrected by the tax administrator, upon an appeal so filed or pursuant to a final determination of the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review, of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals, or any court to which the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals has been appealed, so that the resultant amount due is less than the amount paid, a refund will be paid in the amount of the overpayment as provided by C.O. § 203.9, with interest on that amount as provided by C.O. § 203.9(E). 
(E)  No civil action to recover city income tax or related penalties or interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods: 
(1)  The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties; 
(2)  The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties is pending. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.13 - AUDITS. 
(A)  At or before the commencement of an audit, the tax administrator shall provide to the taxpayer a written description of the roles of the tax administrator and of the taxpayer during the audit and a statement of the taxpayer's rights, including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of a tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the tax administrator shall inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to have commenced. 
(B)  Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the tax administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable alternative dates for the audit. 
(C)  At all stages of an audit by the tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. The tax administrator shall prescribe a form by which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the tax administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the tax administrator may accept other evidence, as the tax administrator considers appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer. 
A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the taxpayer's attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. 
This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney. 
(D)  A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit examination. 
(E)  The failure of the tax administrator to comply with a provision of this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer's case. 
(F)  If the tax administrator fails to substantially comply with the provisions of this section, the tax administrator, upon application by the taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest arising from the audit. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.14 - SERVICE OF ASSESSMENT. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Last known address" means the address the tax administrator has at the time a document is originally sent by certified mail, or any address the tax administrator can ascertain using reasonable means such as the use of a change of address service offered by the postal service or an authorized delivery service under ORC § 5703.056. 
(2)  "Undeliverable address" means an address to which the postal service or an authorized delivery service under ORC § 5703.056 is not able to deliver an assessment of the tax administrator, except when the reason for non-delivery is because the addressee fails to acknowledge or accept the assessment. 
(B)  Subject to division (C) of this section, a copy of each assessment shall be served upon the person affected thereby either by personal service, by certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under ORC § 5703.056. With the permission of the person affected by an assessment, the tax administrator may deliver the assessment through alternative means as provided in this section, including, but not limited to, delivery by secure electronic mail. 
(C)  (1)  (a) ;hg;If certified mail is returned because of an undeliverable address, a tax administrator shall utilize reasonable means to ascertain a new last known address, including the use of a change of address service offered by the postal service or an authorized delivery service under ORC § 5703.056. If the tax administrator is unable to ascertain a new last known address, the assessment shall be sent by ordinary mail and considered served. If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an undeliverable address, the assessment remains appealable within sixty (60) days after the assessment's postmark. 
(b)  Once the tax administrator or other city official, or the designee of either, serves an assessment on the person to whom the assessment is directed, the person may protest the ruling of that assessment by filing an appeal with the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review within sixty (60) days after the receipt of service. The delivery of an assessment of the tax administrator under division (C)(1)(a) of this section is prima facie evidence that delivery is complete and that the assessment is served. 
(2)  If mailing of an assessment by a tax administrator by certified mail is returned for some cause other than an undeliverable address, the tax administrator shall resend the assessment by ordinary mail. The assessment shall show the date the tax administrator sends the assessment and include the following statement: 
"This assessment is deemed to be served on the addressee under applicable law ten days from the date this assessment was mailed by the Tax Administrator as shown on the assessment, and all periods within which an appeal may be filed apply from and after that date." 
Unless the mailing is returned because of an undeliverable address, the mailing of that information is prima facie evidence that delivery of the assessment was completed ten (10) days after the tax administrator sent the assessment by ordinary mail and that the assessment was served. 
If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an undeliverable address, the tax administrator shall proceed under division (C)(1)(a) of this section. A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and service under this division in accordance with division (D) of this section. 
(D)  (1)  A person disputing the presumption of delivery and service under division (C) of this section bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent by certified mail was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the tax administrator originally mailed the assessment. For the purposes of this section, a person is associated with an address at the time the tax administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and, when the assessment was mailed, the person's agent or the person's affiliate was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a person's affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was mailed, owned or controlled at least twenty (20) percent, as determined by voting rights, of the addressee's business. 
(2)  If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described in division (D)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within sixty (60) days after the initial contact by the tax administrator or other city official, or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division prevents the tax administrator or other official from entering into a compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal with the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review. 
(E)  Nothing in this section prohibits the tax administrator or the tax administrator's designee from delivering an assessment by a tax administrator by personal service. 
(F)  Collection actions taken upon any assessment being appealed under division (C)(1)(b) of this section, including those on which a claim has been delivered for collection, shall be stayed upon the pendency of an appeal under this section. 
(G)  Additional regulations as detailed in the rules and regulations shall apply. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.15 - ADMINISTRATION OF CLAIMS. 
(A)  As used in this section, "claim" means a claim for an amount payable to the city that arises pursuant to the city's income tax imposed in accordance with this chapter. 
(B)  Nothing in this chapter prohibits a tax administrator from doing either of the following if such action is in the best interests of the municipal corporation: 
(1)  Compromise a claim; 
(2)  Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments. 
(C)  The tax administrator's rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable. 
(D)  A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim shall be binding upon and shall be to the benefit of only the parties to the compromise or agreement, and shall not eliminate or otherwise affect the liability of any other person. 
(E)  A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement or if the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation of a material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement and that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would have accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue and be due. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.16 - TAX INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL. 
(A)  Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations, hearings, or verifications required or authorized by this chapter is confidential, and no person shall access or disclose such information except in accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection with the performance of that person's official duties or the official business of the city as authorized by this chapter. The tax administrator or a designee thereof may furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received under this chapter and other related tax information to the internal revenue service, the tax commissioner, and tax administrators of other municipal corporations. 
(B)  This section does not prohibit the city from publishing or disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect to particular taxpayers. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.17 - FRAUD. 
No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the preparation or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document authorized or required by city ordinance or state law to be filed with the tax administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel, or advise the preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend, or knowingly procure, counsel or advise such change, alteration, or amendment of the records upon which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document is based with intent to defraud the city or the tax administrator. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.18 - INTEREST AND PENALTIES. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Applicable law" means this chapter, the resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the city provided they impose or directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or filing requirements of the city. 
(2)  "Federal short-term rate" means the rate of the average market yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining periods to maturity of three (3) years or less, as determined under Section 1274 of the Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year. 
(3)  "Income tax," "estimated income tax," and "withholding tax" means any income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by the city pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016. 
(4)  "Interest rate as described in division (A) of this section" means the federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus five (5) percent. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following the July of the year in which the federal short-term rate is determined in accordance with division (A)(2) of this section. 
(5)  "Return" includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule, and other document required to be filed with the tax administrator or the city by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016. 
(6)  "Unpaid estimated income tax" means estimated income tax due but not paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law. 
(7)  "Unpaid income tax" means income tax due but not paid by the date the income tax is required to be paid under applicable law. 
(8)  "Unpaid withholding tax" means withholding tax due but not paid by the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law. 
(9)  "Withholding tax" includes amounts an employer, any agent of an employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an employee's qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer, agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee's qualifying wages. 
(B)  (1)  This section applies to the following: 
(a)  Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016; 
(b)  Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required to be paid or remitted to the city on or after January 1, 2016. 
(2)  This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to the ordinances or rules and regulations, as adopted before January 1, 2016, of the city to which the return is to be filed or the payment is to be made. 
(C)  Should any taxpayer, employer, agent of the employer, or other payer for any reason fail, in whole or in part, to make timely and full payment or remittance of income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file timely with the city any return required to be filed, the following penalties and interest shall apply: 
(1)  Interest shall be imposed at the rate described in division (A) of this section, per annum, on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax, and unpaid withholding tax. 
(2)  (a)  With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income tax, the city may impose a penalty equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the amount not timely paid. 
(b)  With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, the city may impose a penalty not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the amount not timely paid. 
(3)  With respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns, the city may impose a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each failure to timely file each return, regardless of the liability shown thereon for each month, or any fraction thereof, during which the return remains unfiled regardless of the liability shown thereon. The penalty shall not exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each failure. 
(D)  Nothing in this section requires the city to refund or credit any penalty, amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that the city has properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016. 
(E)  Nothing in this section limits the authority of the city to abate or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when the tax administrator determines, in the tax administrator's sole discretion, that such abatement is appropriate. 
(F)  By the 31 st day of October of each year the city shall publish the rate described in division (A) of this section applicable to the next succeeding calendar year. 
(G)  The city may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer the city's post-judgment collection costs and fees, including attorney's fees. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 16-2018 , § 11, 2-27-2017) 
§ 203.19 - AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; VERIFICATION OF INFORMATION. 
Authority. 
(A)  Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the Tax Administrator to perform any of the following duties or functions, unless the performance of such duties or functions is expressly limited by a provision of the Ohio Revised Code: 
(1)  (a)  Exercise all powers whatsoever of an query nature as provided by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums, and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under oath, to issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers, records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a court for attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the fees of officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths. 
(b)  The powers referred to in this division of this section shall be exercised by the tax administrator only in connection with the performance of the duties respectively assigned to the tax administrator under the city's income tax code; 
(2)  Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties; 
(3)  Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their respective official duties as provided by law; 
(4)  Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including penalties and interest thereon, for any reason overpaid. In addition, the tax administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and, if the tax administrator finds that there has been an overpayment, make a written statement of the tax administrator's findings, and approve and issue a refund payable to the taxpayer, the taxpayer's assigns, or legal representative as provided in this chapter; 
(5)  Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to the compromise and settlement of tax claims; 
(6)  Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with C.O. § 203.3; 
(7)  (a)  Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, and orders the tax administrator is by law authorized and required to make and, pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the tax administrator's own motion, review, re-determine, or correct any tax findings, determinations, computations, or orders the tax administrator has made. 
(b)  If an appeal has been filed with the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review or other appropriate tribunal, the tax administrator shall not review, re-determine, or correct any tax finding, determination, computation, or order which the tax administrator has made, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by the appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final; 
(8)  Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner authorized by law; 
(9)  Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding obligations described in C.O. § 203.4. 
Verification of accuracy of returns and determination of liability. 
(B)  (1)  A tax administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns of any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or that the tax administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by the tax administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this section is required to furnish the opportunity for the tax administrator, authorized agent, or employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the request. 
(2)  The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or other person that is subject to, or that a tax administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the tax administrator's inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents relate, unless the tax administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The tax administrator may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep such records as the tax administrator determines necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax levied by the city or for the withholding of such tax. 
(3)  The tax administrator may examine under oath any person that the tax administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect such income. The tax administrator may, for this purpose, compel any such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person's possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney. 
(4)  No person issued written notice by the tax administrator compelling attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers, records, or federal or state income tax returns under this section shall fail to comply. 
Identification information. 
(C)  (1)  Nothing in this chapter prohibits the tax administrator from requiring any person filing a tax document with the tax administrator to provide identifying information, which may include the person's social security number, federal employer identification number, or other identification number requested by the tax administrator. A person required by the tax administrator to provide identifying information that has experienced any change with respect to that information shall notify the tax administrator of the change before, or upon, filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information. 
(2)  (a)  If the tax administrator makes a request for identifying information and the tax administrator does not receive valid identifying information within thirty (30) days of making the request, nothing in this chapter prohibits the tax administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom the request was directed pursuant to C.O. § 203.18, in addition to any applicable penalty described in C.O. § 203.99. 
(b)  If a person required by the tax administrator to provide identifying information does not notify the tax administrator of a change with respect to that information as required under C.O. § 203.19(C) within thirty (30) days after filing the next tax document requiring such identifying information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the tax administrator from imposing a penalty pursuant to C.O. § 203.18. 
(c)  The penalties provided for under divisions (C)(2)(a) and (b) of this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition to any applicable criminal penalties described in C.O. § 203.99 for a violation of C.O. § 203.17 and any other penalties that may be imposed by the tax administrator by law. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.20 - REQUEST FOR OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR. 
(A)  An "opinion of the tax administrator" means an opinion issued under this section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. it does not include ordinary correspondence of the tax administrator. 
(B)  A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the tax administrator in accordance with the rules and regulations. 
(C)  (1)  An opinion of the tax administrator shall remain in effect and shall protect the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and who reasonably relies on it from liability for any taxes, penalty, or interest otherwise chargeable on the activity or transaction specifically held by the tax administrator's opinion to be taxable in a particular manner or not to be subject to taxation for any taxable years that may be specified in the opinion, or until the earliest of the following dates: 
(a)  The effective date of a written revocation by the tax administrator sent to the taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt requested. The effective date of the revocation shall be the taxpayer's date of receipt or one year after the issuance of the opinion, whichever is later; 
(b)  The effective date of any amendment or enactment of a relevant section of the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified state law, or this chapter that would substantially change the analysis and conclusion of the opinion of the tax administrator; 
(c)  The date on which a court issues an opinion establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified state law, or this chapter; 
(d)  If the opinion of the tax administrator was based on the interpretation of federal law, the effective date of any change in the relevant federal statutes or regulations, or the date on which a court issues an opinion establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to federal statutes or regulations; 
(e)  The effective date of any change in the taxpayer's material facts or circumstances; 
(f)  The effective date of the expiration of the opinion, if specified in the opinion. 
(2)  A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts. 
(D)  A tax administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request received under this section. Such refusal is not subject to appeal. 
(E)  An opinion of the tax administrator binds the tax administrator only with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not bind the tax administrator of any other municipal corporation. 
(F)  An opinion of the tax administrator issued under this section is not subject to appeal. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.21 - BOARD OF TAX REVIEW. 
(A)  (1)  The Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members. Two (2) members shall be appointed by city council, but such appointees may not be employees, elected officials, or contractors with the city at any time during their term or in the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of appointment. One member shall be appointed by the city manager. This member may be an employee of the city, but may not be the director of finance or equivalent officer, or the tax administrator or other similar official or an employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any direct subordinate thereof. 
(2)  The term for members of the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review shall be two (2) years. There is no limit on the number of terms that a member may serve if the member is reappointed by the city council. The board member appointed by the city manager shall serve at the discretion of the city manager. 
(3)  Members of the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review appointed by the city council may be removed by the city council by majority vote for malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office. To remove such a member, the city council must give the member a copy of the charges against the member and afford the member an opportunity to be publicly heard in person or by counsel in the member's own defense upon not less than ten (10) days' notice. The decision by the city council on the charges is final and not appealable. 
(4)  A member of the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review who, for any reason, ceases to meet the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall resign immediately by operation of law. 
(5)  A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment within sixty (60) days of when the vacancy was created. Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review shall impair the power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review. 
(6)  If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the city council or city manager that appointed the member shall appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review in the member's place. The appointment of such an individual shall be subject to the same requirements and limitations as are applicable to the appointment of the member temporarily unable to serve. 
(B)  Whenever a tax administrator issues an assessment, the tax administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the taxpayer's right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed. 
(C)  Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment to the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review by filing a request with the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review. The request shall be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the assessment should be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within sixty (60) days after the taxpayer receives the assessment. 
(D)  The Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held within sixty (60) days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (C) of this section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives a hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear before the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review and may be represented by an attorney at law, certified public accountant, or other representative. The Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review may allow a hearing to be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case, the hearing must be completed within one hundred twenty (120) days after the first day of the hearing unless the parties agree otherwise. 
(E)  The Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review may affirm, reverse, or modify the tax administrator's assessment or any part of that assessment. The Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review shall issue a final determination on the appeal within ninety (90) days after the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review's final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final determination by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within fifteen (15) days after issuing the final determination. The taxpayer or the tax administrator may appeal the Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review's final determination as provided in ORC § 5717.011. 
(F)  The Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall adopt rules governing its procedures and shall keep a record of its transactions. Such records are not public records available for inspection under ORC § 149.43. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Upper Arlington Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section are not meetings of a public body subject to ORC § 121.22. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.22 - AUTHORITY TO CREATE RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
Nothing in this chapter prohibits the city council, or a tax administrator pursuant to authority granted to the administrator by resolution or ordinance, to adopt rules to administer an income tax imposed by the city in accordance with this chapter. Such rules shall not conflict with or be inconsistent with any provision of this chapter. Taxpayers are hereby required to comply not only with the requirements of this chapter, but also to comply with the rules and regulations. 
All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted on the internet. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.23 - RENTAL AND LEASED PROPERTY. 
(A)  All property owners of real property located in the city, who rent or otherwise lease the same, or any part thereof, to any person for residential dwelling purposes, including apartments, rooms and other rental accommodations, during any calendar year, or part thereof, commencing with the effective date of this section, shall file with the tax administrator on or before the January 31 first following such calendar year a written report disclosing the name, address and also telephone number, if available, of each tenant known to have occupied on December 31 during such calendar year such apartment, room or other residential dwelling rental property. 
(B)  The tax administrator may order the appearance before him, or his duly authorized agent, of any person whom he believes to have any knowledge of the name, address and telephone number of any tenant of residential rental real property in the city. The tax administrator, or his duly authorized agent, is authorized to examine any person, under oath, concerning the name, address and telephone number of any tenant of residential real property located in the city. The tax administrator, or his duly authorized agent, may compel the production of papers and records and the attendance of all personal before him, whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he believes such person has knowledge of the name, address and telephone number of any tenant of residential real property in the city. 
(C)  Any property owner or person that violates one or more of the following shall be subject to C.O. § 203.99 of this chapter: 
(1)  Fails, refuses or neglects to timely file a written report required by subsection (a) hereof; or 
(2)  Makes an incomplete or intentionally false written report required by subsection (a) hereof; or 
(3)  Fails to appear before the tax administrator or any duly authorized agent and to produce and disclose any tenant information pursuant to any order or subpoena of the tax administrator as authorized in this section; or 
(4)  Fails to comply with the provisions of this section or any order or subpoena of the tax administrator. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.24 - SAVINGS CLAUSE. 
This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, or to any property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of council to impose the tax herein provided for. Any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter or any tax against or exception granted any individual or any of the several groups of persons, or forms of income specified herein if found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of council that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, or part hereof, not been included therein. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.25 - COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF ORDINANCE. 
(A)  This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied hereunder and actions or proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue effective until all of said taxes levied hereunder in the aforesaid periods are fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of said taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter shall have been fully terminated, subject to the limitations contained in C.O. §§ 203.12 and 203.99 hereof. 
(B)  Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of this chapter shall be due on the date provided in C.O. §§ 203.5 and 203.4 of this chapter as though the same were continuing. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.26 - ADOPTION OF RITA RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
The city hereby adopts the Regional Income Tax Agency (RITA) Rules & Regulations, including amendments that may be made from time to time, for use as the city's income tax rules and regulations. In the event of a conflict with any provision(s) of C.O. ch. 203 and the RITA Rules & Regulations, the provisions of C.O. ch. 203 will supersede. Until and if the contractual relationship between the city and RITA ceases, C.O. § 203.26 will supersede all other provisions within C.O. ch. 203 regarding promulgation of rules and regulations by the tax administrator. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 203.80 - FILING NET PROFIT TAXES; ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER. 
(A)  A taxpayer may elect to be subject to C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 in lieu of the provisions set forth in the remainder of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon the taxpayer's election, both of the following shall apply: 
(1)  The state tax commissioner shall serve as the sole administrator of the municipal net profit tax for which the taxpayer as defined in C.O. § 203.81(C) is liable for the term of the election; 
(2)  The commissioner shall administer the tax pursuant to O.C.R. §§ 718.80 to 718.95, C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95, and any applicable provision of O.R.C. Chapter 5703. 
(B)  (1)  A taxpayer shall make the initial election on or before the first day of the third month after the beginning of the taxpayer's taxable year by notifying the tax commissioner and the city, on a form prescribed by the tax commissioner. 
(2)  (a)  The election, once made by the taxpayer, applies to the taxable year in which the election is made and to each subsequent taxable year until the taxpayer notifies the tax commissioner and the city of its termination of the election. 
(b)  A notification of termination shall be made, on a form prescribed by the tax commissioner, on or before the first day of the third month of any taxable year. 
(c)  Upon a timely and valid termination of the election, the taxpayer is no longer subject to C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95, and is instead subject to the provisions set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(C)  The tax commissioner shall enforce and administer C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95. In addition to any other powers conferred upon the tax commissioner by law, the tax commissioner may: 
(1)  Prescribe all forms necessary to administer those sections; 
(2)  Adopt such rules as the tax commissioner finds necessary to carry out those sections; and 
(3)  Appoint and employ such personnel as are necessary to carry out the duties imposed upon the tax commissioner by those sections. 
(D)  The tax commissioner shall not be considered a tax administrator, as that term is defined in O.R.C. § 718.01 and C.O. § 203.02. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-20-2018) 
§ 203.81 - DEFINITIONS. 
    If a term used in C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in O.R.C. Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall have control over the use of the term in O.R.C. Title LVII, unless the term is defined in O.R.C. Chapter 5703, in which case the definition in that chapter shall control. Any reference in this chapter to the Internal Revenue Code includes other laws of the United States related to federal income taxes. If a term is defined in both this section and C.O. § 203.02 the definition in this section shall control for all uses of that term in C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95. 
    As used in C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 only: 
(A)  "Municipal taxable income" means income apportioned or sitused to the municipal corporation under C.O. § 203.82, as applicable, reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the person for the municipal corporation. 
(B)  "Adjusted federal taxable income," for a person required to file as a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation as described in O.R.C. division (D)(5) of section 718.01 and C.O. § 203.02, means a C corporation's federal taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows: 
(1)  Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held for the production of income. 
(2)  Add an amount equal to five percent (5%) of intangible income deducted under division (B)(1) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(3)  Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(4)  (a)  Except as provided in division (B)(4)(b) of this section, deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  Division (B)(4)(a) of this section does not apply to the extent the income or gain is income or gain described in section 1245 or 1250 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(5)  Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income. 
(6)  In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income. 
(7)  Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under O.R.C. section 4313.02. 
(8)  Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in computing adjusted federal taxable income. 
(9)  Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with division (E)(3)(b) of C.O. § 203.86. 
(10)  Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with division (E)(3)(b) of C.O. § 203.86. 
If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity that has made the election described in division (C)(48)(b) of C.O. § 203.02, and is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in division (C)(24)(e) of C.O. § 203.02, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as payment of interest under section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United States treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deduction. 
Nothing in division (B) of this section shall be construed as allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes of federal self-employment tax. 
(C)  "Taxpayer" has the same meaning as in C.O. § 203.02(C)(48), except that "taxpayer" does not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax imposed under O.R.C. Chapter 5745. "Taxpayer" may include receivers, assignees, or trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume the role of a taxpayer. 
(D)  "Tax return" or "return" means the notifications and reports required to be filed pursuant to C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 for the purpose of reporting municipal income taxes, and includes declarations of estimated tax. 
(E)  "Taxable year" means the calendar year or the taxpayer's fiscal year ending during the calendar year, or fractional part thereof, upon which the calculation of the taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income is based pursuant to this chapter. If a taxpayer's taxable year is changed for federal income tax purposes, the taxable year for purposes of C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 is changed accordingly but may consist of an aggregation of more than one (1) taxable year for federal income tax purposes. The tax commissioner may prescribe by rule an appropriate period as the taxable year for a taxpayer that has had a change of its taxable year for federal income tax purposes, for a taxpayer that has two (2) or more short taxable years for federal income tax purposes as the result of a change of ownership, or for a new taxpayer that would otherwise have no taxable year. 
(F)  "Assessment" means a notice of underpayment or nonpayment of a tax issued pursuant to C.O. § 203.90. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1(Exh. 1), 2-20-2018) 
§ 203.82 - APPLICABILITY; TAXABLE SITUS; APPORTIONMENT. 
    This section applies to any taxpayer that is engaged in a business or profession in the city and that has made the election under C.O. § 203.80. 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section, net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the boundaries of the city shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the city for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the average ratio of the following: 
(1)  The average original cost of the real property and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession in the city during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period, wherever situated. 
As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight (8); 
(2)  Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services performed in the city to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from which taxes are not required to be withheld under C.O. § 203.04; 
(3)  Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the city to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed. 
(B)  (1)  If the apportionment factors described in division (A) of this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business activity in the city, the taxpayer may request, or the tax commissioner may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one (1) or more of the following: 
(a)  Separate accounting; 
(b)  The exclusion of one (1) or more of the factors; 
(c)  The inclusion of one (1) or more additional factors that would provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the municipal corporation; 
(d)  A modification of one (1) or more of the factors. 
(2)  A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the requested alternative method unless the tax commissioner denies the request in an assessment issued within the period prescribed by division (A) of C.O. § 203.90. 
(3)  The tax commissioner may require a taxpayer to use an alternative apportionment method as described in division (B)(1) of this section only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by division (A) of C.O. § 203.90. 
(C)  As used in division (A)(2) of this section, "wages, salaries, and other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations: 
(1)  A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or under the possession of one (1) of the following: 
(a)  The employer; 
(b)  A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient; 
(c)  A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described in division (C)(1)(b) of this section, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient. 
(2)  Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation, inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits the employer; 
(3)  Any other location, if the tax commissioner determines that the employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in lieu of a location described in division (C)(1) or (2) of this section solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax liability. If the tax commissioner makes such a determination, the employer may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the tax commissioner's determination was unreasonable. 
(D)  For the purposes of division (A)(3) of this section, receipts from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to the city as follows: 
(1)  Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall be sitused to the city only if, regardless of where title passes, the property meets either of the following criteria: 
(a)  The property is shipped to or delivered within the city from a stock of goods located within the city. 
(b)  The property is delivered within the city from a location outside the city, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the city and the sales result from such solicitation or promotion. 
(2)  Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the city to the extent that such services are performed in the city. 
(3)  To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of real property located in the city shall be sitused to the city. 
(4)  To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and royalties from real property located in the city shall be sitused to the city. 
(5)  Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal property shall be sitused to the city based upon the extent to which the tangible personal property is used in the city. 
(E)  Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the city in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to the city based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in the city to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the taxable year. 
(F)  If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income, the taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee's income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from taxation under divisions (C)(12)(l) and (C)(35) of C.O. § 203.02 by the city or substantially similar provision of the codified ordinances of another municipal corporation, the taxpayer shall add the amount that is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to the city. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add to its net profit that was apportioned to the city any amount other than the amount upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were the amount related to the stock option not exempted from taxation. 
This division applies solely for the purpose of making an adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to the city under this section. 
(G)  When calculating the ratios described in division (A) of this section for the purposes of that division or division (B) of this section, the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-20-2018) 
§ 203.83 - RESERVED. 
§ 203.84 - INFORMATION PROVIDED TO TAX ADMINISTRATORS; CONFIDENTIALITY. 
(A)  Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations, hearings, or verifications required or authorized by C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 is confidential, and no person shall disclose such information, except for official purposes, in accordance with a proper judicial order, or as provided in O.R.C. § 4123.271 or 5703.21. The tax commissioner may furnish the internal revenue service with copies of returns filed. This section does not prohibit the publication of statistics in a form which does not disclose information with respect to particular taxpayers. 
(B)  In May and November of each year, the tax commissioner shall provide the city tax administrator with the following information for every taxpayer that filed tax returns with the commissioner under C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 and that had municipal taxable income apportionable to the city under this chapter for any prior year: 
(1)  The taxpayer's name, address, and federal employer identification number; 
(2)  The taxpayer's apportionment ratio for, and amount of municipal taxable income apportionable to, the city pursuant to C.O. § 203.82; 
(3)  The amount of any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward utilized by the taxpayer; 
(4)  Whether the taxpayer requested that any overpayment be carried forward to a future taxable year; 
(5)  The amount of any credit claimed under O.R.C. section 718.94. 
(C)  Not later than thirty (30) days after each distribution made to municipal corporations under O.R.C. section 718.83, the tax commissioner shall provide to the city a report stating the name and federal identification number of every taxpayer that made estimated payments that are attributable to the city and the amount of each such taxpayer's estimated payment. 
(D)  The information described under divisions (B) and (C) of this section shall be provided to the individual or individuals designated by the city tax administrator under O.R.C. section 718.83(D). 
(E)  (1)  The city expects that the tax commissioner will, pursuant to O.R.C. section 718.84(E), provide tax returns and other information it receives in the performance of its administration of the municipal net profits tax for taxpayers making the election provided in C.O. § 203.80. The tax administrator shall review these returns and information, as well as the information received pursuant to divisions (B) and (C) of this section, and has discretion to refer any taxpayer for audit by the tax commissioner. Such referral shall be made on a form prescribed by the commissioner and shall include any information that forms the basis for the referral. 
(2)  If the tax commissioner declines to audit a taxpayer referred by the tax administrator under this section, the city reserves its right to pursue any and all remedies, whether at law or in equity, to ensure that the correct tax liability has been calculated and paid by the taxpayer. 
(Ord. No. 17-20148, § 1(Exh. A), 2-20-2018) 
§ 203.85 - FILING OF ANNUAL RETURN; REMITTANCE; DISPOSITION OF FUNDS. 
(A)  (1)  For each taxable year, every taxpayer shall file an annual return. Such return, along with the amount of tax shown to be due on the return less the amount paid for the taxable year under C.O. § 203.88, shall be submitted to the tax commissioner, on a form and in the manner prescribed by the commissioner, on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of the taxpayer's taxable year. 
(2)  If a taxpayer has multiple taxable years ending within one (1) calendar year, the taxpayer shall aggregate the facts and figures necessary to compute the tax due under this chapter, in accordance with C.O. §§ 203.81, 203.82, and, if applicable, 203.86, onto its annual return. 
(3)  The remittance shall be made payable to the treasurer of state and in the form prescribed by the tax commissioner. If the amount payable with the tax return is ten dollars ($10.00) or less, no remittance is required. 
(B)  (1)  Each return required to be filed under this section shall contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include the taxpayer's identification number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of perjury. 
(2)  (a)  The tax commissioner may require a taxpayer to include, with each annual tax return, amended return, or request for refund filed with the commissioner under C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95, copies of any relevant documents or other information. 
(b)  A taxpayer that files an annual tax return electronically through the Ohio business gateway or in another manner as prescribed by the tax commissioner shall either submit the documents required under this division electronically as prescribed at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is not available, mail the documents to the tax commissioner. The department of taxation shall publish a method of electronically submitting the documents required under this division on or before January 1, 2019. 
(3)  After a taxpayer files a tax return, the tax commissioner may request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or documents required to determine and verify the taxpayer's municipal income tax. 
[C.  Reserved.] 
(D)  (a)  Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a tax return with the commissioner under this section. The extended due date of the return shall be the fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to which the return relates. 
(b)  A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may request that the commissioner grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for filing the taxpayer's municipal income tax return. If the commissioner receives the request on or before the date the municipal income tax return is due, the commissioner shall grant the taxpayer's extension request. 
(c)  An extension of time to file under division (D)(1) of this section is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the tax commissioner grants an extension of that date. 
(2)  If the commissioner considers it necessary in order to ensure payment of a tax imposed in accordance with C.O. § 203.01, the commissioner may require taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns. 
(E)  Each return required to be filed in accordance with this section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate with the tax commissioner about matters pertaining to the return. The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the commissioner to contact the preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during the examination or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only to provide the commissioner with information that is missing from the return, to contact the commissioner for information about the examination or other review of the return or the status of the taxpayer's refund or payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical errors, offsets, or return preparation that the taxpayer has received from the commissioner and has shown to the preparer or other person. 
(F)  When income tax returns or other documents require the signature of a tax return preparer, the tax commissioner shall accept a facsimile or electronic version of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-20-2018) 
§ 203.851 - ELECTRONIC FILING. 
(A)  All taxpayers that have made the election allowed under C.O. § 203.80 shall file any tax return or extension for filing a tax return, and shall make payment of amounts shown to be due on such returns, electronically, either through the Ohio business gateway or in another manner as prescribed by the tax commissioner. 
(B)  A taxpayer may apply to the commissioner, on a form prescribed by the commissioner, to be excused from the requirement to file returns and make payments electronically. For good cause shown, the commissioner may excuse the applicant from the requirement and permit the applicant to file the returns or make the payments by nonelectronic means. 
(C)  The tax commissioner may adopt rules establishing the following: 
(1)  The format of documents to be used by taxpayers to file returns and make payments by electronic means; 
(2)  The information taxpayers must submit when filing tax returns by electronic means. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-20-2018) 
§ 203.86 - CONSOLIDATED RETURNS. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Affiliated group of corporations" means an affiliated group as defined in section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group includes at least one (1) incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included in the group. 
(2)  "Consolidated federal income tax return" means a consolidated return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to section 1501 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(3)  "Consolidated federal taxable income" means the consolidated taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. "Consolidated federal taxable income" does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under division (A)(1) of this section. 
(4)  "Incumbent local exchange carrier" has the same meaning as in O.R.C. section 4927.01. 
(5)  "Local exchange telephone service" has the same meaning as in O.R.C. section 5727.01. 
(B)  (1)  A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year if at least one (1) member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to municipal income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is required under federal law. The election continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under division (B)(2) of this section or a taxpayer receives permission from the tax commissioner. The tax commissioner shall approve such a request for good cause shown. 
(2)  An election to discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under this section must be made on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year following the last year of a five-year consolidated tax return election period in effect under division (B)(1) of this section. The election to discontinue filing a consolidated tax return is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election. 
(3)  An election made under division (B)(1) or (2) of this section is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a municipal income tax. 
(4)  When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under C.O. § 203.80, a valid election made by the taxpayer under division (S)(1) or (2) of C.O. § 203.05 is binding upon the tax commissioner for the remainder of the five-year period. 
(5)  When an election made under C.O. § 203.80 is terminated, a valid election made under this section is binding upon the tax administrator for the remainder of the five-year period. 
(C)  A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated tax return for that taxable year if the tax commissioner determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net profits to a municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated tax return for all subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission from the commissioner to file a separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances. 
(D)  A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated tax return in the same manner as is required under the United States department of treasury regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member. 
(E)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(2), (3), and (4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in C.O. § 203.81, by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income" for "federal taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income" appears in that division and by substituting "an affiliated group of corporation's" for "a C corporation's" wherever "a C corporation's" appears in that division. 
(2)  No corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall make any adjustment otherwise required under division (B) of C.O. § 203.81 to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the computation of consolidated federal taxable income. 
(3)  If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least eighty percent (80%) of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall do one of the following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or loss for that taxable year: 
(a)  Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purpose of making the computations required in C.O. § 203.82, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
(b)  Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purpose of making the computations required in C.O. § 203.82, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
(4)  If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than eighty percent (80%) of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all of the following shall apply: 
(a)  The corporation filing the consolidated tax return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purposes of making the computations required in C.O. § 203.82, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation; 
(b)  The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 
(F)  Corporations filing a consolidated tax return shall make the computations required under C.O. § 203.82 by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income attributable to" for "net profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in that section and by substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever "taxpayer" appears in that section. 
(G)  Each corporation filing a consolidated tax return is jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges, or other amounts applicable under C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 or O.R.C. Chapter 5703 to the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one (1) or more members of such an affiliated group. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-20-2018) 
§ 203.87 - FAILURE TO PAY TAX. 
    If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under C.O. § 203.80 fails to pay any tax as required under C.O. § 203.80 to 203.95, or any portion of that tax, on or before the date prescribed for its payment, interest shall be assessed, collected, and paid, in the same manner as the tax, upon such unpaid amount at the rate per annum prescribed by O.R.C. section 5703.47 from the date prescribed for its payment until it is paid or until the date an assessment is issued under C.O. § 203.90, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-20-2018) 
§ 203.88 - DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAXES. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Combined tax liability" means the total amount of a taxpayer's income tax liabilities to all municipal corporations in this state for a taxable year. 
(2)  "Estimated taxes" means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably estimates to be the taxpayer's combined tax liability for the current taxable year. 
(B)  (1)  Except as provided in division (B)(4) of this section, every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the tax commissioner, if the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(2)  Except as provided in division (B)(4) of this section, a taxpayer having a taxable year of less than twelve (12) months shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the commissioner. 
(3)  The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of the taxable year or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time. 
(4)  The tax commissioner may waive the requirement for filing a declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other factors. 
(C)  Each taxpayer shall file the declaration of estimated taxes with, and remit estimated taxes to, the tax commissioner at the times and in the amounts prescribed in division (C)(1) of this section. Remitted taxes shall be made payable to the treasurer of state. 
(1)  The required portion of the combined tax liability for the taxable year that shall be paid through estimated taxes shall be as follows: 
(a)  On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of the taxable year, twenty-two and one-half percent (221/2%) of the combined tax liability for the taxable year; 
(b)  On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the beginning of the taxable year, forty-five percent (45%) of the combined tax liability for the taxable year; 
(c)  On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the beginning of the taxable year, sixty-seven and one-half percent (671/2%) of the combined tax liability for the taxable year; 
(d)  On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the taxable year, ninety percent (90%) of the combined tax liability for the taxable year. 
(2)  If the taxpayer determines that its declaration of estimated taxes will not accurately reflect the taxpayer's tax liability for the taxable year, the taxpayer shall increase or decrease, as appropriate, its subsequent payments in equal installments to result in a more accurate payment of estimated taxes. 
(3)  (a)  Each taxpayer shall report on the declaration of estimated taxes the portion of the remittance that the taxpayer estimates that it owes to each municipal corporation for the taxable year. 
(b)  Upon receiving a payment of estimated taxes under this section, the commissioner shall immediately forward the payment to the treasurer of state. The treasurer shall credit the payment in the same manner as in O.R.C. division (B) of section 718.85. 
(D)  (1)  In the case of any underpayment of estimated taxes, there shall be added to the taxes an amount determined at the rate per annum prescribed by O.R.C. section 5703.47 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (E) of this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows: 
(a)  For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, twenty-two and one-half percent (221/2%) of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
(b)  For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, forty-five percent (45%) of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
(c)  For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, sixty-seven and one-half percent (671/2%) of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 
(d)  For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, ninety percent (90%) of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment. 
(2)  The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment presently due. 
(3)  All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as taxes collected under C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 and shall be credited and distributed to municipal corporations in accordance with O.R.C. section 718.83. 
(E)  An underpayment of any portion of a combined tax liability shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least ninety percent (90%) of the combined tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due. 
(2)  The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least one hundred percent (100%) of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a period of twelve (12) months and the taxpayer filed a municipal income tax return for that year. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-20-2018) 
§ 203.89 - ADDITIONAL PENALTIES. 
(A)  In addition to any other penalty imposed by C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 or O.R.C. Chapter 5703, the following penalties shall apply: 
(1)  If a taxpayer required to file a tax return under C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 fails to make and file the return within the time prescribed, including any extensions of time granted by the tax commissioner, the commissioner may impose a penalty not exceeding twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month or fraction of a month, for each month or fraction of a month elapsing between the due date, including extensions of the due date, and the date on which the return is filed. The aggregate penalty, per instance, under this division shall not exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(2)  If a person required to file a tax return electronically under C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 fails to do so, the commissioner may impose a penalty not to exceed the following: 
(a)  For each of the first two (2) failures, five percent (5%) of the amount required to be reported on the return; 
(b)  For the third and any subsequent failure, ten percent (10%) of the amount required to be reported on the return. 
(3)  If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under C.O. § 203.80 fails to timely pay an amount of tax required to be paid under this chapter, the commissioner may impose a penalty equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the amount not timely paid. 
(4)  If a taxpayer files what purports to be a tax return required by C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 that does not contain information upon which the substantial correctness of the return may be judged or contains information that on its face indicates that the return is substantially incorrect, and the filing of the return in that manner is due to a position that is frivolous or a desire that is apparent from the return to delay or impede the administration of C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95, a penalty of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be imposed. 
(5)  If a taxpayer makes a fraudulent attempt to evade the reporting or payment of the tax required to be shown on any return required under C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the greater of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or one hundred percent (100%) of the tax required to be shown on the return. 
(6)  If any person makes a false or fraudulent claim for a refund under C.O. § 203.91, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the greater of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or one hundred percent (100%) of the claim. Any penalty imposed under this division, any refund issued on the claim, and interest on any refund from the date of the refund, may be assessed under C.O. § 203.90 without regard to any time limitation for the assessment imposed by division (A) of that section. 
(B)  For purposes of this section, the tax required to be shown on a tax return shall be reduced by the amount of any part of the tax paid on or before the date, including any extensions of the date, prescribed for filing the return. 
(C)  Each penalty imposed under this section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this section. All or part of any penalty imposed under this section may be abated by the tax commissioner. The commissioner may adopt rules governing the imposition and abatement of such penalties. 
(D)  All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as taxes collected under C.O. § 203.80 to 203.95 and shall be credited and distributed to municipal corporations in the same proportion as the underlying tax liability is required to be distributed to such municipal corporations under O.R.C. section 718.83. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-20-2018) 
§ 203.90 - ASSESSMENTS AGAINST TAXPAYER. 
(A)  If any taxpayer required to file a return under C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 fails to file the return within the time prescribed, files an incorrect return, or fails to remit the full amount of the tax due for the period covered by the return, the tax commissioner may make an assessment against the taxpayer for any deficiency for the period for which the return or tax is due, based upon any information in the commissioner's possession. 
The tax commissioner shall not make or issue an assessment against a taxpayer more than three (3) years after the later of the date the return subject to assessment was required to be filed or the date the return was filed. Such time limit may be extended if both the taxpayer and the commissioner consent in writing to the extension. Any such extension shall extend the three-year time limit in C.O. § 203.91 for the same period of time. There shall be no bar or limit to an assessment against a taxpayer that fails to file a return subject to assessment as required by C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95, or that files a fraudulent return. The commissioner shall give the taxpayer assessed written notice of the assessment as provided in O.R.C. section 5703.37. With the notice, the commissioner shall provide instructions on how to petition for reassessment and request a hearing on the petition. 
(B)  Unless the taxpayer assessed files with the tax commissioner within sixty (60) days after service of the notice of assessment, either personally or by certified mail, a written petition for reassessment signed by the authorized agent of the taxpayer assessed having knowledge of the facts, the assessment becomes final, and the amount of the assessment is due and payable from the taxpayer to the treasurer of state. The petition shall indicate the taxpayer's objections, but additional objections may be raised in writing if received by the commissioner prior to the date shown on the final determination. If the petition has been properly filed, the commissioner shall proceed under O.R.C. section 5703.60. 
(C)  After an assessment becomes final, if any portion of the assessment remains unpaid, including accrued interest, a certified copy of the tax commissioner's entry making the assessment final may be filed in the office of the clerk of the court of common pleas in the county in which the taxpayer has an office or place of business in this state, the county in which the taxpayer's statutory agent is located, or Franklin county. 
Immediately upon the filing of the entry, the clerk shall enter a judgment against the taxpayer assessed in the amount shown on the entry. The judgment may be filed by the clerk in a loose-leaf book entitled "special judgments for municipal income taxes," and shall have the same effect as other judgments. Execution shall issue upon the judgment upon the request of the tax commissioner, and all laws applicable to sales on execution shall apply to sales made under the judgment. 
If the assessment is not paid in its entirety within sixty (60) days after the day the assessment was issued, the portion of the assessment consisting of tax due shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by O.R.C. section 5703.47 from the day the commissioner issues the assessment until the assessment is paid or until it is certified to the attorney general for collection under O.R.C. section 131.02, whichever comes first. If the unpaid portion of the assessment is certified to the attorney general for collection, the entire unpaid portion of the assessment shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by O.R.C. section 5703.47 from the date of certification until the date it is paid in its entirety. Interest shall be paid in the same manner as the tax and may be collected by issuing an assessment under this section. 
(D)  All money collected under this section shall be credited to the municipal income tax fund and distributed to the municipal corporation to which the money is owed based on the assessment issued under this section. 
(E)  If the tax commissioner believes that collection of the tax will be jeopardized unless proceedings to collect or secure collection of the tax are instituted without delay, the commissioner may issue a jeopardy assessment against the taxpayer liable for the tax. Immediately upon the issuance of the jeopardy assessment, the commissioner shall file an entry with the clerk of the court of common pleas in the manner prescribed by division (C) of this section. Notice of the jeopardy assessment shall be served on the taxpayer assessed or the taxpayer's legal representative in the manner provided in O.R.C. section 5703.37 within five (5) days of the filing of the entry with the clerk. The total amount assessed is immediately due and payable, unless the taxpayer assessed files a petition for reassessment in accordance with division (B) of this section and provides security in a form satisfactory to the commissioner and in an amount sufficient to satisfy the unpaid balance of the assessment. Full or partial payment of the assessment does not prejudice the commissioner's consideration of the petition for reassessment. 
(F)  Notwithstanding the fact that a petition for reassessment is pending, the taxpayer may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of the petition. The acceptance of a payment by the treasurer of state does not prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the petition. 
If upon final determination of the petition an error in the assessment is corrected by the tax commissioner, upon petition so filed or pursuant to a decision of the board of tax appeals or any court to which the determination or decision has been appealed, so that the amount due from the taxpayer under the corrected assessment is less than the portion paid, there shall be issued to the taxpayer, its assigns, or legal representative a refund in the amount of the overpayment as provided by C.O. § 203.91, with interest on that amount as provided by that section. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-20-2018) 
§ 203.91 - REFUND APPLICATIONS. 
(A)  An application to refund to a taxpayer the amount of taxes paid on any illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of tax under C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95, including assessments, shall be filed with the tax commissioner within three (3) years after the date of the illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of the tax, or within any additional period allowed by division (A) of C.O. § 203.90. The application shall be filed in the form prescribed by the tax commissioner. 
(B)  (1)  On the filing of a refund application, the tax commissioner shall determine the amount of refund to which the applicant is entitled. The amount determined shall be based on the amount overpaid per return or assessment. If the amount is greater than ten dollars ($10.00) and not less than that claimed, the commissioner shall certify that amount to the director of budget and management and the treasurer of state for payment from the tax refund fund created in O.R.C. section 5703.052. If the amount is greater than ten dollars ($10.00) but less than that claimed, the commissioner shall proceed in accordance with O.R.C. section 5703.70. 
(2)  Upon issuance of a refund under this section, the commissioner shall notify each municipal corporation of the amount refunded to the taxpayer attributable to that municipal corporation, which shall be deducted from the municipal corporation's next distribution under O.R.C. section 718.83. 
(C)  Any portion of a refund determined under division (B) of this section that is not issued within ninety (90) days after such determination shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by O.R.C. section 5703.47 from the ninety-first (91 st ) day after such determination until the day the refund is paid or credited. On an illegal or erroneous assessment, interest shall be paid at that rate from the date of payment on the illegal or erroneous assessment until the day the refund is paid or credited. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-20-2018) 
§ 203.92 - AMENDED RETURNS. 
(A)  If any of the facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in an annual return filed by a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under C.O. § 203.80 and used to determine the tax due under C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 must be altered as the result of an adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return, whether initiated by the taxpayer or the internal revenue service, and such alteration affects the taxpayer's tax liability under those sections, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with the tax commissioner in such form as the commissioner requires. The amended return shall be filed not later than sixty (60) days after the adjustment is agreed upon or finally determined for federal income tax purposes or after any federal income tax deficiency or refund, or the abatement or credit resulting therefrom, has been assessed or paid, whichever occurs first. If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax return, the taxpayer shall notify the commissioner before filing the amended return. 
(B)  In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any penalty and interest thereon. An amended return required by this section is a return subject to assessment under C.O. § 203.90 for the purpose of assessing any additional tax due under this section, together with any applicable penalty and interest. The amended return shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously filed return no longer subject to assessment that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal tax return. 
(C)  In the case of an overpayment, an application for refund may be filed under this division within the sixty-day period prescribed for filing the amended return, even if that period extends beyond the period prescribed in C.O. § 203.91, if the application otherwise conforms to the requirements of that section. An application filed under this division shall claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return unless it is also filed within the time prescribed in C.O. § 203.91. The application shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-20-2018) 
§ 203.93 - EXAMINATION OF RECORDS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS AND PERSONS. 
(A)  The tax commissioner, or any authorized agent or employee thereof, may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns of any taxpayer or other person that is subject to C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was filed, to ascertain the tax due as required under those sections. Upon written request by the commissioner or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every taxpayer or other person subject to this section is required to furnish the opportunity for the commissioner, authorized agent, or employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the request. 
(B)  The records and other documents of any taxpayer or other person that is subject to C.O. §§ 203.80 to 203.95 shall be open to the tax commissioner's inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six (6) years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents relate, unless the commissioner, in writing, consents to their destruction within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The commissioner may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep such records as the commissioner determines necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax levied by a municipal corporation. 
(C)  The tax commissioner may examine under oath any person that the commissioner reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect such income. The commissioner may, for this purpose, compel any such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers, records, and federal income tax returns in such person's possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney. 
(D)  No person issued written notice by the tax commissioner compelling attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers, records, or federal income tax returns under this section shall fail to comply. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-20-2018) 
§ 203.94 - CREDITS. 
(A)  A credit, granted by resolution or ordinance of the city pursuant to O.R.C. section 718.15 or 718.151 shall be available to a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under C.O. § 203.80, against the municipal corporation's tax on income. A municipal corporation shall submit the following information to the tax commissioner on or before the later of January 31, 2018, or the thirty-first (31 st ) day of January of the first year in which the taxpayer is eligible to receive the credit: 
(1)  A copy of the agreement entered into by the city and taxpayer under O.R.C. section 718.15 or 718.151. 
(2)  A copy of the ordinance or resolution authorizing the agreement entered into between the city and the taxpayer. 
(B)  (1)  Each taxpayer that claims a credit shall submit, with the taxpayer's tax return, documentation issued by the city granting the credit that confirms the eligibility of the taxpayer for the credit, the amount of the credit for which the taxpayer is eligible, and the tax year to which the credit is to be applied. 
(2)  Such documentation shall be provided in the form prescribed by the tax commissioner. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the tax commissioner to enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to grant a credit, to determine if a taxpayer meets the conditions of a tax credit agreement entered into by the city and taxpayer under O.R.C. section 718.15 or 718.151 or to modify the terms or conditions of any such existing agreement. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-20-2018) 
§ 203.95 - RECKLESS VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES. 
(A)  Except as provided in division (B) of this section, whoever recklessly violates division (A) of C.O. § 203.84 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a term of up to six (6) months, or both. 
(B)  Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of division (A) of C.O. § 203.84 constitutes a separate offense. 
(C)  These specific penalties shall not be construed to prevent the city from prosecuting any and all other offenses that may apply. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-20-2018) 
§ 203.99 - VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES. 
(A)  Whoever violates C.O. § 203.17, C.O. § 203.16(A), or C.O. § 203.4 by failing to remit the city income taxes deducted and withheld from an employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a term of up to six (6) months, or both. If the individual that commits the violation is an employee, or official, of the city, the individual is subject to discharge from employment or dismissal from office. 
(B)  Any person who discloses information received from the Internal Revenue Service in violation of C.O. § 203.16(A) shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) plus the costs of prosecution, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five (5) years, or both. If the individual that commits the violation is an employee, or official, of the city, the individual is subject to discharge from employment or dismissal from office. 
(C)  Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of C.O. § 203.16(A) constitutes a separate offense. 
(D)  If not otherwise specified herein, no person shall: 
(1)  Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required by this chapter; 
(2)  File any incomplete or false return; 
(3)  Fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter; 
(4)  Refuse to permit the tax administrator or any duly authorized agent or employee to examine his books, records, papers and federal and state income tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer; 
(5)  Fail to appear before the tax administrator and to produce his books, records, papers or federal and state income tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the tax administrator; 
(6)  Refuse to disclose to the tax administrator any information with respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer; 
(7)  Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or subpoena of the tax administrator authorized hereby; 
(8)  Give to an employer false information as to his true name, correct social security number, and residence address, or fail to promptly notify an employer of any change in residence address and date thereof; 
(9)  Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter. 
(E)  Any person who violates any of the provisions in C.O. § 203.99(D) shall be subject to the penalties provided for in C.O. § 203.99(A) of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
CHAPTER 205. - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 76-2015, § 5, adopted November 23, 2015 , renumbered Chapter 202 as Chapter 205. 

§ 205.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Accommodations remarketer: means a person that reserves, arranges for, conveys, or furnishes occupancy, whether directly or indirectly, to a transient guest for a rental amount determined by the accommodations remarketer, directly or indirectly, whether pursuant to a written or other agreement, or who contracts with a vendor to market the hotel or transient accommodation and to accept payment from the transient guest for the accommodation. Examples of accommodations remarketers include, but are not limited to, online travel companies and discount travel services. 
    Exempted entity: means the government of the United States, the government of the State of Ohio, the governments of States other than Ohio, the governments of political subdivisions in the State of Ohio, the governments of political subdivisions of states other than Ohio, and organizations that are exempt from federal income taxation under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3). 
    Hotel: means every establishment kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered to guest(s), in which five (5) or more rooms are used for the accommodation of such guests, whether such rooms are in one (1) or several structures. The term "Hotel" shall include "Motel". 
    Transient accommodations: means every establishment kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered to guests in which four (4) or fewer rooms are used for the accommodation of such guests, whether such rooms are in one (1) or several structures. 
    Transient guests: means person(s) occupying a room or rooms for sleeping accommodations for less than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
    Vendor: means the person who is the owner or operator of the hotel or transient accommodation and who furnishes the lodging. 
(Ord. No. 28-2014; Ord. No. 76-2015, § 5, 11-23-15 ) 
§ 205.02 - IMPOSITION OF TAX. 
(A)  To provide for the purposes of general municipal operations, capital improvements, maintenance and repair of equipment, streets and other physical properties, purchase of new equipment, and the payment of principal and interest on bonds issued by the city, an excise tax of three percent (3%) is hereby levied on transactions by which lodging by a hotel or transient accommodations is or is to be furnished to transient guests, pursuant to ORC § 5739.08 and furthermore, an additional excise tax of three percent (3%) is hereby levied on transactions by which lodging by a hotel or transient accommodation is or is to be furnished to transient guests pursuant to ORC § 5739.09. Purchase of a room or rooms by a transient guest through an accommodations remarketer is a transaction by which a hotel or transient accommodation is to be furnished to transient guests and is subject to tax at the price paid by the transient guest to the accommodations remarketer. 
(B)  Although the above levies are separate and distinct for purposes of determining distribution, the combined amounts of six percent (6%) are hereby referred to as the "Hotel/Motel Excise Taxes". 
(C)  The tax applies and is collectible at the time the lodging is furnished regardless of the time when the price is paid. The tax does not apply to lodging furnished to exempted entities. Lodging shall be considered to be furnished to an exempted entity only if the lodging is purchased by an agent of the exempted entity and directly purchased with the exempted entity's funds. For purposes of this section, lodging purchased with a credit card on which the exempted entity is the primary accountholder shall be considered to have been directly purchased with the exempted entity's funds. 
(D)  For the purpose of the proper administration of this chapter, and to prevent the evasion of the tax it is presumed that all transactions for lodging furnished by hotels or transient accommodations in the city to transient guests are subject to tax until the contrary is established by the transient guest. 
(E)  All revenues generated by this excise tax will be distributed as follows: 
(1)  The entire excise tax collected pursuant to ORC § 5739.08 shall be deposited into the general fund. 
(2)  The additional excise tax collected pursuant to ORC § 5739.09 to be distributed as follows: 50% shall be deposited into the Upper Arlington Visitors' Bureau Fund, which is hereby created, and which shall be spent solely to make contributions to convention and visitors' bureaus operating within Franklin County as directed by city council. The remaining 50% shall be deposited into the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 35-2011, 7-13-2011; Ord. No. 66-2013; Ord. No. 76-2015, § 5, 11-23-15 ) 
§ 205.03 - TRANSIENT GUEST TO PAY TAX. 
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the transient guest to the vendor and each vendor shall collect from the transient guest the full and exact amount of the tax payable on each taxable lodging. 
If the tax is claimed to be exempt, the transient guest must furnish to the vendor, and the vendor must obtain from the transient guest, a statement specifying the reason that the sale is not legally subject to the tax. If no statement is obtained, it shall be presumed the tax applied. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 5, 11-23-15 ) 
§ 205.04 - REFUND OF ILLEGAL OR ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS. 
The director of finance shall refund to vendors the amount of taxes paid illegally or erroneously or paid on any illegal or erroneous assessment where the vendor has not reimbursed himself from the transient guest. When such illegal or erroneous payment or assessment was not paid to a vendor but was paid by the transient guest directly to the city, the finance director shall refund the appropriate amount to the transient guest. Applications shall be filed with the finance director on the form prescribed by him, within ninety (90) days of the date it is ascertained that the assessment or payment was illegal or erroneous. However, in any event such application for refund must be filed with the finance director within four (4) years from the date of the illegal or erroneous payment of the tax. On filing of such application, the finance director shall determine the amount of refund due and issue the refund to the person claiming such refund. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 5, 11-23-15 ) 
§ 205.05 - REQUIRED RECORDS. 
Each vendor shall keep complete and accurate records of lodging furnished, together with a record of the tax collected thereon, which shall be the amount due under this chapter and shall keep all invoices and such other pertinent documents. If the vendor furnishes lodging not subject to the tax, the vendor's records shall show the identity of the transient guests, if the sale was exempted by reason of such identify, or the nature of the transaction if exempted for any other reason. Such records and other documents shall be open during business hours to the inspection of the finance director and shall be preserved for a period of not less than four (4) years, unless the finance director, in writing, consents to their destruction within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 5, 11-23-15 ) 
§ 205.06 - RETURNS REQUIRED. 
Each vendor shall file a monthly return on forms prescribed by the finance director showing receipts from furnishing lodging, the amount of tax due from the vendor to the city for the period covered by the return, and such other information as the finance director deems necessary for the proper administration of this chapter. The monthly return is due on or before the 15 th day of each month during a calendar year. The finance director may extend the time for making and filing returns. Returns shall be filed by mailing the same to the finance director, together with payment of the amount of tax shown to be due thereon. The finance director shall record the date and amount of payment received with the return. Any vendor who fails to file a return under this chapter shall forfeit and pay into the city treasury the sum of one percent (1%) of the tax due. The director of finance, if deemed necessary in order to ensure the payment of the tax imposed by this chapter, may require returns and payments to be made for other than in monthly periods. The returns shall be signed by the vendor or authorized agent. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 5, 11-23-15 ) 
§ 205.07 - LIABILITY, ASSESSMENT AND PETITION FOR REASSESSMENT: PENALTIES. 
(A)  If any vendor collects the tax imposed by or pursuant to this chapter and fails to remit the same to the city as prescribed, such vendor shall be personally liable for any amount collected which he failed to remit. The finance director may make an assessment against such vendor based upon any information in the finance director's possession. If any vendor fails to collect the tax or any transient guest fails to pay the tax imposed by or pursuant to this chapter on any transaction subject to the tax, such vendor or transient guest shall be personally liable for the amount of the tax applicable to the transaction. The finance director may make an assessment against either the vendor or transient guest as the fact may require, based upon any information in the finance director's possession. An assessment against a vendor in cases where the tax imposed by or pursuant to this chapter has not been collected or paid, shall not discharge the transient guest's liability to reimburse the vendor for the tax applicable to such transaction. 
(B)  In each case the finance director shall give to the vendor or transient guest assessed written notice of such assessment. Such notice may be served upon the vendor or transient guest personally or by registered or certified mail. An assessment issued against either pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be considered an election of remedies, nor a bar to an assessment against the other for the tax applicable to the same transaction, provided that no assessment shall be issued against any vendor or transient guest for the tax due on a particular transaction if said tax has actually been paid by another. 
(C)  The director of finance may make an assessment against any vendor who fails to file a return required by this chapter or fails to remit the proper amount for the tax in accordance with this chapter. When information in the possession of the director of finance indicates that the amount required to be collected is, or should be, greater than the amount remitted by the vendor, the director of finance may, upon the basis of test checks of a vendor's business for a representative period, which are hereby authorized, determined the ratio which the tax required to be collected under this chapter bears to the hotel's or transient accommodations' lodging which determination shall be the basis of an assessment as herein provided in this chapter. Notice of such assessment shall be made in the manner prescribed in this chapter. 
(D)  Unless the vendor or transient guest, to whom said notice of assessment is directed, files within thirty (30) days after service thereof, either personally or by registered or certified mail a petition, in writing, verified under oath by said vendor, transient guest, or his authorized agent, having knowledge of the facts, setting forth with particularity the items of said assessment objected to, together with the reasons for such objections, said assessment shall become conclusive and the amount thereof shall be due and payable, from the vendor or transient guest so assessed, to the director of finance. When a petition for reassessment is filed, the director of finance shall assign a time and place for the hearing of same and shall notify the petitioner thereof by registered or certified mail, but the director of finance may continue the hearings from time to time if necessary. 
(E)  A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to the amount of every assessment made under this chapter. The director of finance may adopt and promulgate rules and regulations providing for the remission of penalties added to assessments made under this chapter. 
(F)  When any vendor or transient guest files a petition for reassessment as provided in this chapter, the assessment made by the finance director, together with penalties thereon, shall become due and payable within three (3) days after notice of the finding made at the hearing has been served, either personally or by registered or certified mail, upon the party assessed. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 5, 11-23-15 ) 
§ 205.08 - LIMITATION FOR ASSESSMENTS. 
No assessment shall be made or issued against a vendor or transient guest for any tax imposed by or pursuant to this chapter more than four (4) years after the return date for the period in which the lodging was furnished, or more than four (4) years after the return for such period is filed, whichever is later. This section does not bar an assessment: 
(A)  When the director of finance has substantial evidence of amounts of taxes collected by a vendor from transient guest's lodging that were not returned to the city. 
(B)  When the vendor assessed failed to file a return as required. 
(C)  When the director of finance and the vendor or guest waives the limitation in writing. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 5, 11-23-15 ) 
§ 205.09 - TAX PAID BY TRANSIENT GUEST; FALSE EVIDENCE OF TAX-EXEMPTION. 
No transient guest shall refuse to pay the full and exact tax as required by this chapter, or present to the vendor false evidence indicating that the lodging as furnished is not subject to the tax. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 5, 11-23-15 ) 
§ 205.10 - VENDOR TO COLLECT TAX; PROHIBITION AGAINST REBATES. 
No vendor shall fail to collect the full and exact tax as required by this chapter. No vendor shall refund, remit or rebate to a transient guest, either directly or indirectly any of the tax levied pursuant to this chapter, or make in any form of advertising, verbal or otherwise, any statements which might imply that he is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the transient guest by an adjustment of prices, or furnishing lodging at a price including the tax, or rebating the tax in any other manner. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 5, 11-23-15 ) 
§ 205.11 - REPORT FILINGS. 
No person, including any officer of a corporation or employee of a corporation having control or supervision of or charged with the responsibility of filing returns, shall fail to file any return or report required to be filed by this chapter, or file or cause to be filed any incomplete, false or fraudulent return, report or statement. 
If any vendor required to file monthly returns under this chapter fails on two (2) consecutive months or on three (3) or more months within a twelve-month period, to file such returns when due or to pay the tax thereon, or if any other vendor authorized by the finance director to file returns at less frequent intervals, fails on two (2) or more occasions within a twenty-four-month period, to file such returns when due or to pay the tax due thereon, the finance director may: require such vendor to furnish security in an amount equal to the average tax liability of the vendor for a period of one (1) year, as determined by the finance director from a review of returns or other information pertaining to such vendor, which amount shall in no event be less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The security may be in the form of a payment to be applied to pay the tax due on subsequent returns, or a corporate surety bond, satisfactory to the finance director, conditioned upon payment of the tax due with the returns from the vendor. The security must be filed within ten (10) days following the vendor's receipt of the notice from the finance director of its requirements. 
A corporate surety bond filed under this section shall be returned to the vendor if, for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months following the date the bond was filed, the vendor has filed all returns and remitted payment therewith within the time prescribed in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 5, 11-23-15 ) 
§ 205.12 - PERSONAL LIABILITY OF CORPORATE OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES. 
If any vendor corporation required to file returns and to remit tax due to the city under the provisions of the chapter, fails for any reasons to make such filing or payment, any of its officers or employees charged with the responsibility of filing returns and making payments shall be personally liable for such failure. The dissolution of a corporation shall not discharge an officer or employee's liability for a prior failure of the corporation to file returns or remit tax due. The sum due for such liability may be collected by assessment in the manner provided in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 5, 11-23-15 ) 
§ 205.13 - INTEREST ON UNPAID COLLECTED TAXES. 
All taxes collected by a vendor from a transient guest and remaining unpaid after they become due pursuant to this chapter shall bear interest computed daily on the amount of such unpaid taxes at the maximum statutory rate permitted by ORC § 5703.47. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 5, 11-23-15 ) 
§ 205.90 - VIOLATIONS. 
(A)  No transient guest shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, interest and penalties imposed by this chapter. 
(B)  No vendor shall fail, neglect or refuse to collect from a transient guest the taxes imposed by this chapter. 
(C)  No vendor shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay the taxes collected from a transient guest or the interest and penalties imposed by this chapter. 
(D)  No person shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, § 5, 11-23-15 ) 
§ 205.99 - PENALTIES. 
(A)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided herein, a violation of C.O. § 205.90(A), (B), or (D) shall be a minor misdemeanor as defined in C.O. ch. 501. The court shall sentence the offender to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation. 
(2)  If the offender has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of C.O. § 205.90(A), (B), (C), or (D), a violation of C.O. § 205.90(A), (B), or (D) shall be a misdemeanor of the third degree as defined in C.O. ch. 501. The court shall sentence the offender to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. 
(B)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided herein, a violation of C.O. § 205.90(C) shall be a misdemeanor of the third degree as defined in C.O. ch. 501. The court shall sentence the offender to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. 
(2)  If the offender has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of C.O. § 205.90(A), (B), (C), or (D), a violation of C.O. § 205.90(C) shall be a misdemeanor of the first degree as defined in C.O. ch. 501. The court shall sentence the offender to a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each violation. 
( Ord. No. 76-2015, §§ 4, 5, 11-23-2015 ) 
CHAPTER 221. - DEPOSITORIES AND INVESTMENTS 

§ 221.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    Active deposit: means a public deposit necessary to meet current demands on the treasury that is deposited in any of the following: 
(A)  A commercial account that is payable, in whole or in part, on demand. 
(B)  A negotiable order of withdrawal account. 
(C)  A money market deposit account. 
    Capital funds: means the sum of the following: the par value of the outstanding common capital stock, the par value of the outstanding preferred capital stock, the aggregate par value of all outstanding capital notes and debentures and the surplus. 
    Financial institution: means any eligible financial institution as defined in ORC § 135.03. 
    Interim moneys: means public moneys in the treasury of the city, which are not needed for immediate use and are available for investment. 
    Oversight agency: In the case of a bank means the superintendent of banks or the comptroller of the currency, and in the case of a savings and loan association, the superintendent of building and loan associations or the Federal Home Loan Bank Board. 
    Public deposit: means public moneys deposited in a public depository. 
    Public depository: means an institution which receives or holds any public deposits. 
    Public moneys: means all moneys in the city treasury or moneys coming lawfully into the possession or custody of the finance director. 
§ 221.02 - INSTITUTIONS ELIGIBLE FOR ACTIVE DEPOSITS. 
Any financial institution located in the City of Upper Arlington is an institution, which is eligible to become a public depository for active deposits. 
§ 221.03 - INSTITUTIONS INELIGIBLE AS PUBLIC DEPOSITORIES. 
No financial institution is eligible to become a public depository or to receive any new public deposits if: 
(A)  In the case of a bank, the bank or any of its directors, officers, employees or controlling shareholders is currently a party to an active final or temporary cease-and-desist order issued under ORC § 1125.08. 
(B)  In the case of an association, the association or any of its directors, officers, employees, or controlling shareholders is currently a party to an active final or temporary cease-and-desist order issued under ORC § 1155.02. 
§ 221.04 - CONTRACT WITH THE DEPOSITORY FOR ACTIVE DEPOSITS. 
Within sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the depository contract, the finance director shall prepare and distribute a request for proposals (RFP) for obtaining bids for active deposits from eligible institutions. The RFP shall include qualifications required by the institution, descriptions of the accounts required, recent activity of the current accounts, provisions for investment of excess funds and such other information as is deemed necessary by the finance director. 
Institutions desiring to submit proposals shall provide appropriate financial data as specified in the RFP, and shall provide a financial statement in sufficient detail as to show the capital funds of the applicant. 
The RFP shall be mailed to each eligible institution, provided that if an institution has more than one (1) branch office in the City of Upper Arlington, the RFP need only be sent to one (1) of the branches. 
The finance director shall evaluate all proposals and make a recommendation for the award of the depository for active deposits. After approval by city council, a contractual agreement shall be executed. The contract can be for a period of up to five (5) years. 
§ 221.05 - INVESTMENT OF INTERIM MONEYS. 
The finance director shall determine the amount of interim moneys available for deposit, based on the anticipated cash flow requirements. Interim moneys may be invested in securities maturing more than two (2) years from the date of purchase provided that the securities can be converted to cash through trade in a secondary market prior to maturity. 
§ 221.06 - AUTHORIZED INVESTMENT INSTRUMENTS. 
The following instruments are authorized for investment purposes: 
(A)  U.S. Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds; various federal agency securities including issues of Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA), Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. (FHLMC), Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB), Federal Farm Credit Bank (FFCB), Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA), Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) and other agencies or instrumentalities of the United States. GNMA mortgage-backed, pass-through securities are considered as eligible investments of the city and are not derivative securities, as defined under ORC § 135.14(C). Eligible investments include securities that may be "called", by the issuer, prior to the final maturity date. Any eligible investment may be purchased at a premium or a discount. All federal agency securities shall be direct issuances of federal government agencies or instrumentalities. 
(B)  General obligations of the State of Ohio. 
(C)  General obligations of any county, township, school district, municipal corporation, or other legally constituted taxing subdivision of Ohio, which is not at the time of such investment, in default in the payment of principal on any of its obligations, provided that all of the following apply: 
(1)  The debt is payable from the general revenues and backed by the full faith and credit of the political subdivision 
(2)  The debt is rated at the time of purchase in the three highest classifications of at least one nationally recognized rating agency and purchased through a registered securities broker or dealer. 
(3)  The aggregate value of the bonds/obligations does not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the portfolio. 
(4)  The city is not the sole buyer of the issue. 
(D)  Certificates of deposit issued by institutions whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Certificates of deposit shall be collateralized using eligible securities or instruments as defined under ORC § 135.18 or 135.181. The selection of ORC § 135.18 or 135.181 for purposes of collateralization, shall be determined by the finance director. Under either method, the finance director may require an additional percentage of eligible collateral to compensate for any depreciation of market value of such pledged collateral, less any portion insured by the FDIC. 
(E)  Repurchase agreements with any eligible institution mentioned in ORC § 135.03, or any eligible securities dealer pursuant to ORC § 135.14(M). Repurchase agreements transacted with eligible securities dealers shall be executed on a delivery versus payment basis. Eligible repurchase agreement collateral is restricted to securities listed in C.O. § 221.06(A), limited to final maturity dates of ten (10) years. The market value of securities subject to a repurchase agreement must exceed the principal value of the repurchase agreement amount by at least two (2) percent and marked to market daily. Term repurchase agreements shall be limited to a maximum of thirty (30) days. 
(F)  Banker's acceptances issued by any domestic bank rated in the highest category by one of two nationally recognized rating agencies. 
(G)  No load money market mutual funds consisting exclusively of obligations described in ORC § 135.14(B)(1) or (2) and repurchase agreements secured by such obligations, provided that investments in securities described in this division are made only through eligible institutions mentioned in ORC § 135.03. 
(H)  Commercial paper notes issued by an entity that is defined in ORC § 1705.01(D) and that has assets exceeding five hundred million dollars ($500,000,000.00), to which notes all of the following apply: 
(1)  The notes are rated at the time of purchase in the highest classification established by at least two (2) nationally recognized standard rating services. 
(2)  The aggregate value of the notes does not exceed ten (10) percent of the aggregate value of the outstanding commercial paper of the issuing corporation. 
(3)  The notes mature not later than two hundred seventy (270) days after purchase. 
(4)  The investment in commercial paper notes of a single issuer shall not exceed in the aggregate five (5) percent of interim moneys available for investment at the time of purchase. 
(I)  Medium term notes issued by a corporation, domiciled within the United States and having assets in excess of $500 million, provided that such medium term notes have a maximum maturity of five (5) years and are rated, at the time of purchase, by Standard & Poor's, Moody's or Fitch under the following limitations: 
Standard & Poor's Moody's Fitch A+(2-yr max maturity) A1(2-yr max maturity) A+(2-yr max maturity) A(2-yr max maturity) A2(2-yr max maturity) A(2-yr max maturity) A-(2-yr max maturity) A3(2-yr max maturity) A-(2-yr max maturity) AA+(3-yr max maturity) Aa1(3-yr max maturity) AA+(3-yr max maturity) AA(3-yr max maturity) Aa2(3-yr max maturity) AA(3-yr max maturity) AA-(3-yr max maturity) Aa3(3-yr max maturity) AA-(3-yr max maturity) AAA(maturities > 3 years) Aaa(maturities>3-years) AAA(maturities > 3 years)  
If a security has a split rating, the higher of the two (2) ratings shall be used to determine the eligibility for investment purposes. In no event shall a corporate security, at the time of purchase, be rated less than A- by Standard & Poor's or less than an A3 by Moody's. 
(J)  The state treasurer's investment pool (STAR OHIO), pursuant to ORC § 135.45. 
( Ord. No. 38-2016, § 1, 7-11-2016 ; Ord. No. 75-2018 , § 1, 10-22-2018) 
§ 221.07 - LIMITATIONS ON INVESTMENTS. 
(A)  Limitations on investments of any single institution or issuer: 
(1)  The city's investment with any individual issuer shall not constitute more than five percent (5%) of such issuer's total outstanding issue in banker's acceptances, commercial paper or corporate medium term notes. 
(2)  The total value of certificates of deposit, purchased from any individual financial institution, shall not exceed three percent (3%) of that institutions total time deposits, provided that such total deposits do not exceed five percent (5%) of the city's average portfolio at the time of purchase. 
(B)  Limitations on the investment of interim funds: The aggregate investments in bankers acceptances and commercial paper shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the city's average portfolio, at the time of purchase. 
(1)  The aggregate total of all corporate medium term notes shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the average portfolio, based upon purchase cost or book value, at the time of purchase. Commercial paper and bankers acceptances shall not be considered when calculating the maximum holdings in any single issuer. 
(2)  The use of derivative securities, as defined in ORC § 135.14 (C), is expressly prohibited. 
(3)  Collateralized mortgage obligations (CMOs) of any kind are expressly prohibited. 
(C)  All eligible investments will mature within five (5) years from the date of settlement, unless the investment is matched to a specific obligation or debt of the city, and the investment is specifically approved by the finance director. 
§ 221.08 - COLLATERALIZATION OF CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT. 
(A)  Securities pledged as collateral by any institution shall be delivered to a qualified trustee approved by the finance director. The finance director shall accept the written receipt of the trustee describing the securities which have been deposited with the trustee by the institution, a copy of which shall also be delivered to the institution. 
If the institution fails to pay over any part of a deposit due the city, the finance director shall have the option to sell the securities delivered to the finance director, in a manner determined by the finance director. If the securities are on deposit with a trustee, the finance director may request the trustee to deliver the securities to the finance director, and the finance director shall have the option to sell the collateral. When a sale of securities has been made, the finance director shall deliver the securities versus payment, whereupon the absolute ownership of the securities shall pass to the purchasers. Any surplus remaining after deducting the principal amount and accrued interest due the city and any expenses of the sale shall be paid to the institution. 
(B)  When the institution has deposited eligible securities with a trustee for safekeeping, the institution may at any time substitute or exchange eligible securities having a current market value equal to or greater than the current market value of the securities then on deposit and for which they are to be substituted or exchanged without specific authorization only if: 
(1)  The finance director has authorized the institution to make such substitution or exchange on a continuing basis during a specified period without prior approval of each substitution or exchange. Such authorization may be effected by the finance director sending to the trustee a written notice stating that substitution may be effected on a continuing basis during a specified period which shall not extend beyond the end of the period of designation during which the notice is given. The trustee may rely upon such notice, and upon the period of authorization stated therein. 
(2)  No continuing authorization for substitution or exchange has been given by the finance director, the institution notifies the trustee and the finance director of the intended substitution or exchange, and the finance director fails to object to the trustee within ten (10) business days after the date appearing on the notice of proposed substitution. The notice to the finance director and to the trustee shall be in writing and delivered personally or by certified or registered letter with a return receipt requested. The trustee may assume in such case that the notice has been delivered to the finance director. 
(3)  The finance director gives written authorization for a substitution or exchange of specific securities. The institution shall notify the finance director of any substitution or exchange under C.O. § 221.08(B)(1) or (B)(2). Upon request from the finance director, the trustee shall furnish a statement of the securities pledged against such deposits. 
(C)  In lieu of the pledging requirements prescribed in C.O. § 221.08(B) above, the finance director may accept collateral in the form of a pool of securities pledged by the financial institution, provided that: 
(1)  Securities committed to the pool must have a market value at least equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the total amount of all public moneys on deposit with the institution secured by the pooled securities, including the portion covered by federal deposit insurance. 
(2)  The securities eligible for deposit in the pool shall be those described in C.O. §§ 221.06(A) through (C). 
(3)  The securities are deposited with a qualified trustee as described in C.O. § 221.08(A), and the fees and expenses of the trustees shall be paid by the depository. 
(4)  Each subdivision shall have an undivided security interest in the pool of securities in the proportion that the total amount of the subdivision's public moneys secured by the pool bears to the total amount of the deposits so secured. 
If the depository fails to pay over any part of the deposits due the city, the finance director shall give written notice to the trustee, and at the same time, shall send a copy of the notice to the institution. Upon receipt of the notice, the trustee shall transfer to the finance director for public sale such of the pooled securities as may be necessary to produce an amount equal to the deposits due the city and not paid over, less the portion of deposits covered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, plus any accrued interest due on the deposits. When a sale of securities has been made, the finance director shall deliver the securities versus payment, whereupon the absolute ownership of such securities shall pass to the purchasers. Any surplus after deducting the amount due the city and expenses of the sale shall be paid to the institution. 
The institution may at any time substitute, exchange or release eligible securities deposited with the trustee, provided such substitution, exchange or release does not reduce the total value of securities to an amount less than one hundred ten percent (110%) of the total amount of public deposits in the pool. 
The institution will provide a detailed quarterly statement of the face value and market value of all securities pledged to the pool, and the dollar amount of deposits thereby secured. 
§ 221.09 - APPORTIONMENT OF INVESTMENT EARNINGS. 
All investment earnings shall be credited to the general fund, with the following exceptions: 
(A)  Balances in the solid waste management fund. 
(B)  Balances in the self-insurance fund. 
Any fund for which applicable laws require the crediting of interest. 
Funds that are to be credited with investment earnings shall receive a proportionate share based on a method determined by the finance director. 
( Ord. No. 38-2016, § 2, 7-11-2016 ) 
§ 221.10 - REQUIREMENTS OF INVESTMENT ADVISORS. 
All investment advisors contracted by the city to make investment recommendations must be given a copy of C.O. ch. 221 entitled, depositories and investments. Such advisors, having read the contents of C.O. ch. 221, must acknowledge, by letter, their comprehension and receipt of the policies contained within this chapter. 
CHAPTER 223. - DISPOSITION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY 

§ 223.01 - STATEMENT OF POLICY. 
(A)  It is the policy of the city to dispose of any municipal property that is no longer needed for a public purpose. 
(B)  It is the policy of the city to make reasonable efforts to obtain the fair market value for the sale or disposition of any municipal property. 
(C)  It is the policy of the city to consider donating surplus personal property to the Upper Arlington City School District, other governmental bodies, or charitable non-profit organizations when the benefit to those entities exceeds the fair market value. 
§ 223.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
For the purposes of C.O. ch. 223 the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
(A)  Donate means the transfer of ownership of an item for less than the fair market value of such item. 
(B)  Minimal value means either: 
(1)  The estimated repair costs for the item exceeds the estimated fair market value of the repaired item, 
(2)  The estimated storage costs to store the item for future use exceeds the estimated replacement value of the item, or 
(3)  The estimated fair market value of the item is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(C)  Person means any natural or corporate person, business association or other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity. 
(D)  Real property interest means the city's fee simple estate or any lesser estate or interest in all or any part of any real property owned by the city, including but not limited to rights-of-way. 
(E)  Rights-of-way shall have the same definition as set forth in C.O. ch. 933. 
(F)  Surplus means no longer needed for a public purpose. 
§ 223.03 - SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY. 
(A)  The city manager is authorized to dispose of surplus personal property through auction, sealed bids, Internet auction, or, in the case of surplus or non-surplus personal property, by sale for a fixed price. An item of non-surplus property may only be sold for a fixed price if it is of minimal value as defined in C.O. § 223.02. 
(B)  Auctions or sealed bids shall be conducted after advertisement for not less than two (2) or more than four (4) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipal corporation. 
(C)  Internet auctions shall be conducted after notice has been posted in the municipal services center and on the city's website. Internet auctions may be conducted either by the city on its website or by an Internet auction service. The purchasing administrator may establish the minimum price and any other terms and conditions that will be accepted for each specific item. Each item of property will be posted on the Internet for a minimum of ten (10) days, including Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. If an Internet auction service is used, the fee or commission for such service shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the sale proceeds. 
(D)  Property scheduled for auction, sealed bids, or Internet auction shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. The purchasing administrator is authorized to determine the highest and best bidder and to reject any and all bids. 
(E)  The city manager and the director of finance may establish the price demanded for personal property to be disposed of by sale for a fixed price. Such price shall be the property's estimated market price, as determined by the city manager and director of finance. 
(Ord. No. 50-2013; Ord. No. 5-2017 , § 5, 2-13-2017) 
§ 223.04 - DONATIONS OF PERSONAL PROPERTY. 
(A)  The city manager is authorized to dispose of surplus personal property having an estimated fair market value of less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) by donating the item to an appropriate entity in accordance with this section. 
(B)  The city manager may donate the item to the Upper Arlington City School District. 
(C)  If the Upper Arlington School District is not interested in the item, the city manager may donate the item to another governmental body or to a non-profit charitable organization. 
(D)  The city manager may require the entity receiving the donation to pay a reduced purchase price and/or the costs associated with the delivery of the item. 
§ 223.05 - OTHER DISPOSITIONS OF PERSONAL PROPERTY. 
    The city manager is authorized to dispose of surplus personal property: 
(A)  By refuse collection when the item has minimal value; 
(B)  By destruction upon the determination of the city manager and the city attorney that the property needs to be destroyed for public safety reasons; 
(C)  By trade for goods or services of like value when such trade is determined by the city manager to be in the best interest of the city; 
(D)  By trade-in for credit at the time of the city's purchase of new or replacement property; 
(E)  By sale for a fixed price to the general public. The city manager may dispose of both surplus personal property, and non-surplus personal property that is of minimal value, as defined in C.O. § 223.02, by selling it for a fixed price determined as provided in C.O. § 223.03(E); and/or 
(F)  By recycling, when the item is damaged, obsolete and/or non-functional personal property, including, but not limited, to informational technology items and mobile devices, provided the item has minimal value. 
(Ord. No. 50-2013; Ord. No. 49-2018 , § 2, 6-25-2018) 
§ 223.06 - REQUIREMENTS FOR SALE OF REAL PROPERTY. 
(A)  Any sale, transfer, or other conveyance of a real property interest shall require a determination by the city manager that the real property interest is surplus property. 
(B)  Except as provided in C.O. § 223.07, the city manager shall obtain an independent appraisal and a survey prior to the sale, transfer, or other conveyance of a real property interest. 
(C)  Except as provided in C.O. § 223.07, the sale, transfer, or other conveyance of a real property interest shall require the approval of a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of city council. The ordinance shall describe the real property interest to be conveyed and any interests to be retained by the city. The ordinance may also describe any easements or other interests to be granted by the city to any person that is lawfully occupying the rights-of-way or owns property abutting the rights-of-way. 
(D)  Any contract, deed, lease, easement, right of entry, or other conveyance instrument shall be approved to form by the city attorney and executed on behalf of the city by the city manager. 
§ 223.07 - EXCEPTIONS. 
(A)  The city manager may sell, transfer, or otherwise convey the following real property interests without obtaining an independent appraisal or city council approval: 
(1)  A permanent or temporary non-exclusive utility easement in the real property interest. 
(2)  A lease of the Real Property Interest for a term of eighteen (18) months or less. 
(3)  A temporary construction easement or right of entry in the real property interest for less than one (1) year. 
(4)  A real property interest involving less than 0.05 acres. 
(5)  A real property interest that has an estimated fair market value of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) as certified by the finance director. 
(B)  City council may by ordinance waive any of the requirements of this chapter or provide additional requirements for the sale, transfer, or other conveyance of a particular real property interest. 
(Ord. No. 83-2013) 
§ 223.08 - SALE OF REAL PROPERTY TO ABUTTING OWNERS. 
(A)  The real property interest may be offered for sale to the abutting owners at its fair market value as determined by the appraisal. If there is more than one abutting owner, the real property interest shall be offered for sale to all abutting owners by competitive bid. The minimum bid shall be not less than one hundred percent (100%) of the fair market value of the real property interest. If none of the abutting owners submits a bid equal to or greater than the fair market value of the real property interest, the real property interest may be offered for sale to the general public by competitive sealed bid or by public auction. 
(B)  The city reserves the right to reject all bids in the event the city manager determines that no bids submitted are acceptable. 
§ 223.09 - SALE OF REAL PROPERTY TO GENERAL PUBLIC. 
(A)  The real property interest may be offered for sale to the general public by competitive bid or by public auction. The sale of the real property interest shall be advertised once a week for a period of two (2) weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipal corporation. The minimum bid for the first time a real property interest is offered to the general public shall be not less than ninety percent (90%) of its fair market value. 
(B)  A real property interest that is not sold the first time it is offered to the general public may be offered for sale to the general public at a second competitive bid or public auction without further action of the city council. The sale of the real property interest shall be advertised once a week for a period of two (2) weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipal corporation. The city manager may waive the minimum bid requirement for the second time a real property interest is offered for sale to the general public by competitive bid or public auction. 
(C)  The city reserves the right to reject all bids in the event the city manager determines that no bids submitted are acceptable. 
§ 223.10 - OBLIGATIONS OF BUYER OF REAL PROPERTY. 
(A)  In addition to payment of the purchase price, the city manager may require the highest bidder to reimburse the city for some or all of the city's costs associated with the sale of the real property interest, including but not limited to the appraiser and surveyor fees, advertising costs, auctioneer fees, real estate commissions, title insurance fees, transfer fees, document preparation costs, taxes and closing costs. 
(B)  The highest bidder shall not be exempt from compliance with the city's Unified Development Code, Building Codes or any other applicable federal, state or local law. 
§ 223.11 - TERMINATION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS IN REAL PROPERTY. 
City council may by ordinance terminate the public rights in a particular real property interest upon the conveyance of the real property interest pursuant to this chapter or C.O. ch. 933. 
§ 223.12 - VACATION OF REAL PROPERTY. 
(A)  The vacation of a real property interest pursuant to ORC § 723.04 or 723.05 shall require a determination by city council that the real property interest is no longer needed by the city for use as a right-of-way and that the sale of the real property interest is unlikely to yield a sufficient purchase price to cover the city's anticipated costs of sale. The ordinance approving the vacation of the real property interest shall describe the real property interest to be vacated and any interests to be retained by the city. The ordinance may also describe any easements or other interests to be granted by the city to anyone lawfully occupying the rights-of-way or owning property abutting the rights-of-way. 
(B)  The vacation of a real property interest pursuant to ORC § 723.09 shall require a determination by the court of common pleas that the real property interest is no longer needed by the city for use as a right-of-way and that the sale of the real property interest is unlikely to yield a sufficient purchase price to cover the city's anticipated costs of sale. The order approving the vacation of the real property interest shall describe the real property interest to be vacated and any interests to be retained by the city. The order may also describe any easements or other interests to be granted to providers having facilities in the rights-of-way or to property owners abutting the rights-of-way. 
(C)  The sale, transfer, or other conveyance of a Real Property Interest pursuant to this chapter or C.O. ch. 933 shall not be considered a vacation of the real property interest for any purpose. 
§ 223.13 - ADVERSE POSSESSION. 
(A)  No person shall acquire any interest in a real property interest by means of the adverse possession of the real property interest. 
(B)  No person shall acquire any interest in a real property interest by means of the provisions of ORC § 2305.05. 
(C)  Except as expressly provided in this chapter, no person shall acquire any interest in a real property interest without the approval of a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of city council. 
§ 223.14 - ALLOCATION OF FUNDS. 
(A)  Proceeds from the sale of surplus personal property shall be deposited in the city fund that was used to purchase the personal property. If the source of funds for the purchase is unknown or the fund no longer exists, the proceeds shall be deposited in the general fund. 
(B)  Proceeds from the sale of lost, stolen, unclaimed or seized property in the possession of the police division and disposed of at city auction shall be deposited in the general fund. The city manager may designate a portion of the proceeds from each sale of property disposed of pursuant to this section to be paid to Crime Stoppers, Inc. to be used exclusively for the payment of citizen rewards. 
(C)  Proceeds from the sale or disposition of all other personal property shall be deposited in the general fund. 
(D)  Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the proceeds of the sale of a real property interest shall be deposited into the city's general fund without restriction on future use. 
CHAPTER 225. - CITY FUNDS 

§ 225.01 - UPPER ARLINGTON SWIMMING POOL FUND. 
All revenues derived from the Upper Arlington Swimming Pools shall be credited to the Upper Arlington Swimming Pool Fund, which is hereby established. Said fund shall be used for the payment of the cost of management, maintenance and repair of said pools. 
Expenditures from said fund are subject to appropriation by city council and shall be made only for the furtherance of the Upper Arlington Swimming Pools. 
§ 225.02 - LIFELONG LEARNING AND LEISURE FUND. 
All revenues derived from programs associated with life long learning/leisure activities shall be credited to the lifelong learning and leisure fund, which is hereby established. Said fund shall be used for the payment of the cost of management and general operations of said program. 
Expenditures from said Fund are subject to appropriation by city council and shall be made only for the furtherance of the continuing education program. 
§ 225.03 - ENFORCEMENT EDUCATION FUND. 
A portion of revenues derived from fines received from operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated (OMVI) convictions shall be credited to the enforcement education fund which is hereby established. The enforcement education fund shall be used to pay the costs incurred in both enforcing and informing the public of the laws governing operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol. 
Expenditures from said fund are subject to appropriation by city council and shall be made only for the furtherance of educating/ informing the public of aforesaid laws. 
§ 225.04 - CIVIL SERVICE FUND. 
The civil service fund is hereby established and shall be used for the payment of the cost of management and general operations of the civil service commission. 
Expenditures from said fund are subject to appropriation by city council and shall be made only in support of services provided by the civil service commission. 
§ 225.05 - FORMERLY BOARD OF HEALTH FUND. 
§ 225.06 - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FUND. 
The economic development fund is hereby established and shall be used for stimulating investment in Upper Arlington by providing incentives and maintaining an attractive economic climate for business retention and expansion and new business recruitment. 
§ 225.07 - TAX INCENTIVE REVIEW FUND. 
The tax incentive review fund is hereby established to receive deposits of fees required when agreements are entered into under ORC § 3735, relative to regulations governing the metropolitan housing authority. 
Expenditures from said fund are exclusive for the purpose of complying with ORC § 3735.672 and for the purpose of performing the duties of the tax incentive review board. 
§ 225.08 - DISCRETIONARY FUND. 
The appointing authority shall maintain a discretionary fund to provide and sometimes to present such items to include food, amenities and token gifts, on occasion(s) as deemed appropriate for employee work functions, boards, commissions and community endeavors. Expenditures of such funds may include, but are not limited to, non-alcoholic beverages, meals, office refreshments, paper products, gift cards, amenities, meritorious service awards, certificates, plaques, resolutions and other similar items. 
§ 225.09 - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES FUND. 
The emergency medical services (EMS) fund is hereby established. All revenue derived from EMS billings shall be credited to this fund. Said fund shall be used for the payment of the operation of the EMS program as well as other operating and capital needs of the fire division. 
§ 225.10 - COMMUNITY FIBER OPTIC FUND. 
The community fiber optic fund is hereby established. All proceeds from grants, loans and general fund advances and any future revenue from lease payments shall be credited to this fund. Said fund shall be used for the payment of the installation and maintenance and repairs of the fiber optic network as well as the payments for the loan. 
( Ord. No. 77-2015, § 1, 11-9-2015 ) 
CHAPTER 227. - COLLECTION OF REVENUES 

§ 227.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
    Charges: means all revenues accruing to the city, including but not limited to taxes, permits, license, fees, charges, special assessments, fines, costs, penalties, and interest. 
§ 227.02 - RESPONSIBILITIES. 
(A)  The finance director is responsible for the collection of all charges. 
(B)  The departments of the city that are the reason for a particular charge accruing to the city shall provide the finance director with timely information and assistance in the collection of such charge. 
(C)  The finance director may request the assistance of the city attorney to file the appropriate civil complaint in a court of law or take other reasonable legal action to collect unpaid charges. 
(D)  The finance director is authorized to impose additional charges to recover the city's time and expenses incurred in the collection of charges remaining unpaid after the due date. 
(E)  The finance director is authorized to waive penalties and interest, compromise the amount of the charges, and accept waiver of statutes of limitations when the probable cost of collection exceeds the amount due or it is in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 40-2009) 
§ 227.03 - PENALTIES AND INTEREST. 
(A)  Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, all charges remaining unpaid for more than thirty days (30) after they become due shall bear interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month or the maximum rate permitted by law, whichever is lower. The interest shall accrue daily until all unpaid revenues and interest have been paid in full. The person responsible for the charges shall be responsible for payment of the interest. 
(B)  Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid amount due the city shall be imposed if the amount remains unpaid for more than thirty (30) days. The penalty shall increase to twenty-five percent (25%) of the unpaid amount due the city if the amount remains unpaid for more than twelve (12) months. This penalty shall be in addition to any interest imposed by subsection (A) or any other applicable interest provisions. The person responsible for the charges shall be responsible for payment of the penalty. 
(Ord. No. 40-2009) 
§ 227.04 - CHARGES ASSESSED TO PROPERTY. 
(A)  All charges relating to a service rendered or made available to a specific parcel of real property, including but not limited to, charges for solid waste collection under C.O. ch. 935, charges for stormwater drainage under C.O. ch. 937, charges for neighborhood lighting under C.O. ch. 939, charges for cutting weeds and grasses or for removing rubbish, garbage or improperly stored items under C.O. ch. 1401, are assessed against the property to which the service was rendered or made available and shall become a lien against said property, collectible the same as other liens and taxes. Transfer of ownership of such property shall not relieve the property of responsibility for charges assessed against the property. 
(B)  The fact that such charges were billed in the name of a tenant, lessee or other person or party occupying the property shall not relieve the property or the owner of the property for liability for such charges. After a tenant, lessee or other person or party occupying the property is delinquent in the payment of such charges for a period of sixty (60) days, the finance director shall notify the owner of the property of the delinquency by forwarding a statement by ordinary U.S. mail to the tax mailing address of the owner of the property as listed on the Franklin County Auditor's website, and/or to the address of the property. Thirty (30) days after said notification to the owner of the property, the delinquency for the charges shall be certified as provided in subsection (C). 
(C)  If such charges have not been paid within ninety (90) days after they are due and payable, then the finance director may, in addition to any other methods of collection, certify said charges, together with the interest and penalties allowed by law, to the Franklin County Auditor to be placed on the tax list and duplicate for the specific parcel of real property. 
§ 227.05 - RIGHTS OF PURCHASER. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not bar or prejudice the rights a purchaser may have against the prior owner of property for reimbursement of any charges, as provided herein, incurred prior to the transfer of title to the property, or any other rights that a purchaser may have against the prior owner of the property, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008) 
Part 3 - TRAFFIC CODE 
CHAPTER 301. - DEFINITIONS 

§ 301.01 - DEFINITIONS (A-C). 
The following words and phrases when used in this traffic code or any traffic ordinance of the city shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter unless otherwise stated. 
    Agricultural tractor: means every self-propelling vehicle designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision for carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used for agricultural purposes. 
    Alley: means a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings in the city and is intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic, and includes any street or highway that has been declared an alley by council or the city manager or designee. 
    Arterial street: means any United States or state numbered route, controlled access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or highway within the city designated by council or the city manager or designee as part of a major arterial system of streets. 
    Articulated passenger bus type vehicle: means a vehicle with three (3) axles supporting two (2) connected passenger compartments that are connected by a joint that allows the bus to bend when making turns. 
    Assembled: means, in regard to motor vehicles, capable of being driven. 
    Automobile transporter: means any vehicle combination designed and used expressly for the transport of assembled motor vehicles. 
    Axle: means one (1) or more load-carrying wheels mounted in a single transverse vertical plane. 
    B-train assembly: means any rigid frame extension that is attached to the rear frame of one (1) semitrailer and provides a fifth wheel connection point for a second semitrailer. 
    Bicycle: means every device, other than a tricycle designed solely for use as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power upon which any person may ride, and that has two (2) tandem wheels, or one (1) wheel in front and two (2) wheels in the rear, or two (2) wheels in the front and one (1) wheel in the rear, any of which is more than fourteen (14) inches in diameter. 
    Boat transporter: means any vehicle combination, including a straight truck towing a trailer typically using a ball and socket connection, designed and used specifically for the transport of boat hulls and boats, whether the hulls or boats are assembled or partially disassembled to facilitate transportation. 
    Bus: means any motor vehicle having motor power designed and used for carrying more than nine (9) passengers and used for the transportation of persons other than a ridesharing arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
    Business district: means the territory fronting upon a street or highway, including the street or highway, between successive intersections where fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage between such successive intersections is in use for business, or where fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is in use for business, and the character of such territory is indicated by official traffic control devices. 
    Cancel or cancellation: means the annulment or termination by the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles of a driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege because it was obtained unlawfully, issued in error, altered or willfully destroyed, or because the holder no longer is entitled to the license, permit, or privilege. 
    Certified ignition interlock device: means a device approved by the Ohio Director of Public Safety that connects a breath analyzer to a motor vehicle's ignition system, that is constantly available to monitor the concentration by weight of alcohol in the breath of any person attempting to start that motor vehicle by using its ignition system, and that deters starting the motor vehicle by use of its ignition system unless the person attempting to start the vehicle provides an appropriate breath sample for the device and the device determines that the concentration by weight of alcohol in the person's breath is below a preset level. 
    Child day-care center and type a family day-care home: have the same meaning as in ORC § 5104.01. 
    Collector street: means a street connecting local streets with arterial streets. 
    Commercial car: means any motor vehicle having motor power designed and used for carrying merchandise or freight, or used as a commercial tractor. 
    Commercial tractor: means every motor vehicle having motor power designed or used for drawing other vehicles and not constructed as to carry any load thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a portion of such other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both. 
    Construction zone: means that lane or portion of street or highway open to vehicular traffic and adjacent to a lane, berm or shoulder of a street or highway within which lane, berm or shoulder construction, reconstruction, resurfacing or other work of a repair or maintenance nature, including public utility work or work that requires portions of the street or highway to be closed, is being conducted. 
    Continuous alcohol monitoring: means the ability to automatically test and periodically transmit alcohol consumption levels and tamper attempts at least every hour, regardless of the location of the person who is being monitored. 
    Controlled-access highway: means every street or highway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right or access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such street or highway. 
    Controlled substance and marijuana: have the same meaning as in ORC § 3719.01. 
    Crosswalk: means any of the following: 
(A)  That part of a roadway or alley at an intersection ordinarily included within the real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines, or in the absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway or alley; 
(B)  If the Upper Arlington City Manager or designee authorizes curb ramps which are outside the crosswalk established by subsection (A) but within fifteen (15) feet of that crosswalk, the crosswalk shall be extended to encompass the pathway between two (2) opposed ramps; 
(C)  Any portion of a roadway or alley, whether at an intersection or elsewhere, distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface; and 
(D)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, there shall not be a crosswalk where local authorities have placed signs indicating no crossing. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009; Ord. No. 33-2012; Ord. No. 59-2012; Ord. No. 8-2016, § 1, 2-22-2016 ) 
§ 301.02 - DEFINITIONS (D-H). 
    The following words and phrases when used in this traffic code or any traffic ordinance of the city shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter unless otherwise stated. 
    Drive: means any person who drives or operates a motor vehicle upon any street, highway or private property. 
    Driver: means every person who drives, operates, or is in actual physical control of a vehicle, trackless trolley or streetcar. 
    Drug abuse offense, cocaine, and L.S.D.: have the same meanings as in ORC § 2925.01. 
    Drug of abuse: has the same meaning as in ORC § 3719.011 and ORC § 4506.01. 
    Electronic scooter is a vehicle consisting of a two-wheeled device with handlebars and a floorboard that is designed to be stood upon while riding, and is powered by an electric motor. 
    Electronic wireless communications device: includes any of the following: 
(A)  A wireless telephone; 
(B)  A text-messaging device; 
(C)  A personal digital assistant; 
(D)  A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet; 
(E)  Any other substantially similar wireless device that is designed or used to communicate text. 
    Emergency vehicle: means emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county departments or public utility corporations when identified as such as required by law, the Ohio Director of Public Safety, or local authorities, and motor vehicles when commandeered by a law enforcement officer. 
    Equivalent offense: means any of the following: 
(A)  A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of this state, law of another state, or law of the United States that is substantially similar or equivalent; 
(B)  A violation of a former law of this state that is substantially similar or equivalent. 
    Explosives: means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is intended for the purpose of producing an explosion, that contains any oxidizing and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction by concussion, by percussion or by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of destroying life or limb. 
Manufactured articles shall not be held to be explosives when the individual units contain explosives in such limited quantities of such nature, or in such packing, that it is impossible to procure a simultaneous or a destructive explosion of such units, to the injury of life, limb or property by fire, by friction, by concussion, percussion, or by a detonator, such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers or safety fuse matches. 
    Flammable liquid: means any liquid which has a flash point of 70° Fahrenheit, or less, as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device. 
    Fronting: means facing a street or highway without regard to the placement of the school building and may include one (1) or more sides of the school property. 
    Funeral escort vehicle: means any motor vehicle, including funeral hearse, while used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession. 
    Gross weight: means the weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load thereon. 
    Handicapped parking space or disability parking spaces: means clearly marked parking spaces on public or private streets, parking lots and parking garages designated for the exclusive use of a handicapped designated vehicle and denoted in accordance with the requirements of ORC § 4511.60(E) and ORC § 3781.111(C). 
    Handicapped designated vehicle: means a motor vehicle that displays either (1) a parking card issued under ORC § 4503.44 or (2) a special license plate issued under ORC § 4503.44 and is being operated by or for the transport of a handicapped person. When a motor vehicle displays a temporary parking pass, disabled veteran plate, permanent parking card from the appropriate state agency, or special license plate, that is being operated by or transporting a disabled or handicapped person, the motor vehicle shall have the decal or parking card clearly displayed on the left dashboard or in the left front windshield of enclosed vehicles so that the parking privilege information is on the front side of the card and is readily readable from outside the windshield. 
    Handicapped person: means any person who has lost the use of one (1) or both legs or one (1) or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or so severely handicapped as to be unable to move without the aid of crutches or a wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a permanent cardiovascular, pulmonary, or other handicapping condition. 
    Highway or laned street: means a street or highway, the roadway of which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
    House arrest: means a period of confinement of an offender that is in the offender's home or in other premises specified by the sentencing court or by the parole board pursuant to ORC § 2967.28 and during which all of the following apply: 
(1)  The offender is required to remain in the offender's home or other specified premises for the specified period of confinement, except for periods of time during which the offender is at the offender's place of employment or at other premises as authorized by the sentencing court or by the parole board. 
(2)  The offender is required to report periodically to a person designated by the court or parole board. 
(3)  The offender is subject to any other restrictions and requirements that may be imposed by the sentencing court or by the parole board. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009; Ord. No. 9-2012; Ord. No. 72-2018 , § 2, 10-8-2018) 
§ 301.03 - DEFINITIONS (I-N). 
The following words and phrases when used in this traffic code or any traffic ordinance of the city shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter unless otherwise stated. 
    Immobilizing or disabling device: means a device approved by the Ohio Director of Public Safety that may be ordered by a court to be used by an offender as a condition of limited driving privileges. This includes an ignition interlock device, and any prototype device that is used according to protocols designed to ensure efficient and effective monitoring of limited driving privileges granted by a court to an offender. 
    Intersection: means: 
(A)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines; or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) streets or highways which join one another at, or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets or highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
(B)  Where a street or highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street or highway by an intersecting street or highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. If an intersecting street or highway also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such street or highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
(C)  The junction of an alley with a street or highway, or with another alley, shall not constitute an intersection. 
    Jail: has the same meaning as in ORC § 2929.01. 
    Law enforcement officer: means every officer or police officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Local authorities: means every county, municipal and other local board or body having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and laws of this state. 
    Local street: means an urban street whose primary function is to provide access to residences, businesses or other abutting properties. 
    Manufacturer and dealer: all persons and firms that are regularly engaged in the business of manufacturing, selling, displaying, offering for sale, or dealing in motor vehicles, at an established place of business that is used exclusively for the purpose of manufacturing, selling, displaying, offering for sale, or dealing in motor vehicles. A place of business that is used for manufacturing, selling, displaying, offering for sale, or dealing in motor vehicles shall be deemed to be used exclusively for those purposes even though snowmobiles or all-purpose vehicles are sold or displayed for sale thereat, even though farm machinery is sold or displayed for sale thereat, or even though repair, accessory, gasoline and oil, storage, parts, service, or paint departments are maintained thereat, or, in any county having a population of less than seventy-five thousand (75,000) at the last federal census, even though a department in a place of business is used to dismantle, salvage, or rebuild motor vehicles by means of used parts, if such departments are operated for the purpose of furthering and assisting in the business of manufacturing, selling, displaying, offering for sale, or dealing in motor vehicles. Places of business or departments in a place of business used to dismantle, salvage, or rebuild motor vehicles by means of using used parts are not considered as being maintained for the purpose of assisting or furthering the manufacturing, selling, displaying, and offering for sale or dealing in motor vehicles. 
    Maximum axle load: means the gross weight of vehicle and load imposed by any axle upon the road surface. 
    Maximum wheel load: means the proportionate gross weight of vehicle and load imposed by any wheel upon the road surface. 
    Median: means a continuous traffic control island usually in the center of a street or highway provided to separate traffic on adjacent roadways. 
    Motor vehicle: means any vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except motorized bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels, power cranes and other equipment used in construction work and not designed for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery, well drilling machinery, ditch digging machinery, farm machinery, trailers used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm when drawn or towed on a public street or highway at a speed of twenty-five (25) miles per hour, or less, threshing machinery, hay baling machinery, corn sheller, hammermill and agricultural tractors and machinery used in the production of horticultural, floricultural, agricultural and vegetable products, and trailers designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more than ten (10) miles at a speed of twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less. 
    Motorcycle: means every motor vehicle other than a tractor having a saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, including, but not limited to, motor vehicles known as motor-driven cycle, motor scooter or motorcycle without regard to weight or brake horsepower. Motorcycle does not include stand-up electric scooters. 
    Motorized bicycle: means any vehicle having either two (2) tandem wheels or one (1) wheel in the front and two (2) wheels in the rear, that is capable of being pedaled and is equipped with a helper motor of not more than fifty (50) cubic centimeters piston displacement which produces no more than one (1) brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of no greater than twenty (20) miles per hour on a level surface. 
    Moving violation: means any violation of any statute or ordinance that regulates the operation of vehicles, streetcars, or trackless trolleys on a highway or street. Moving violation does not include a violation of ORC § 4513.263 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a violation of any statute or ordinance regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load limitations, vehicle fitness requirements, or vehicle registration. 
    Municipal OVI Ordinance and Municipal OVI Offense: have the same meanings as in ORC § 4511.181. 
    Non-commercial motor vehicle: means any motor vehicle, including a farm truck as defined in ORC § 4503.04, designed by the manufacturer to carry a load of no more than three-quarters (3/4) of a ton and used exclusively for purposes other than engaging in business for profit. 
(Ord. No. 59-2012; Ord. No. 72-2018 , § 3, 10-8-2018) 
§ 301.04 - DEFINITIONS (O-R). 
    The following words and phrases when used in this traffic code or any traffic ordinance of the city shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter unless otherwise stated. 
    Official time standard: whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this city. 
    Operate: means to cause or have caused movement of a vehicle, streetcar or trackless trolley. 
    Operator: means every person who drives, operates, or is in actual physical control of a vehicle, trackless trolley or streetcar. 
    Owner: means any person or firm, other than a manufacturer or dealer, that has title to a motor vehicle, except that, in ORC §§ 4505.01 to 4505.19, "owner" includes in addition manufacturers and dealers. 
    Park/Parking: means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading or in compliance with directions of a law enforcement officer or traffic control device. 
    Passenger car: means any motor vehicle designed and used for carrying not more than nine (9) persons, including any motor vehicle designed and used for carrying not more than fifteen (15) persons in a ride sharing arrangement. 
    Pedestrian: means any natural person afoot. 
    Person: means every natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other entity. 
    Person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk: means any person who, as determined by a health care provider, meets any of the following criteria: 
(A)  Cannot walk two hundred (200) feet without stopping to rest; 
(B)  Cannot walk without the use of, or assistance from, a brace, cane, crutch, another person, prosthetic device, wheelchair, or other assistive device; 
(C)  Is restricted by a lung disease to such an extent that the person's forced (respiratory) expiratory volume for one (1) second, when measured by spirometry, is less than one (1) liter, or the arterial oxygen tension is less than sixty (60) millimeters of mercury on room air at rest; 
(D)  Uses portable oxygen; 
(E)  Has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person's functional limitations are classified in severity as class III or class IV according to standards set by the American Heart Association; 
(F)  Is severely limited in the ability to walk due to an arthritic, neurological, or orthopedic condition; 
(G)  Is blind. 
    Physical control: means being in the driver's position of the front seat of a vehicle or in the driver's position of a streetcar or trackless trolley and having possession of the vehicle's, streetcar's or trackless trolley's ignition key or other ignition device. 
    Pole trailer: means every trailer or semi-trailer attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, pole or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, or sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
    Police officer: means every officer or law enforcement officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Private road or driveway: means every way or place in private ownership used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner but not by other persons. 
    Probationary driver's license or probationary license: means the license issued to any person between sixteen and eighteen years of age to operate a motor vehicle. 
    Prototype device: means any testing device to monitor limited driving privileges that has not yet been approved or disapproved by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. 
    Public grounds: means open, improved or unimproved lands owned, leased or controlled by the City of Upper Arlington, whether or not the same have been designated as parks or playgrounds, or those areas of private property that are open to the general public for vehicular and pedestrian travel. 
    Public safety vehicle: means any of the following: 
(A)  Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to a municipal corporation, township or county, and private ambulances and non-transport vehicles bearing license plates issued under ORC § 4503.49. 
(B)  Motor vehicles and bicycles used by public law enforcement officers or other persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state. 
(C)  Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or directives of that service. The Ohio State Fire Marshal shall be designated the Ohio Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety vehicles described in this section. 
(D)  Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when used by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire department service when identified as required by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. 
Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service to an ill or injured person, when certified as a public safety vehicle, shall be considered a public safety vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a hospital regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital. 
(E)  Vehicles used by the commercial motor vehicle safety enforcement unit for the enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio as specified in ORC § 5503.34. 
    Railroad, railroad train and railroad sign or signal: Railroad means a carrier of persons or property operating upon rails placed principally on a private right-of-way. Railroad train means a stream or internal combustion engine or an electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad. Railroad sign or signal means any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train. 
    Residence district: means the territory, not comprising a business district, fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway, where, for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more, the frontage is improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
    Ridesharing arrangement: means the transportation of persons in a motor vehicle where such transportation is incidental to another purpose of a volunteer driver and includes ridesharing arrangements known as car pools, van pools and bus pools. 
    Right-of-way: means either of the following, as the context requires: 
(1)  The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in a lawful manner in the direction in which it or the individual is moving in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different direction into its or the individual's path. 
(2)  A general term denoting land, property or the interest therein, usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to transportation purposes. When used in this context, right-of-way includes the roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch and slopes extending to the right-of-way limits under the control of the State or local authority. 
    Road service vehicle: means wreckers, utility repair vehicles, and state, county, and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of flashing, rotating, or oscillating lights. 
    Roadway: means that portion of a street or highway improved, designated or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term roadway means any such roadway separately, but not all such roadways collectively. 
    Rural mail delivery vehicle: means every vehicle used to deliver United States mail on a rural mail delivery route. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009; Ord. No. 42-2015, § 1, 6-22-2015 ) 
§ 301.05 - DEFINITIONS (S-Z). 
The following words and phrases when used in this traffic code or any traffic ordinance of the city shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter unless otherwise stated: 
    Saddlemount vehicle transporter combination: means any combination of vehicles in which a straight truck or commercial tractor tows one (1) or more straight trucks or commercial tractors, each connected by a saddle to the frame or fifth wheel of the straight truck or commercial tractor in front of it. Such a combination may include a fullmount, in which a smaller vehicle is mounted completely on the frame of either the first or last straight truck or commercial tractor in the saddlemount combination. 
    Safety zone: means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and so protected or marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times. 
    School: means any school chartered under ORC § 3301.16 and any non-chartered school that during the preceding year filed with the Ohio Department of Education in compliance with rule 3301-35-08 of the Ohio Administrative Code, a copy of the school's report for the parents of the pupil certifying that the school meets Ohio minimum standards for non-chartered, non tax supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to the city from which it is requesting the establishment of a school zone and as further defined in ORC § 2925.01. 
An offense is "committed in the vicinity of a school" if the offender commits the offense on school premises, in a school building, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the boundaries of any school premises. 
    School building: means any building in which any of the instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by a school is conducted, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a criminal offense is committed. 
    School bus: means every bus designed for carrying more than nine (9) passengers which is owned by a public, private or governmental agency or institution of learning and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school session or a school function or owned by a private person and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or a school function; provided school bus does not include a bus operated by a municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating exclusively within the territorial limits of a municipal corporation, or within such limits and the territorial limits of municipal corporations immediately contiguous to such municipal corporation, or a common passenger carrier certified by the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio unless such bus is devoted exclusively to the transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function and school bus does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child day-care center or type A family day-care home to transport children from the child day-care center or type A family day-care home to a school if the van or bus does not have more than fifteen (15) children in the van or bus at any time. 
    School premises: means either of the following: 
(1)  The parcel of real property on which any school is situated, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a criminal offense is committed; 
(2)  Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a board of education of a school or the governing body of a school for which the state board of education prescribes minimum standards under ORC § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction, extracurricular activities, or training of the school is conducted, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal offense is committed. 
    School zone: means that portion of a street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or highway, and also includes that portion of the state highway. The distances described in this definition shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet per approach per direction and are bounded by whichever of the following distances or combinations thereof that the Ohio Director of Public Service approves as most appropriate: 
(a)  The distance encompassed by projecting the school building lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of three hundred (300) feet on each approach direction; 
(b)  The distance encompassed by projecting the school property lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of three hundred (300) feet on each approach direction; 
(c)  The distance encompassed by the special marking of the pavements for a principal school crosswalk plus a distance of three hundred (300) feet on each approach direction of the highway. 
    Semi trailer: means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by another vehicle. 
    Sidewalk: means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Special license plates and removable windshield placard: means any license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable windshield placard issued under ORC § 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any substantially similar license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country, or sovereignty. 
    Standing: means any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not. 
    State highway: means a highway under the jurisdiction of the Ohio Department of Transportation. 
    State route: means every highway, which is designed with an official state route number and so marked. 
    Stinger-steered automobile transporter: means any automobile transporter configured as a semitrailer combination in which the fifth wheel is located on a drop frame located behind and below the rearmost axle of the power unit. 
    Stinger-steered boat transporter: means a boat transporter configured as a semitrailer combination in which the fifth wheel is located on a drop frame located behind and below the rearmost axle of the power unit. 
    Street racing: means the operation of two (2) or more vehicles from a point approximately side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to out-distance each other or the operation of one (1) or more vehicles over a common selected course, from approximately the same point to the same point, wherein timing is made of the participating vehicles involving competitive accelerations or speeds. 
    Streetcar: means a car, other than a railroad train, for transporting persons or property, operated upon rails principally within a street or highway. 
    Stop (when required): means a complete cessation of movement. 
    Stop intersection: means any intersection at one (1) or more entrances of which stop signs are erected. 
    Stop or stopping (when prohibited): means any cessation of movement except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a law enforcement officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
    Street or highway: means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for the purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Suspend or suspension: means the permanent or temporary withdrawal, by action of a court or the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles, of a driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege for the period of the suspension or the permanent or temporary withdrawal of the privilege to obtain a license, permit, or privilege of that type for the period of the suspension. 
    Through highway: means every street or highway or portion thereof, as defined in C.O. § 335.03. 
    Trackless trolley: means every car that collects its power from overhead electric trolley wires and that is not operated upon rails or tracks. 
    Traffic: means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, trackless trolleys, and other devices, either singularly or together, while using any highway for purposes of travel. 
    Traffic control devices: means all signs, signals, markings and devices placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting names of streets and highways. 
    Traffic control signal: means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop, to proceed, to change direction or not to change direction. 
    Trailer: means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, including any such vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a semi-trailer and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm when drawn or towed on a public street or highway at a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of more than ten (10) miles or at a speed of more than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
    Truck: means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semi-trailers, designed and used to carry property. 
    Type A family day-care home: Child day-care center and type A family day-care home have the same meaning as in ORC § 5104.01. 
    Urban district: means the territory contiguous to and including any street or highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than one hundred (100) feet for a distance of a quarter of a mile or more, and the character of such territory is indicated by official traffic devices. 
    Vehicle: means every device, including a motorized bicycle and electronic scooter, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except that "vehicle" does not include any motorized wheelchairs, electric personal assistive mobility devices, or any device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks or any devices other than bicycles moved by human power. 
    Voice-operated or hands-free device: means a device that allows the user to vocally compose or send, or to listen to, a text-based communication without the use of either hand except to activate or deactivate a feature or function. 
    Wheelchair ramp: means a break in the curb of a public street, with a ramp extending away from the street, up to a public or private walkway. 
    Write, send, or read a text-based communication: means to manually write, send, or read a text-based communication using an electronic wireless communications device. This includes manually writing, sending, or reading communications referred to as text messages, instant messages, or electronic mail. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009; Ord. No. 59-2012; Ord. No. 72-2018 , § 4, 10-8-2018) 
CHAPTER 305. - TRAFFIC CONTROL REGULATION/DEVICES 

§ 305.01 - DUTY OF CITY MANAGER. 
It shall be the general duty of the city manager or designee with respect to the regulation of traffic, to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of recurring accident locations and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. 
( Ord. No. 8-2016, § 2, 2-22-2016 ) 
§ 305.02 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES, AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER. 
(A)  The city manager or designee is authorized to place and maintain traffic control devices upon any street or highway within the jurisdiction of the City of Upper Arlington as necessary to make effective the provisions of this Traffic Code, or to regulate, guide, or warn traffic, and such additional traffic control devices as the city manager or designee may deem necessary for the proper control of traffic. 
(B)  The city manager or designee is hereby authorized and empowered to: 
(1)  Prohibit right turns against a steady red signal at any intersection as to which the city manager or designee shall have determined that such turns will be hazardous to pedestrians or to vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Designate any street or highway as a through street or highway and require that all vehicles stop or yield the right-of-way as may be required before entering the same. 
(3)  Designate any intersection as a stop intersection and require all vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to such intersection. 
(4)  Designate any intersection as a yield intersection and require all vehicles to yield the right-of-way as required. 
(5)  Designate any street as a one-way street and require that all vehicles thereon be moved in one specific direction. 
(6)  Designate and mark lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center line of the roadway. 
(7)  Erect signs directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction. 
(8)  Designate those portions of any street, where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left of the center or center line of the roadway would be especially hazardous, by appropriate signs or markings on the street to indicate the beginning and end of such zones. Such zones may be marked by an auxiliary yellow line placed parallel and to the right of the normal center line or offset marked lane line. 
(9)  Place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections and require that a specific course of direction be traveled by vehicles proceeding in lanes by either permitting, prohibiting or requiring turns at such intersections. 
(10)  Install traffic control devices, signals and signs at any location to regulate traffic. 
(11)  Establish safety zones, crosswalks, zones of quiet and play streets. 
(12)  Close any street or portion thereof to vehicular traffic, which is in the process of construction, reconstruction or repair. 
(13)  Determine the location of any necessary bus stops and taxicab stands, and passenger or freight loading zones. 
(14)  Determine the location and limiting hours of truck loading zones. 
(15)  Designate dangerous railroad crossings and erect stop signs thereat. 
(16)  Erect "No U Turn" signs at any location to prohibit a vehicle from being turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction. 
(17)  Regulate or prohibit the stopping, standing and parking of vehicles on streets, alleys or public property by erecting signs plainly indicating the prohibitions, restrictions or time limitations. 
(18)  Designate individual parking spaces by markings, which may either be parallel or at a prescribed angle to the curb or edge of the roadway. 
(19)  Designate truck routes in the city. 
(20)  Designate bike only lanes or shared bike lanes, or otherwise regulate or prohibit the riding of bicycles on all or any portion of specific streets, highways, sidewalks or multipurpose paths. 
(C)  The city manager or designee shall exercise the authority delegated in this section upon the basis of an applicable engineering or traffic investigation and consideration of the following: 
(1)  The maximum safety and protection of vehicular and pedestrian traffic from physical injury or property damage; 
(2)  The existing and potential traffic movement, volume and conditions. 
(3)  The location and frequency of accidents, including studies of remedial measures. 
(4)  The recommendations of the police and fire chief. 
(5)  The acceleration of transportation of persons and property by vehicles so as to expedite travel and promote public safety. 
(6)  The convenience and welfare of the general public in parking, standing, loading and unloading, and the use of the streets as affecting business concerns and places of assembly. 
(7)  Economy in the expenditure of money. 
(D)  The traffic regulating powers of the city manager shall not be limited by the specific enumeration of subjects contained in this chapter. 
(E)  The city manager or designee shall file a copy of all designations, rules, and regulations adopted under the authority granted in this chapter with the city clerk. The city clerk shall promptly provide notice of such filing to city council and shall maintain a record of all such designations, rules, and regulations. The designations, rules, and regulations shall become effective after ninety (90) days unless city council takes action pursuant to C.O. § 305.05. 
(F)  Violation of such designations, rules, and regulations shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in C.O. § 315.99. 
( Ord. No. 8-2016, § 2, 2-22-2016 ) 
§ 305.03 - TEMPORARY RULES (CITY MANAGER AUTHORITY). 
(A)  The city manager or designee may make temporary rules regulating traffic or for testing traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic. No such temporary rules regulating traffic shall remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days. The city manager or designee may extend this time period for demonstrated good cause. 
(B)  The city manager or designee is authorized to establish temporary traffic patterns, which may be other than those prescribed by law or ordinance, to route traffic around street construction projects or other obstacles to traffic. Temporary routes shall be posted while in effect and shall be discontinued when traffic can be returned to normal patterns. 
(C)  The city manager or designee is authorized to make and enforce traffic rules and regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. 
( Ord. No. 8-2016, § 2, 2-22-2016 ) 
§ 305.04 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES; CONFORMITY TO STATE MANUAL. 
All traffic control devices placed pursuant to the provisions of this Traffic Code shall conform to the "Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways" adopted by the Ohio Department of Transportation and good engineering practices. 
( Ord. No. 8-2016, § 2, 2-22-2016 ) 
§ 305.05 - RESERVATION OF POWER TO COUNCIL. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of C.O. §§ 305.01 to 305.04, inclusive, city council may override any decision of the city manager or designee made under such provisions, and may assume any of the powers delegated to the city manager, by an ordinance or resolution adopted by a vote of a majority of the council members. Upon the adoption of any such ordinance or resolution, the same may be changed only by an amending or repealing ordinance or resolution adopted by city council. 
( Ord. No. 8-2016, § 2, 2-22-2016 ) 
CHAPTER 307. - POLICE DIVISION; ARRESTS 

§ 307.01 - DUTY OF POLICE; ENFORCEMENT. 
It shall be the duty of the police division and all police officers to enforce all street traffic ordinances and all of the state laws applicable to street traffic. Officers of the division are authorized to direct all traffic in conformance with traffic laws or ordinances; provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police or fire divisions may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic code or ordinances. 
§ 307.02 - ARREST PROCEDURES. 
Except when authorized or directed under state law to immediately take a person arrested for a violation of any of the traffic laws before a magistrate, judge or mayor, any police officer, upon making an arrest for violation of the state traffic laws or traffic code of this city, shall take the violator's name, address, operator's license number and the registration number of the motor vehicle involved, and issue to him in writing on a form provided by the clerk of courts, a notice to answer to the charge against him within seven (7) days during hours and at a place specified in the notice. 
The officer shall thereupon, and upon giving by the violator of his written promise to answer as specified in the notice, release him from custody. The arresting officer shall send one (1) copy of such notice to the clerk of courts. Provided, however, that the magistrate, judge or mayor may require the giving of recognizance bail or surety bonds by non-residents of the city, and by other persons charged with violation of such provisions of the traffic code, as he may designate, as a prerequisite to release from custody. 
§ 307.03 - PARKING NOTICES. 
Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by ordinance of this city or state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing, on a form provided by the clerk of courts, for the driver to answer to the charge against him within seven (7) days during the hours and at a place specified in the notice. The officer shall send one (1) copy of such notice to the clerk of courts. 
If the owner or operator fails to appear, a summons shall be issued to the last known address of the owner or operator of the vehicle. If the owner or operator fails to appear, a five (5) day warning notice is to be sent informing the person that a warrant will be issued for failure to appear in court. 
§ 307.04 - POLICE JURISDICTION TO EXTEND TO CITY OWNED PROPERTY. 
Notwithstanding the usual definition of the word city and municipality found in this Code, and notwithstanding any particular provision of this Code, all police regulations within the Upper Arlington Codified Ordinances shall apply on all lands owned by the city and situated outside the corporate limits thereof, to the extent authorized by the statutes of this state. 
CHAPTER 309. - RECORDS AND REPORTS 

§ 309.01 - TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS. 
(A)  The police division shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic code or of the State Uniform Traffic Act of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. This record shall accumulate until a five-year period is covered and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for the most recent five-year period. 
(B)  All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms. 
(C)  All such records and reports shall be available for use and study by the city manager or designee. 
§ 309.02 - INVESTIGATIONS. 
(A)  It shall be the duty of the police division to investigate traffic accidents and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of laws or ordinances causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(B)  The police division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring them shall be filed numerically by month/year. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city manager or designee. 
(C)  Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police division shall cooperate with the city manager in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(D)  The police division shall receive and properly file all accident reports made to it. 
§ 309.03 - DRIVER FILE. 
The police division shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints, and the same shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. Such records shall accumulate until a five-year period is covered and thereafter such records shall be maintained complete for the most recent five-year period. 
§ 309.04 - ANNUAL SAFETY REPORT. 
The police division shall annually prepare a traffic report, containing information on traffic matters in this city, for the city manager, as follows: 
(A)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed or injured and other pertinent traffic accident data. 
(B)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police. 
(C)  The plans and recommendations of the police division for future traffic safety activities. 
CHAPTER 311. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 8-2016, § 3, adopted February 22, 2016 , amended chapter 311 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 311, §§ 311.01-311.13, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

§ 311.01 - FORMER TRAFFIC SCHEDULES. 
(A)  The city clerk shall maintain a permanent copy of the traffic schedules formerly contained in C.O. Chapter 311. 
(B)  The former traffic schedules shall be used for the prosecution of offenses occurring prior to January 1, 2016. 
( Ord. No. 8-2016, § 3, 2-22-2016 ) 
CHAPTER 313. - IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES 

§ 313.01 - IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES. 
(A)  Any law enforcement officer is authorized to remove or cause removal from the streets, highways, sidewalks, or public grounds or those areas of private property open to the public for vehicular traffic or parking: 
(1)  Any vehicle parked, left standing or abandoned thereon, in violation of any of the specific terms of this traffic code. 
(2)  Any vehicle that fails to comply with the provisions of this traffic code relative to equipment. 
(3)  Any vehicle for which two (2) or more citations for violations of this traffic code have been issued, if the owner or operator thereof has failed to respond to such citations. 
(4)  Any vehicle that has been reported stolen. 
(5)  Any vehicle which is wrecked or so disabled that it is not capable of being operated. 
(6)  Any vehicle that has been involved in an accident and the driver or operator has failed to stop after such accident. 
(7)  Any vehicle operated by a person while engaged in, or, connected with, the commission of a crime. 
(8)  Any vehicle operated by a person without an operator's license, or during a period of suspension or cancellation of such license. 
(9)  Any vehicle from which the driver or owner has been arrested, or any vehicle operated by a person who refused to obey the instruction of any law enforcement officer after such person has been placed under arrest. The law enforcement officer may have the vehicle towed for safekeeping or evidence. 
(10)  Any vehicle operated by any person who is arrested for reckless operation or operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. 
(11)  Any vehicle operated by a person that is permitted to be seized under ORC ch. 4510 or 4511 or any substantially similar ordinance. 
(12)  Any vehicle operated by a person that requires seizure under ORC §§ 4510.14, 4510.16, 4511.195 or 4511.203 or any substantially similar ordinance. 
(13)  Any vehicle which, in the impounding authority's opinion, creates a condition which presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property including vehicles which, without authorization, release, discharge, or leak substances into or upon the environment. 
(14)  Any vehicle abandoned after an accident on public or private property away from the owner's residence. 
(15)  Any vehicle from which the driver or operator has been removed due to illness or injury. 
(Ord. No. 8-2014) 
§ 313.02 - OTHER PENALTIES TO APPLY. 
The removal and storage of a vehicle impounded, and the payment of the expense of removal and storage of a vehicle so impounded shall not release the owner, driver or other person in charge of such vehicle from penalties for violation of this traffic code or any other traffic ordinance or rule. 
§ 313.03 - OWNER'S RISK. 
The removal by a law enforcement officer of a vehicle for any of the reasons mentioned in this chapter, or ORC ch. 4503, 4510 or 4511, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance, shall be at the risk of the owner or person in charge thereof and there shall be no liability on the part of the city for any damage caused by such removal or cost associated with the impoundment. 
The storage of any vehicle when impounded by the city shall be at the risk of the driver or owner thereof, and the city shall not be liable for damage of any nature of the theft or destruction by fire of any vehicle so impounded. 
§ 313.04 - POUND CHARGES. 
The expense of removal, conveyance or towing of such vehicle and the expense of storage thereof when removed to any impounding place designated by the Upper Arlington City Manager or designee shall be borne by the owner, driver or other person in charge thereof and shall be paid before the vehicle is released from the pound. 
§ 313.05 - NOTICE TO OWNER: REDEMPTION. 
If, at the expiration of twenty-four (24) hours after any vehicle has been impounded, the owner, driver or other person in charge thereof, has not claimed the vehicle from the pound, it shall be the duty of the officer in charge of such pound to notify, in writing, the owner, driver or other person in charge of the same at their last known place of residence, informing the owner, driver or other person in charge of the nature and circumstances of the violation on account of which such vehicle has been impounded, and also the amount of charges for re-delivery, unless otherwise stated pursuant to ORC ch. 4510 or 4511, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance. 
When the owner, driver or other person in charge of the vehicle impounded presents themselves to the vehicle pound to claim the vehicle, satisfactory proof of right and title shall be furnished to the officer in charge of such pound. 
§ 313.06 - IMPOUNDING FEE AND STORAGE CHARGE. 
(A)  No vehicle impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be removed from such vehicle pound except upon the payment by the owner, driver or other person in charge of such vehicle, or a service charge to the officer or other person in charge of such pound, and a storage charge per day for each twenty-four (24) hours or fraction thereof. 
(B)  Any vehicle impounded or immobilized under this chapter shall be released to the owner upon the owner presenting a valid certificate of title or other proof of ownership to the vehicle to the clerk of court and upon the owner either paying the fines, penalties, fee and costs due in the parking infractions issued, or posting a bond equal to the amount of fines, penalties, fees and costs. 
(C)  The court shall not authorize release of a vehicle from immobilization or impoundment orders under the traffic code unless the court is presented with current proof of financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle. 
§ 313.07 - PAYMENT OF FEES. 
In the event payment is made for the impoundment and storage of a vehicle and the operator or owner is found not guilty by the trial court of committing any and all of the violations on account of which the vehicle of such person was impounded, or if all charges are dismissed, then upon the recommendation of the Upper Arlington City Prosecutor, the Upper Arlington City Manager may cause to be refunded to such person upon demand, the set fee and accrued storage charge paid by the person. 
§ 313.08 - POUND. 
The Upper Arlington City Manager is authorized to establish a vehicle pound and to contract with private agencies for the towing and storage services. 
CHAPTER 315. - LAW ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES, FINANCIAL SANCTIONS AND COURT COSTS 

§ 315.01 - GOVERNMENT VEHICLES INCLUDED; EMERGENCY VEHICLES. 
(A)  The provisions of this traffic code shall apply to the driver of any vehicle, owned by or used in the service of the United States, any State, or political subdivision thereof, including this city, except as otherwise provided by law and subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency and public safety vehicles in this traffic code or by state statute. 
(B)  The provisions of this traffic code regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles and buses shall apply to emergency vehicles, as defined in this traffic code, except as follows: a driver when operating any such vehicle in an emergency, except when otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer, may: 
(1)  Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this traffic code. 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as the driver does not endanger life or property. 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions so long as the driver does not endanger life or property. 
The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of the driver's or the person's reckless disregard of the safety of others. 
§ 315.02 - COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS; FLEEING FROM LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS. 
(A)  No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of any law enforcement officer invested with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
(B)  No person shall operate a vehicle so as to willfully elude, flee or ignore a law enforcement officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a law enforcement officer to bring the vehicle to a stop. 
(C)  Every person shall obey signals from members of the school safety patrol stationed in the vicinity of school buildings. 
(D)  Except as provided in ORC § 2921.331, whoever violates C.O. § 315.02(A) or (B) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates C.O. § 315.02(C) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender has previously been found guilty of an offense under division (B) of this section, division (B) of former ORC § 4511.02, or division (B) of section 2921.331 of the Ohio Revised Code, or a substantially similar municipal ordinance, then the court shall impose at least thirty (30) mandatory days imprisonment for violation of the section. 
(E)  This section shall not apply if: 
(1)  In committing the offense, the offender was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony; 
(2)  The operation of the vehicle by the offender was a proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property; 
(3)  The operation of the vehicle by the offender caused a substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property, as set forth in ORC § 2921.331. 
(F)  (1)  In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division (A) of this section, the court shall impose a class five (5) suspension from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(6) or ORC § 4510.02(A)(6). 
(2)  In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division (B) of this section, the court shall impose a class two (2) suspension from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(2) or ORC § 4510.02(A)(2). If the offender previously has been found guilty of an offense under former ORC § 4511.02, or ORC § 2921.331, or a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court shall impose a class one suspension as described in C.O. § 315.99(F)(1) or ORC § 4510.02(A)(1). The court shall not grant limited driving privileges to the offender. No judge shall suspend the first three (3) years of suspension under a class two suspension of an offender's license, permit, or privilege required by this division on any portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an offender's license, permit, or privilege required by this division. 
(G)  In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court shall impose a license suspension pursuant to ORC § 2921.331(E). 
(Ord. No. 71-2010; Ord. No. 63-2013) 
§ 315.03 - RESISTING AN ENFORCING OFFICIAL. 
(A)  No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct or abuse any official while that official is attempting to arrest offenders under this traffic code. 
(B)  No person shall interfere with any person charged under any provision of this traffic code with the enforcement of the law relative to public streets or highways or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(C)  Whoever violates division (A) is guilty of resisting an enforcing official, a misdemeanor of the second degree. Whoever violates division (B) is guilty of interfering with an enforcing official, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(Ord. No. 71-2010) 
§ 315.04 - ROAD WORKERS AND EQUIPMENT EXCEPTED. 
This traffic code shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work on, in or near the surface of a street or highway within an area designated by traffic control devices, but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. 
§ 315.05 - RIDING, DRIVING ANIMALS ON ROADWAYS. 
Every person riding, driving or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject to the provisions of this traffic code applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions of such sections which by their nature are inapplicable. 
§ 315.06 - USE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR VEHICULAR TRAVEL. 
The provisions of this traffic code do not prevent the owner of real property, used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of the owner and not as a matter of right, from prohibiting such use or from requiring additional conditions to those specified in such sections, or otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such owner. 
§ 315.07 - WAIVER OF HEARING: PAYMENT OF FINES. 
(A)  Any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a traffic charge under this traffic code, except for violations of C.O. §§ 315.02, 315.03, 315.09, 333.01, 335.08, 351.25, 351.38, 353.01, 353.02, 353.03, 353.12, 355.01, 355.02, 355.03, 355.04, 355.05, 355.06, 355.07, 357.01, 357.02, 357.05, 363.06, and 381.07, offenses designated under ORC Traffic Rule 13, and any traffic offense which is classified as a misdemeanor of the first, second, third or fourth degree, may within the time specified in the notice, answer at the Upper Arlington Clerk of Court to the charges set forth in such notice by paying a prescribed fine and, in writing, pleading guilty to the charge, waiving a hearing in court and giving power of attorney to the person in charge of the traffic violations bureau to make such a plea and pay such fine in court. 
(B)  No person shall permit any vehicle registered in his name to stand or be parked in this city in violation of any ordinance regulating the standing or parking of vehicles. If any vehicle is found upon a street, park or other public grounds of the city in violation of any provisions of this traffic code, or any ordinance of this city, regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation. 
§ 315.08 - TRAFFIC DIRECTIONS IN EMERGENCIES. 
(A)  It shall be the duty of the police division to enforce the provisions of this traffic code. Law enforcement officers are authorized to direct all traffic, either in person or by means of visible or audible signal in conformance with the provisions of this traffic code, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police or fire divisions may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this traffic code. Law enforcement officers when directing traffic, either on foot or from any vehicle, or from any authorized police bicycle shall station themselves wherever necessary to effectively regulate traffic upon the streets. 
(B)  The Upper Arlington City Manager or the designated representative is authorized to make temporary regulations because of emergencies, special conditions or special events which temporarily restrict access to certain designated sidewalks and streets or portions thereof, and which provide that the designated restricted area is to be conspicuously posted notifying the public that only authorized persons are permitted in the restricted area. 
§ 315.09 - FURNISHING FALSE INFORMATION. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly present, display, or orally communicate a false name, social security number, or date of birth to a law enforcement officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or complaint. 
(B)  Whoever violates C.O. § 315.09 of the Upper Arlington Codified Ordinance is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 315.10 - LITTERING AS THE OPERATOR OR OCCUPANT OF A MOTOR VEHICLE. 
(A)  No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall throw, drop, discard, or deposit, in any manner, regardless of intent, litter which includes any garbage, trash, paper waste, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, tacks, nails, glass, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, or anything else of an unsightly, unsanitary or dangerous nature on or along any street, road, highway, private or public driveway, or private property open to use by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking 
(B)  Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(C)  In addition to division (B), if the violation of division (A) causes physical harm to persons or physical harm to property, the responsible party is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
For the purposes of this section, "physical harm to persons" and "physical harm to property" have the same definitions as they are given in C.O. § 501.14-General definitions. 
(D)  This section is not intended to override or conflict with any other city ordinance, notably, § 537.07-Littering or dumping of garbage or rubbish. 
(Ord. No. 36-2017 , § 1, 5-22-2017) 
§ 315.99 - PENALTIES, FINANCIAL SANCTIONS AND COURT COSTS. 
(A)  Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code not specifically listed in the sections hereafter following, or for which a specific penalty is not provided elsewhere in this Code, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense. If within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of, forfeited bond, or pleaded guilty to two (2) violations of any provision of this traffic code or any equivalent offense that is substantially similar to any provision of this traffic code, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of, forfeited bond, or pleaded guilty to three (3) or more violations of any provision of this traffic code or any equivalent offense that is substantially similar to any provision of this traffic code, the offense is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(B)  (1)  Except as provided in ORC §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28 and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of the following: 
(a)  For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than one hundred eighty (180) days; 
(b)  For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than ninety (90) days; 
(c)  For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than sixty (60) days; 
(d)  For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than thirty (30) days. 
(2)  A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under this section may permit the offender to serve the sentence in intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as provided in ORC § 2929.26(B). 
(3)  If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this section and the court assigns the offender to a county jail that has established a county jail industry program pursuant to ORC § 5147.30, the court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be considered for participation in the program. During the offender's term in the county jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification regarding the offender's participation in the county jail industry program. 
(4)  If a person is sentenced to a jail term pursuant to this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to ORC § 2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to ORC § 307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56, or 2947.19 and ORC § 2929.37, both of the following apply: 
(a)  The court shall specify both of the following as part of the sentence: 
(i)  If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to ORC § 2929.37 or C.O. § 552.01 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is required to pay the bill in accordance with that section. 
(ii)  If the person does not dispute the bill described in division (B)(4)(a)(i) of this section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in ORC § 2929.37 or C.O. § 552.05, the clerk of court may issue a certificate of judgment against the person as described in that section. 
(b)  The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment issued as described in division (B)(4)(a)(ii) of this section. 
(c)  If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division of C.O. § 353.01(D) also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a specification of the type described in ORC § 2941.1414 and if the court imposes a jail term on the offender for the underlying offense, the court shall impose upon the offender an additional definite jail term of not more than six (6) months. The additional jail term shall not be reduced pursuant to any provision of the Ohio Revised Code. The offender shall serve the additional jail term consecutively to and prior to the jail term imposed for the underlying offense and consecutively to any other mandatory term imposed in relation to the offense. 
(C)  In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to ORC § 2947.23, the court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a minor misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or combination of financial sanctions authorized under this section. Financial sanctions that may be imposed pursuant to this section include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Restitution by the offender to the victim of the offender's crime or any survivor of the victim, in an amount based on the victim's economic loss. The court shall order that the restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of the victim. The order may include a requirement that reimbursement be made to third parties, other than the offender's insurer, for amounts paid to the victim or any survivor of the victim for economic loss resulting from the offense. If reimbursement to third parties is required, the offender shall make the reimbursement to any governmental agency to repay any amounts paid by the agency to the victim or survivor before the offender makes any reimbursement to any other person. 
The court shall determine, or order to be determined, the amount of restitution to be paid by the offender. The court may base the amount of restitution it orders on an amount recommended by the victim, the offender, a pre-sentence investigation report, estimates or receipts indicating the cost of repairing or replacing property, and other information. The court shall hold a hearing on restitution if the offender, victim, or survivor disputes the amount of restitution. 
All restitution payments shall be credited against any recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or any survivor of the victim against the offender. 
The court may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not more than five percent (5%) of the amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity responsible for collecting and processing restitution payments. 
The victim or survivor may request that the prosecuting attorney file a motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment terms of any restitution ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify the payment terms as it determines appropriate. 
(2)  A fine of the type described in divisions (C)(2)(a) and (b) of this section payable to the appropriate entity as required by law: 
(a)  A fine in the following amount: 
(i)  For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 
(ii)  For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00); 
(iii)  For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); 
(iv)  For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); 
(v)  For a minor misdemeanor, for a violation committed prior to January 1, 2004, not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00); for a violation committed on or after January 1, 2004, not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(b)  A state fine or cost as defined in ORC § 2949.111 and pursuant to Upper Arlington Mayor's Court Rules. 
(c)  Whoever commits an offense not specifically classified under any provision of this code shall be fined or imprisoned or both according to the penalty provided for in violation of that section. 
(3)  (a)  Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of sanctions incurred by the governmental entity, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(i)  All or part of the costs of implementing any community control sanction, including a supervision fee under ORC § 2951.021 or C.O. § 171.07; 
(ii)  All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other residential facility, including, but not limited to, a per diem fee for room and board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of repairing property damaged by the offender while confined pursuant to C.O. § 552.01. 
(iii)  All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition interlock device or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders an offender to use under ORC § 4510.13. 
(b)  The amount of reimbursement ordered under division (C)(3)(a) of this section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that division. If the court does not order reimbursement under that division, confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under ORC § 2929.37 or C.O. § 552.02. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees specified in ORC § 2929.38 or C.O. § 552.02 in accordance with that section. 
(D)  If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial sanction imposed pursuant to this section or court costs or is likely in the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs. 
If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing and may impose a term of community service under ORC § 2929.27(A) or C.O. § 552.03 in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court does not determine that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term of community service under ORC § 2929.27(A) or C.O. § 552.03 in lieu of or in addition to imposing a financial sanction under this section and in addition to imposing court costs. The court may order community service for a minor misdemeanor pursuant to ORC 2929.27(C) or C.O. § 552.03 in lieu of or in addition to imposing a financial sanction under this section and in addition to imposing court costs. If a person fails to pay a financial sanction or court costs, the court may order community service in lieu of the financial sanction or court costs. 
Misdemeanor Community Service Guidelines: 
(1)  A misdemeanor of the first degree: maximum of five hundred (500) hours; 
(2)  A misdemeanor of the second degree: maximum of three hundred (300) hours; 
(3)  A misdemeanor of the third degree: maximum of two hundred fifty (250) hours; 
(4)  A misdemeanor of the fourth degree: maximum of two hundred (200) hours; 
(5)  A minor misdemeanor: maximum of forty (40) hours. 
(E)  The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender pursuant to division (2)(a) of this section to pay the costs incurred by a municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under this section or ORC § 2929.26 or 2929.27. Funds shall be allocated and processed pursuant to ORC §§ 2929.26 to 2929.28 or C.O. § 552.04. 
(F)  When a court elects or is required to suspend the driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege of any offender from a specified suspension class, for each of the following suspension classes, the court shall impose a definite period of suspension from the range specified for the suspension class: 
(1)  For a class one (1) suspension, a definite period for the life of the person subject to the suspension; 
(2)  For a class two (2) suspension, a definite period of three (3) years to life; 
(3)  For a class three (3) suspension, a definite period of two (2) to ten (10) years; 
(4)  For a class four (4) suspension, a definite period of one (1) to five (5) years; 
(5)  For a class five (5) suspension, a definite period of six (6) months to three (3) years; 
(6)  For a class six (6) suspension, a definite period of three (3) months to two (2) years; 
(7)  For a class seven (7) suspension, a definite period not to exceed one (1) year. 
(G)  The court may require a person to successfully complete a remedial driving course as a condition for the return of full driving privileges after a suspension period imposed from any range in division (F) of this section or otherwise imposed by the court pursuant to any other provision of law ends. 
(H)  When a court or the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles suspends the driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege of any offender or person pursuant to any provision of law that does not provide for the suspension to be from a class set forth in division (F) or (G) of this section, except as otherwise provided in the provision that authorizes or requires the suspension, the suspension shall be subject to and governed by ORC § 4510.02. 
CHAPTER 333. - STREETS; SPECIAL USES 

§ 333.01 - OBSTRUCTION IN STREETS. 
(A)  No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a street, highway, road, lane, or alley any tacks, bottles, wires, glass, nails or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal traveling along or upon such street, highway, road, lane, or alley, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair of construction thereof. 
(B)  Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street any noxious, destructive, or injurious material shall immediately remove the same. 
(C)  Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street or highway from such vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley. 
(D)  No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a roadway without proper authority. 
(E)  No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a street, highway, road, lane, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may damage or injure any person or animal or vehicle traveling or stopped on any highway, lane, road, street or alley except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof. 
(F)  No person shall recklessly drop or throw any object which may induce an operator of a vehicle on any part of any highway, lane, road, street or alley to take evasive action to avoid striking such object whether or not such object is actually capable of causing damage or injury. 
(G)  Whoever violates C.O. § 333.01(A) or (B) or (C) or (D) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Whoever violates C.O. § 333.01(E) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates C.O. § 333.01(F) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
§ 333.02 - PARADE OR PROCESSION. 
(A)  No parade or procession which shall in any way obstruct the flow of traffic shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the Upper Arlington City Manager or as otherwise authorized herein. For purposes of this chapter parade shall mean any procession or moving assemblage upon any street or public thoroughfare other than routine vehicular traffic or a funeral procession. 
(B)  Permit required: No person or organization shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or conduct any street parade without first obtaining a permit from the Upper Arlington City Manager. 
(C)  Exception: This section shall not apply to, nor shall a permit be required for a funeral or for picketing conducted off the street or roadway. 
§ 333.03 - QUIET ZONES. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no persons operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of the vehicle, except in an emergency. The Upper Arlington City Manager shall designate such quiet zones as deemed necessary, and shall erect signs thereat. 
§ 333.04 - CHILDREN AT PLAY. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a children at play street, then the operator of a motor vehicle shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon such street or portion thereof. The city manager or designee shall designate such children at play streets as the city manager or designee deems necessary, and shall erect signs thereat. Such streets may be designated by slow children signs or children at play signs. 
§ 333.05 - SELLING FROM VEHICLES ON ANY STREET. 
No person shall sell or offer to sell from any vehicle on any street in this city before the hours of 9:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m. during daylight savings hours, and after 5:00 p.m. at all other times, any food, drink or other merchandise of any kind. Such sales will at all times be conducted from the side of such vehicle nearer the curb or edge of the pavement. Selling of goods shall be in compliance with all state and local regulations and laws. 
CHAPTER 335. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

§ 335.01 - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL INTERSECTION. 
Traffic control signals shall be established and traffic control intersections shall be designated by the city manager or designee. 
( Ord. No. 8-2016, § 4, 2-22-2016 ) 
§ 335.02 - OBEYING TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. 
No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any traffic control device placed in accordance with this traffic code unless at the time otherwise directed by a police officer or school crossing guard stationed in the vicinity of school buildings. When both traffic control signals and stop signs are erected at intersections, traffic shall be governed by the traffic control signal while it is in operation. 
No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator, if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
§ 335.03 - THROUGH STREETS, STOP AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS. 
(A)  The city manager or designee shall establish and designate stop intersections and yield intersections, at which intersections shall be maintained the appropriate traffic control devices to regulate traffic and promote public safety. The city manager or designee shall have all necessary authority to erect, or cause to be erected, appropriate and legible signals, signs or markers, upon which shall be displayed the word stop at all intersections designated by the city manager or designee as stop intersections or the word yield at the intersections designated by the city manager or designee as yield intersections. 
(B)  All state routes are hereby designated as through streets or highways, provided that stop signs shall be erected at all intersections with such through streets or highways except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(C)  Other streets or highways or portions thereof within the city with a continuous length of more than one (1) mile between the limits of such street or highway or portion thereof, at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from the majority of intersecting streets or highways is controlled by stop or yield signs or traffic control signals, are hereby designated as through streets or highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of such street or highway or portion thereof shall be the city corporation line, the physical terminus of the street or highway or any point on such street or highway at which vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to traffic on the intersection street. Through streets may be further classified as arterial streets or collector streets. 
(D)  Where two (2) or more through streets or highways intersect and no traffic control signal is in operation, stop signs shall be erected at one (1) or more entrances thereto, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(E)  Every stop sign shall bear the word "STOP" in letters not less than six (6) inches in height. Every stop sign shall be located as near as practicable at the property line of the street or highway at the entrance to which the stop must be made, or at the nearest line of the crosswalk thereat; or, if none, at the nearest line of the roadway. 
(F)  Stop signs need not be erected at intersections so constructed as to permit traffic to safely enter a through street or highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through street or highway. 
(G)  The city manager or designee may designate additional through streets or highways and shall erect stop signs in all streets and highways intersecting such through streets or highways. 
(H)  Through streets may be further classified as arterial streets or collector streets. All other streets not classified as a collector street or arterial street are classified as local streets. For planning and operational purposes, a higher level of service and priority designation will be given first to arterial streets, then collector streets and finally local streets. Street lights will be installed and maintained as deemed necessary by city council on arterial and collector streets, in consideration of pedestrian volumes and community activity centers, such as schools and city parks, commercial zoning districts, intersections and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 115-2009; Ord. No. 8-2016, § 5, 2-22-2016 ) 
§ 335.04 - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL TERMS AND LIGHTS, NO TURN ON RED. 
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words go, caution, or stop, or exhibiting different illuminated colored lights or controlled with illuminated arrows, the following colors only shall be used and the terms and lights shall indicate and apply to operators or vehicles and pedestrians, as follows: 
(A)  Circular green alone or go signal: 
(1)  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk, unless directed otherwise by a pedestrian signal or a traffic control device. 
(2)  All other traffic facing the signal except as provided under C.O. § 351.14 may proceed straight through or turn right or left, unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But such traffic shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection and to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
(B)  Circular yellow alone or caution when shown following the green or go signal: 
(1)  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway. 
(2)  All other traffic facing the signal is warned that the red or stop signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and that pedestrians proceeding in accordance with the traffic control signals shall have the right-of-way. 
(C)  Circular red alone or stop signal: 
(1)  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway. 
(2)  All other traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until authorized to proceed by a traffic control device except as provided in C.O. § 335.04(C)(3) and (C)(4). 
(3)  Unless a sign is in place prohibiting a right turn on red vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to make a right turn after stopping as required by C.O. § 335.04(C)(2). Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
(4)  Unless a sign is in place prohibiting a left turn, vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal on a one-way street on which traffic moves to the left may cautiously enter the intersection to make a left turn into the one-way street after stopping as required by C.O. § 335.04(C)(2), and yielding the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
(D)  Green arrow signal or a traffic control device authorizing turn with red or stop signal: 
(1)  No pedestrian facing such a signal or device shall enter the roadway. 
(2)  All other traffic facing such signal or device may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the green arrow or device, and shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within the crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
(E)  Green arrow signal alone: 
(1)  Pedestrians facing a vertical green arrow signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk unless directed otherwise by a pedestrian signal or traffic control device. 
(2)  All other traffic facing such signal may enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a cross-walk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
(F)  Signals show simultaneously: 
(1)  Where more than one (1) traffic control signal or device is shown simultaneously, vehicular traffic shall comply with the traffic control signal or device applicable to the traffic lane and direction in which it is proceeding or about to proceed. 
(G)  Changing signals: 
(1)  Any traffic lawfully upon the roadway within an intersection at the time a traffic control signal changes may continue cautiously through the intersection with due regard for the safety and rights of all persons using the roadway. 
(H)  Yellow arrow signal: 
(1)  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway. 
(2)  All other traffic facing the signal is warned that the protected movement indicated by the preceding green arrow is terminated and that pedestrians proceeding in accordance with traffic signals shall have the right-of-way. 
§ 335.05 - PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS. 
Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words walk, don't walk or wait are in place, such signals shall indicate the following instructions: 
(A)  Walk: pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the operators of all vehicles. 
(B)  Don't walk or wait: no pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal. 
§ 335.06 - FLASHING TRAFFIC SIGNALS. 
(A)  Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow traffic signal is used in a traffic signal or with a traffic sign it shall require obedience, as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal): Operators of vehicles shall stop before entering the intersection at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersection roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal): Operators of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or pass such signal only with caution. 
§ 335.07 - UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS. 
(A)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles a traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic control device, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any street or highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic control devices. 
(B)  Every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device is a public nuisance, and the City may remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
§ 335.08 - TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES OR SIGNS. 
No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following: 
(A)  Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with any traffic control device, any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia on the device, sign or signal, or any part of the device sign or signal. 
(B)  Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an undried condition and is marked by flags, cones, marked signs or other devices intended to protect it. 
(C)  Knowingly move, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with a manhole cover. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(E)  If a violation of C.O. §§ 335.08(A) or (C) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(F)  This section shall not apply if a violation of C.O. §§ 335.08(A) or (C) causes serious physical harm to property that is leased or controlled by a State or local authority. 
CHAPTER 351. - OPERATION GENERALLY (MOTOR VEHICLES) 

§ 351.01 - LANES OF TRAVEL UPON ROADWAYS. 
(A)  Upon all streets or highways of sufficient width, a vehicle or trackless trolley shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing such movements. 
(2)  When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the street or highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the street or highway within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard. An obstruction may be defined but is not limited to a parked car, a leaf pile or snow bank. 
(3)  When driving upon a roadway divided into three (3) or more marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon. 
(4)  When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way traffic. 
(5)  When otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer or traffic control device. 
(B)  Upon all roadways any vehicle or trackless trolley proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle or trackless trolley proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn. 
(C)  Upon any roadway having four (4) or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle or trackless trolley shall be driven to the left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or except as permitted under C.O. § 351.01(A)(2). 
C.O. § 351.01(C) shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
§ 351.02 - PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS. 
Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one (1) line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-half (1/2) or as nearly one-half (1/2) of the main traveled portion of the roadway as is reasonably possible. 
§ 351.03 - OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT; DRIVER'S DUTIES. 
The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction: 
(A)  The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(B)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle at the latter's audible signal, and the operator shall not increase the speed of the operator's vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(C)  The operator of a vehicle or trackless trolley overtaking and passing another vehicle or trackless trolley proceeding in the same direction on a divided street or highway as defined in ORC § 4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in ORC § 5511.02 or a highway with four (4) or more traffic lanes, is not required to signal audibly to the vehicle or trackless trolley being overtaken and passed. 
§ 351.04 - OVERTAKING, PASSING TO RIGHT OR LEFT. 
(A)  The operator of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn. 
(2)  Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled by the overtaking vehicle. 
(3)  The operator of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. The movement shall not be made by driving off the roadway. 
(B)  No vehicle shall overtake and pass traffic proceeding in the same direction in school zones between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. when the roadway does not have two (2) or more lanes of travel moving in the same direction. 
§ 351.05 - OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF CENTER LINE. 
No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center or center line of the roadway in overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made, without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching the opposite direction of any traffic overtaken. 
In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable and in the event the passing movement involves the use of land authorized for traffic approaching from the opposite direction before coming within two hundred (200) feet of any approaching vehicle. 
§ 351.06 - PROHIBITIONS AGAINST OVERTAKING, PASSING LEFT OF CENTER. 
No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing traffic, or at any time, be driven to the left of the center line of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(A)  When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the street or highway where the operator's view is obstructed within such a distance as to create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite direction. 
(B)  When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred (100) feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel. 
(C)  When approaching within one hundred (100) feet of or traversing an intersection or railroad grade crossing, unless compliance with this section is impossible because of insufficient roadway space. 
This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway or upon a roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side or under the conditions described in C.O. § 351.01(A)(2). 
§ 351.07 - HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES. 
Hazardous zones, commonly called no passing zones, shall consist of an auxiliary yellow line marked on the roadway pavement and placed parallel to the normal center line or marked lane line. When the auxiliary yellow line appears on the left side in the driver's lane of travel (to the right of the normal center line or marked lane line), no driver shall drive across the auxiliary yellow line to overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction. When auxiliary yellow lines appear on both sides of the normal center line or marked lane line, drivers proceeding in either direction shall not drive across such auxiliary yellow lines to overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction. No driver shall, at any other time, drive across the yellow auxiliary line when it appears in the driver's lane of travel, except to make a lawfully permitted left-hand turn under the rules governing such movement. No passing signs may also be erected facing traffic to indicate the beginning and end of each no passing zone. When appropriate signs or markings indicating hazardous or no passing zones are in place and clearly visible, every operator of a vehicle shall obey directions thereof, notwithstanding the distance as set forth in C.O. § 351.06. 
§ 351.08 - OPERATION OF A VEHICLE AT STOP SIGNS. 
(A)  Every operator of a vehicle shall stop at a stop sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering an intersection except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer or traffic control signal. 
(B)  The stop at a stop sign shall be made at the stop line indicated on the surface of the roadway or at the nearest edge of the intersection, if there is no stop line. 
§ 351.09 - ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS. 
A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. 
§ 351.10 - ONE-WAY STREETS. 
(A)  Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way traffic as designated by the city manager or designee, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated. 
(B)  No operator shall drive on a roadway in a direction of travel in violation of signs, markings or barriers erected or placed. 
( Ord. No. 8-2016, § 6, 2-22-2016 ) 
§ 351.11 - DRIVING IN MARKED LANES. 
Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, or wherever traffic is lawfully moving in two (2) or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the following rules apply: 
(A)  A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from such lane or line until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(B)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes and provides for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or when preparing for a left turn, or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is posted with signs to give notice of such allocation. 
(C)  Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs. 
(D)  Official traffic control devices may be installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. 
§ 351.12 - SPACE BETWEEN MOVING VEHICLES; ASSURED CLEAR DISTANCE. 
(A)  The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable or prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the street or highway. 
(B)  The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle, when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district shall maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between such vehicle and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger. This paragraph does not prevent overtaking and passing, nor does it apply to any lane especially designated for use by trucks. 
(C)  Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade, shall maintain a sufficient space between such vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger. This paragraph shall not apply to funeral processions. 
§ 351.13 - DIVIDED ROADWAYS. 
Whenever any highway has been divided into two (2) roadways by an intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an opening crossover or intersection established by public authority. This section does not prohibit the occupancy of such dividing space, barrier or section for the purpose of an emergency stop or in compliance with an order of a law enforcement officer. 
§ 351.14 - TURNS AT INTERSECTION. 
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be governed by the following rules: 
(A)  Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(B)  At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for the left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center lines thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(C)  At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one (1) direction on one (1) or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable in the left-hand lane of the roadway being entered lawfully available to the traffic moving in that lane. 
(D)  Markers, buttons or signs may be placed within or adjacent to intersections thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles, turning at an intersection, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn such vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. 
(E)  No operator shall turn a vehicle at any intersection where signs, signals or markings prohibit such turn and have been erected or placed at such location. 
§ 351.15 - U TURNS PROHIBITED. 
(A)  No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street or highway. Turns commonly known as U turns are hereby prohibited. 
(B)  Motor vehicles are also prohibited from making left turns for the purpose of parking on the opposite side of the street, wherever turns are prohibited in paragraph (A) hereof. 
§ 351.16 - TURNING INTO PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING. 
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or driveway, alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed by the following rules: 
(A)  Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(B)  Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions, approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof. 
(C)  Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one (1) direction, approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across any alleyway. 
§ 351.17 - STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES. 
(A)  No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked upon any street or highway or any public or private property open to use by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking until such movement can be made with reasonable safety so as to yield the right of way to moving vehicles. 
(B)  Before backing, an operator of a vehicle shall give ample warning, and while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on the street or highway, or any public or private property open to use by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(C)  No person shall back a vehicle into an intersection or over a crosswalk. 
(D)  No operator of a vehicle shall back such vehicle from any alley, private driveway, or building across the centerline of any street of sufficient width to allow two (2) or more moving lanes of traffic in each direction. 
§ 351.18 - BACKING INTO CURB PERMITTED. 
In places where and at hours when stopping for the loading or unloading of merchandise or materials is permitted, vehicles used for the transportation of merchandise or materials may back into the curb to take on or discharge loads, provided that such vehicle shall not prevent the reasonable flow of traffic. 
§ 351.19 - TURN AND STOP SIGNALS. 
(A)  No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a street or highway unless and until such person has exercised due care to ascertain that the movement can be made with reasonable safety nor without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(B)  When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
(C)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give a signal. 
(D)  Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate to both approaching and following traffic intention to turn or move right or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a street or highway shall be equipped with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds twenty-four (24) inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds fourteen (14) feet, whether a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles. 
(E)  The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on one (1) side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or do pass signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one (1) side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with this section. 
§ 351.20 - HAND AND ARM SIGNALS. 
All signals required by this traffic code, when given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(A)  Left turn-Hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(B)  Right turn-Hand and arm extended upward. 
(C)  Stop or decrease speed-Hand and arm extended downward. 
(D)  As an alternative to (B) of this section, a person operating a bicycle may give a right turn signal by extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the bicycle. 
§ 351.21 - RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS. 
(A)  When two (2) vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(B)  The right-of-way rule declared in paragraph (A) of this section is modified at through highway and otherwise stated in this traffic code. 
§ 351.22 - RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT. 
(A)  The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or onto an alley, private road or driveway, shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction whenever the approaching vehicle is within the intersection or so close to the intersection, alley, private road, or driveway as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
§ 351.23 - MALFUNCTIONING TRAFFIC LIGHTS RIGHT-OF-WAY. 
The operator of a vehicle, who approaches an intersection where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following, if the signal facing him either exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows or exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate the assignment of right-of-way. 
(A)  Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, stop before entering the intersection. 
(B)  Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or approaching an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an immediate hazard during the time the operator of a vehicle is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways. 
(C)  Exercise ordinary care, while proceeding through the intersection. 
§ 351.24 - RIGHT-OF-WAY AT THROUGH HIGHWAY, STOP SIGNS AND YIELD SIGNS. 
(A)  Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at the clearly marked stop line; but, if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or; if none, then at the point nearest to the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersection roadway before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle or pedestrian in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways. 
(B)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but, if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle or pedestrian in the intersection or approaching on the roadway as closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle or pedestrian in the intersection or junction of roadways, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima-facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right-of-way. 
(C)  The operator of a vehicle in obedience to a yield sign shall yield the right-of-way to all other vehicles or pedestrians approaching from a different direction into its or his path. 
§ 351.25 - EMERGENCY/PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES HAVE RIGHT-OF-WAY. 
(A)  Upon the approach of an emergency/public safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle, equipped with at least one (1) flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of the vehicles, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-of-way, immediately drive if practical to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the edge or curb of the street or highway clear of any intersection, and stop and remain in such position until the emergency/public safety vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer. 
(B)  This section does not relieve the driver of an emergency/public safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the street or highway. 
(C)  This section applies to a coroner's vehicle only when the vehicle is operated in accordance with ORC § 4513.171. As used in this section, "coroner's vehicle" means a vehicle used by a coroner, deputy coroner, or coroner's investigator that is equipped with a flashing, oscillating, or rotating red or blue light and a siren, exhaust whistle, or bell capable of giving an audible signal. 
(D)  Whoever violates paragraph (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 351.26 - FUNERAL PROCESSION HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY. 
(A)  As used in this section funeral procession means two (2) or more vehicles accompanying a body of a deceased person in the daytime when each of such vehicles has its headlights lighted and is displaying a purple and white pennant attached to each vehicle in such manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction. 
(B)  Excepting emergency/public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with C.O. § 351.24, or when directed otherwise by a law enforcement officer, pedestrians and the operators of all vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle which is a part of a funeral procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully enters an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in such procession may continue to follow such lead vehicle through the intersection notwithstanding any traffic control devices or right-of-way provisions of this traffic code, provided the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian upon the roadway. 
(C)  No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession without having the headlights of such vehicle lighted and without displaying a purple and white pennant in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction. 
(D)  Funeral processions shall keep as near to the right side of the street as practical. 
(E)  No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession while in motion. 
§ 351.27 - ENTERING TRAFFIC FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY. 
(A)  The operator of a vehicle emerging from a private driveway or building shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian on the sidewalk. 
(B)  The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a street or highway from a private road or building shall stop and yield the right-of-way to all traffic approaching on the street or highway. 
(C)  The operator of a vehicle entering a private road or building from a street or highway shall yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians lawfully using the street, highway or sidewalk. 
§ 351.28 - DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE. 
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone except for the purpose of making a left turn or to go around an obstruction or as directed by a law enforcement officer or other traffic control devices. 
§ 351.29 - OBSTRUCTING VIEW OR MOVEMENT AND CONTROL OF DRIVER. 
(A)  No persons or person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded or in such condition, or when there are in the front seat such number of persons or animals, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(B)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position or by any manner of conduct, as to interfere with the driver's view to the front or sides of the vehicle or interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(C)  No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so and can be done without interfering with the movement of the other traffic nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
§ 351.30 - DRIVING OVER CURBS AND OTHER PROPERTY OTHER THAN PUBLIC STREETS. 
(A)  No driver of any motor vehicle shall drive over or across any curb or within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(B)  No driver of any motor vehicle shall drive over or along that part of a street between the roadway and property adjacent to such street, except on an uncurbed street when and to the extent that it may be necessary to drive on the unpaved part thereof in order to permit passage of other vehicles. 
(C)  No driver of any motor vehicle shall drive over any property, public or private, other than a public street, without permission of the owner or person in charge thereof, except on a permanent or temporary driveway. 
§ 351.31 - DAMAGING CURB, SIGN OR POLE. 
Whoever having charge of any vehicle shall run into or against any curbing or sidewalk or fire hydrant or any danger signal or warning sign or standard thereof, or any light or utility pole or standard, along any street or public way, thereby cracking, breaking or otherwise injuring the same; or shall crack or break or otherwise injure or deface the same by unloading or throwing upon the same in a hasty manner, rough or careless manner, any stone, iron, building material, or other heavy body or substance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
§ 351.32 - DRIVING UPON CLOSED HIGHWAY; CONSTRUCTION. 
No person shall drive upon, along or across a street or highway, or any part thereof, which has been closed in the process of its construction, reconstruction or repair, or which has been closed for any other reason by order of the city manager or designee, and posted with appropriate signs. 
§ 351.33 - FOLLOWING AND PARKING NEAR EMERGENCY/PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES. 
(A)  The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency/public safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency/public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than five hundred (500) feet. 
(B)  The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle on official business, shall not drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a law enforcement officer or a firefighter. 
§ 351.34 - DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE. 
No vehicle shall, without the consent of the fire division official in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire division, when such hose is laid down on any street or private driveway, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire. 
§ 351.35 - RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLES. 
(A)  No person shall hang onto, or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley, while it is moving upon a street, highway or roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency. 
(B)  No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto, or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle, while it is moving upon a street, highway or roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under the authority of a public agency. 
(C)  No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall knowingly permit any person who has not attained the age of sixteen (16) years to ride in the unenclosed or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver's vehicle, if the vehicle is traveling faster than twenty-five (25) miles per hour, unless either of the following applies: 
(1)  The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with Federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in division (A)(2) of ORC § 4513.263, the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt. 
(2)  An emergency/public safety exists that threatens the life of the driver or the person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer or semitrailer. 
(D)  No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall permit any person, except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance or trash collection vehicles or construction under authority of a public agency to ride in the cargo storage area or on a tailgate of the driver's vehicle while the tailgate is unlatched. 
§ 351.36 - PROHIBITION AGAINST DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSINGS. 
(A)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, he shall stop within fifty (50) feet, but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of the railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirement shall apply when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train. 
(2)  When a crossing gate is lowered. 
(3)  When a human flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a train. 
(4)  A train approaching within approximately one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from that distance and the train by reason of its speed or nearness to the crossing, is an immediate hazard. 
(5)  An approaching train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing. 
(B)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
§ 351.37 - VEHICLES REQUIRED TO STOP AT GRADE CROSSINGS. 
(A)  The operator of any motor vehicle, carrying passengers for hire, or of any school bus, or of any vehicle carrying explosives or flammable liquids as a cargo, or such part of a cargo as to constitute a hazard, before crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle and while so stopped shall listen through an open door or open window and look in both directions along the track for any approaching train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after stopping, looking and listening as required by this section, and upon proceeding, the operator of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gears of the vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing such crossing, and the operator shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks. 
This section does not apply to abandoned tracks, spur tracks, side tracks and industrial tracks when the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio has authorized and approved the crossing of such tracks without making the stop required by this section. 
(B)  When authorized stop signs are erected at railroad grade crossings, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within fifty (50) feet, but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise due care before proceeding across such grade crossing. 
§ 351.38 - STREET RACING PROHIBITED. 
(A)  No person shall participate in a street race as defined in C.O. ch. 301 upon any public road, street or highway in this city. 
(B)  Persons rendering assistance in any manner to such competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as the participants. The operation of two (2) or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of prima-facie lawful speeds established by ORC § 4511.21(A) through (G), inclusive; or in excess of the prima facie lawful speeds established by C.O. § 353.05 or pursuant to C.O. § 353.06, or rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such prima-facie lawful speeds shall be prima-facie evidence of street racing. 
(C)  Whoever violates C.O. § 351.38 is guilty of street racing, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other sanctions, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege for not less than thirty (30) days or more than three (3) years. No judge, mayor or magistrate shall suspend the first thirty (30) days of any suspension of any offender's license, permit, or privilege imposed under this division. 
§ 351.39 - LOADING OR DISCHARGING BUS PASSENGERS. 
No operator of a bus shall stop or park the same for the purpose of loading or discharging passengers in any officially designated loading or unloading area unless the front and rear wheels of such vehicle on the right side thereof are within twelve (12) inches from the curb. However, the provisions of this section do not apply where conditions in the loading area or in the sidewalk are adjacent thereto make such stop impossible. 
§ 351.40 - PROHIBITIONS AGAINST EARPHONES. 
(A)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over, or earplugs in, both ears. As used in this section, earphones means any headset, radio, tape player or other similar device that provides the listener with radio programs, music or other recorded information through a device attached to the head or that covers all or a portion of both ears. Earphones does not include speakers or other listening devices that are built into protective headgear. 
(B)  This section does not apply to: 
(1)  Any person wearing a hearing aid. 
(2)  Law enforcement personnel while on duty. 
(3)  Fire Division personnel and emergency medical service personnel while on duty. 
(4)  Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the maintenance or repair of any street or highway. 
(5)  Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment. 
§ 351.41 - DUTIES UPON APPROACHING STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE DISPLAYING EMERGENCY LIGHT. 
(A)  The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public safety vehicle, an emergency vehicle, or a road service vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals by means of flashing, oscillating, or rotating lights, as prescribed in ORC § 4513.17, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a street or highway that consists of at least two (2) lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of travel as that of the driver's motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather, and traffic conditions, shall change lanes into a lane that is not adjacent to that of the stationary public safety vehicle, an emergency vehicle, or a road service vehicle. 
(2)  If the driver is not traveling on a street or highway of a type described in division (A)(1) of this section, or if the driver is traveling on a street or highway of that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so would be unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather, and traffic conditions. 
(B)  This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety, an emergency vehicle, or a road service vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the street or highway. 
(C)  No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with division (A)(1) or (2) of this section when so required by division (A) of this section. 
(D)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two (2) or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(2)  Notwithstanding ORC § 2929.28, upon a finding that a person operated a motor vehicle in violation of division (C) of this section, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose a fine of two (2) times the usual amount imposed for the violation. 
(E)  As used in this section, "public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle and road service vehicle," have the same meaning as in C.O. ch. 301. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009; Ord. No. 59-2012) 
§ 351.42 - RIGHT-OF-WAY AT T-INTERSECTIONS. 
When two (2) vehicles approach or enter a T-intersection from streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the street or highway which dead-ends into the other street or highway shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the other street or highway, unless a traffic control device is present at the T-intersection and otherwise stated in this traffic code. 
§ 351.43 - RIGHT-OF-WAY AT PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING. 
The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a street or highway from any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed. 
§ 351.44 - EMERGING FROM PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY, OR BUILDING; STOP AT SIDEWALK OR SIDEWALK AREA. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road, or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across the alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon. 
§ 351.45 - EMERGING FROM PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING. 
It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle emerging from a private road or driveway, alley, or building to yield the right of way to pedestrians using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across any such private roadway or driveway, alleyway, or building exitway. When conditions restrict a clear view of any approaching pedestrians, the driver shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto such sidewalk or sidewalk area, sound an audible approach signal, and yield the right of way to pedestrians as may be required. 
CHAPTER 353. - INTOXICATION; RECKLESS DRIVING; SPEED 

§ 353.01 - OPERATING A VEHICLE UNDER THE INFLUENCE (O.V.I.); PHYSICAL CONTROL. 
(A)  No person who is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them shall operate any vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley within this city. 
(B)  No person shall operate any vehicle within this city when: 
(1)  The person has a concentration of eight-hundredths (.08) of one percent (1%) or more but less than seventeen-hundredths (.17) of one percent (1%) by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole blood; or 
(2)  The person has a concentration of eight-hundredths (.08) of one (1) gram or more but less than seventeen-hundredths (.17) of one (1) gram by weight of alcohol per two hundred ten (210) liters of the person's breath; or 
(3)  The person has a concentration of eleven-hundredths (.11) of one (1) gram or more but less than two hundred thirty-eight thousandths (.238) of one (1) gram by weight of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of the person's urine; or 
(4)  The person has a concentration of ninety-six-thousandths (.096) of one percent (1%) or more but less than two hundred four-thousandths (.204) of one per cent (1%) by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or plasma; or 
(5)  The person has a concentration of seventeen-hundredths (.17) of one percent (1%) or more by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole blood; or 
(6)  The person has a concentration of seventeen-hundredths (.17) of one (1) gram or more by weight of alcohol per two hundred ten (210) liters of the person's breath; or 
(7)  The person has a concentration of two hundred thirty-eight thousandths (.238) of one (1) gram or more by weight of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of the person's urine; or 
(8)  The person has a concentration of two hundred four-thousandths (.204) of one percent (1%) or more by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or plasma. 
(9)  Except as provided in division (O) of this section, the person has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or metabolites of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following: 
(a)  The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person's urine of at least five hundred (500) nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least one hundred (100) nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
(b)  The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person's urine of at least one hundred fifty (150) nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of cocaine in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least fifty (50) nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
(c)  The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the person's urine of at least one hundred fifty (150) nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least fifty (50) nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
(d)  The person has a concentration of heroin in the person's urine of at least two thousand (2,000) nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of heroin in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least fifty (50) nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
(e)  The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person's urine of at least ten (10) nanograms of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten (10) nanograms of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
(f)  The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person's urine of at least twenty-five (25) nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person's urine or a concentration of L.S.D. in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten (10) nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
(g)  The person has a concentration of marijuana in the person's urine of at least ten (10) nanograms of marijuana per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of marijuana in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least two (2) nanograms of marijuana per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
(h)  Either of the following applies: 
(i)  The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them, and, as measured by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, the person has a concentration of marijuana metabolite in the person's urine of at least fifteen (15) nanograms of marijuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of marijuana metabolite in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least five (5) nanograms of marijuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
(ii)  As measured by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, the person has a concentration of marijuana metabolite in the person's urine of least thirty-five (35) nanograms of marijuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of marijuana metabolite in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least fifty (50) nanograms of marijuana metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
(i)  The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person's urine of at least five hundred (500) nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least one hundred (100) nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
(j)  The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person's urine of at least twenty-five (25) nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten (10) nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. 
(C)  No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley if, at the time of the physical control, any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. 
(2)  The person's whole blood, breath, urine, or blood serum or plasma contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in division (A)(1)(b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), or (i) of ORC § 4511.19 or C.O. § 353.01(B)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), or (8). 
(3)  Except as provided in division (K)(5)(c) of this section, the person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in ORC § 4511.19(A)(1)(j) or C.O. § 353.01(B)(9). 
(D)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall operate any vehicle, streetcar or trackless trolley within this city, if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person has a concentration of at least two-hundredths (.02) of one percent (1%), but less than eight-hundredths (.08) of one percent (1%) by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole blood; or 
(2)  The person has a concentration of at least two-hundredths (.02) of one (1) gram but less than eight-hundredths (.08) of one (1) gram by weight of alcohol per two hundred ten (210) liters of the person's breath; or 
(3)  The person has a concentration of at least twenty-eight one thousandths (.028) of one (1) gram but less than eleven hundredths (.11) of one (1) gram by weight of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of the person's urine; or 
(4)  The person has a concentration of at least three-hundredths (.03) of one percent (1%), but less than ninety-six-thousandths (.096) of one percent (1%) by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or plasma. 
(E)  No person who, within twenty (20) years of the conduct described in division (E)(1) of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this division, division (A), (B), or (D) of this section, ORC § 4511.19(A)(1) or (B), or any other equivalent offense shall do both of the following: 
(1)  Operate any vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley within this city while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them; 
(2)  Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley as described in division (E)(1) of this section, or ORC § 4511.19(A)(2)(a), being asked by a law enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under ORC § 4511.191, and being advised by the officer in accordance with ORC § 4511.192 of the consequences of the person's refusal or submission to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests. 
(F)  (1)  In any prosecution for a violation of division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this section or for an equivalent offense, the court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance, or a combination of them in the defendant's whole blood, breath, urine, blood serum or plasma, or other bodily substance at the time of the alleged violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three (3) hours of the time of the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified in this division regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect the two (2) hour time limit specified in ORC § 4511.192(A) as the maximum period of time during which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as described in that section. 
When a person submits to a blood test at the request of a law enforcement officer under ORC § 4511.191, only a physician, a registered nurse, or a qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist shall withdraw blood for the purpose of determining the alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This limitation does not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood under this division may refuse to withdraw blood under this division, if in that person's opinion, the physical welfare of the person would be endangered by the withdrawing of the blood. 
The bodily substance withdrawn shall be analyzed in accordance with methods approved by the Ohio Director of Health, by an individual possessing a valid permit issued by the director pursuant to ORC § 3701.143. 
(2)  In any prosecution for a violation of C.O. § 353.01(A), (B), or (C) or for an equivalent offense, if there was at the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (B)(1), (2), (3) and (4) of this section or less than the applicable concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance specified for a violation of division (B)(9) of this section, that fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant. This division does not limit or affect a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (D) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent to that division. 
(3)  Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the chemical test shall be made available to the person, or the person's attorney, immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. 
The person tested may have a physician, a registered nurse, or a qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist of the person's own choosing administer a chemical test or tests, at the person's expense, in addition to any administered at the request of a law enforcement officer. The form to be read to the person to be tested, as required under ORC § 4511.192, shall state that the person may have an independent test performed at the person's expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical test by a person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the chemical test or tests taken at the request of a law enforcement officer. 
(4)  (a)  As used in divisions (F)(4)(b) and (c) of this section, "National Highway Traffic Safety Administration" means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration established as an administration of the United States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C.A. 105. 
(b)  In any prosecution for a violation of division (A), (B), (C), (D) or (E) of this section, of a municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle with prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine, or being in physical control of a motor vehicle, if a law enforcement officer has administered a field sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing standards for any reliable, credible, and generally accepted field sobriety tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including, but not limited to, any testing standards then in effect that were set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply: 
(i)  The officer may testify concerning the results of the field sobriety test so administered. 
(ii)  The prosecution may introduce the results of the field sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the prosecution. 
(iii)  If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under division (F)(4)(b)(i) or (ii) of this section and if the testimony or evidence is admissible under the rules of evidence, the court shall admit the testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of fact considers to be appropriate. 
(c)  Division (F)(4)(b) of this section does not limit or preclude a court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a prosecution of a type described in that division, from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by division (F)(4)(b) of this section. 
The foregoing provisions of this section do not limit the introduction of any other competent evidence bearing upon the question of whether or not the defendant was under the influence of alcohol, drug of abuse or combined influence of alcohol and drug of abuse. 
(G)  As used in this section drug of abuse has the same meaning as that term defined in ORC § 4506.01. 
(H)  In any proceeding arising out of one (1) incident, a person may be charged with a violation of C.O. § 353.01(A), § 353.01(B), § 353.01(D) or § 353.01(E) of this section, but the person may not be convicted of more than one (1) violation of these divisions. 
(1)  Subject to division (I)(3) of this section, in any prosecution for a violation of division (B)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), or (9), (C), or (D) (1), (2), (3), or (4) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions, a laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the Ohio Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine, or other bodily substance test and that contains all of the information specified in this division shall be admitted as prima-facie evidence of the information and statements that the report contains. The laboratory report shall contain all of the following: 
(a)  The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the analysis; 
(b)  Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a combination of them that was found; 
(c)  A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or test performer involved with the report, the analyst's or test performer's employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the analyst's or test performer's regular duties; and 
(d)  An outline of the analyst's or test performer's education, training, and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the department of health. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission of evidence, a report of the type described in division (I)(1) of this section is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding, other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant's attorney or, if the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant. 
(3)  A report of the type described in division (I)(1) of this section shall not be prima-facie evidence of the contents, identity, or amount of any substance if, within seven (7) days after the defendant to whom the report pertains or the defendant's attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the defendant's attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report. The judge, magistrate, or mayor in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of justice. 
(I)  [Reserved.] 
(J)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician, registered nurse, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section, ORC § 4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station, or clinic at which blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section, ORC § 4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the person. The immunity provided in this division is not available to a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in willful or wanton misconduct. 
(K)  (1)  Whoever violates any provision of division (A) or (B)(1) to (8) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever violates division (B)(9) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for either offense under ORC ch. 2929, except as otherwise authorized or required by divisions (K)(1)(a) to (d) of this section: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in division (K)(1)(b), (c), (d)(i), (ii) of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender to all the following: 
(i)  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of division (A), (B) (1), (2), (3), (4), or (9) of this section, a mandatory jail term of three (3) consecutive days. As used in this division, three (3) consecutive days means seventy-two (72) consecutive hours. The court may sentence an offender to both an intervention program and a jail term. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the three-day mandatory jail term or intervention program, however, in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. 
The court may suspend the execution of the three-day jail term under this division if the court, in lieu of that suspended term, places the offender on probation and requires the offender to attend, for three (3) consecutive days, a drivers' intervention program certified under ORC § 3793.10. The court also may suspend the execution of any part of the three (3) day jail term under this division if it places the offender on probation for part of the three (3) days, requires the offender to attend for the suspended part of the term a drivers' intervention program so certified, and sentences the offender to a jail term equal to the remainder of the three (3) consecutive days that the offender does not spend attending the program. The court may require the offender, as a condition of probation and in addition to the required attendance at a drivers' intervention program, to attend and satisfactorily complete any treatment or education programs that comply with the minimum standards adopted pursuant to ORC ch. 3793 by the director of alcohol and drug addiction services that the operators of the drivers' intervention program determine that the offender should attend and to report periodically to the court on the offender's progress in the programs. The court also may impose on the offender any other conditions of probation that it considers necessary. 
If the court grants unlimited driving privileges to a first-time offender under ORC § 4510.022, all penalties imposed upon the offender by the court under division (K)(1)(a)(i) of this section for the offense apply, except that the court shall suspend any mandatory or additional jail term imposed by the court under division (K)(1)(a)(i) of this section upon granting unlimited driving privileges in accordance with ORC § 4510.022. 
(ii)  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of division (B) (5), (6), (7), or (8) or division (E)(1), (2) of this section, except as otherwise provided in this division, a mandatory jail term of at least three (3) consecutive days and a requirement that the offender attend, for three (3) consecutive days, a drivers' intervention program that is certified pursuant to ORC § 3793.10. As used in this division, three (3) consecutive days means seventy-two (72) consecutive hours. If the court determines that the offender is not conducive to treatment in a drivers' intervention program, if the offender refuses to attend a drivers' intervention program, or if the jail at which the offender is to serve the jail term imposed can provide a drivers' intervention program, the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term of at least six (6) consecutive days. 
The court may require the offender, as a condition of probation, to attend and satisfactorily complete any treatment or education programs that comply with the minimum standards adopted pursuant to ORC ch. 3793 by the director of alcohol and drug addiction services, in addition to the required attendance at drivers' intervention program, that the operators of the drivers' intervention program determine that the offender should attend and to report periodically to the court on the offender's progress in the programs. The court also may impose any other conditions of probation on the offender that it considers necessary. 
If the court grants unlimited driving privileges to a first-time offender under ORC § 4510.022, all penalties imposed upon the offender by the court under division (K)(1)(a)(i) of this section for the offense apply, except that the court shall suspend any mandatory or additional jail term imposed by the court under division (K)(1)(a)(i) of this section upon granting unlimited driving privileges in accordance with ORC § 4510.022. 
(iii)  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of (A), (B)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (9) of this section, a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than one thousand seventy-five dollars ($1,075.00). If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of (B) (5), (6), (7), (8) or (E) (1) or (2) of this section, a fine of not less than five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) and not more than one thousand seventy-five dollars ($1,075.00). 
(iv)  In all cases, a suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified for a definite period of one (1) to three (3) years. The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under ORC §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13. The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with an ignition interlock device relative to the suspension and may reduce the period of suspension as authorized under ORC § 4510.022. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in division (K)(1)(d)(i), (ii) of this section, an offender who, within ten (10) years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) violation of division (A), (B), or (D) of this section or one (1) other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
(i)  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of division (A), (B)(1), (2), (3), (4), or (9) of this section, a mandatory jail term of ten (10) consecutive days. The court shall impose the ten-day mandatory jail term under this division, unless, subject to (K)(3) of this section, it instead imposes a sentence under that division consisting of both a jail term and a term of electronically monitored house arrest or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the ten-day mandatory jail term. The cumulative jail term imposed for the offense shall not exceed six (6) months. In addition, the court may authorize that the defendant be granted work release from imprisonment during the ten (10) consecutive days of imprisonment that the court is required by this section to impose. 
In addition to the jail term or the term of electronically monitored house arrest or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring and jail term, the court shall require the offender to be assessed by an alcohol and drug treatment program that is authorized by section ORC § 3793.02, subject to division (I) of this section, and shall order the offender to follow the treatment recommendations of the program. The purpose of the assessment is to determine the degree of the offender's alcohol usage and to determine whether or not treatment is warranted. Upon the request of the court, the program shall submit the results of the assessment to the court, including all treatment recommendations and clinical diagnoses related to alcohol use. (Ordinance No. 88-2008) 
(ii)  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of division (B)(5), (6), (7), or (8) or division (E)(1), (2) of this section, except as otherwise provided in this division, a mandatory jail term of twenty (20) consecutive days. The court shall impose the twenty-day mandatory jail term under this division unless, subject to division (K)(3) of this section, it instead imposes a sentence under that division consisting of both a jail term and a term of electronically monitored house arrest or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the twenty-day mandatory jail term. The cumulative jail term imposed for the offense shall not exceed six (6) months. In addition, the court may authorize that the offender be granted work release during the twenty (20) consecutive days. 
In addition to the jail term or the term of electronically monitored house arrest and jail term, or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring, the court shall require the offender to be assessed by an alcohol and drug treatment program that is authorized by section ORC § 3793.02, subject to division (I) of this section, and shall order the offender to follow the treatment recommendations of the program. The purpose of the assessment is to determine the degree of the offender's alcohol usage and to determine whether or not treatment is warranted. Upon the request of the court, the program shall submit the results of the assessment to the court, including all treatment recommendations and clinical diagnoses related to alcohol use. 
(iii)  In all cases, notwithstanding the fines set forth in ORC ch. 2929, if the sentence is being imposed for a violation of division (A), (B)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (9) of this section, a fine of not less than seven hundred twenty-five dollars ($725.00) and not more than one thousand six hundred twenty-five dollars ($1,625.00). If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of division (B) (5), (6), (7), (8) or (E) (1) or (2) of this section, a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and not more than one thousand six hundred twenty-five dollars ($1,625.00). 
(iv)  In all cases, a suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege for a definite period of one (1) to seven (7) years. The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under ORC §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13. 
(v)  In all cases, if the vehicle is registered in the offender's name, immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense for ninety (90) days in accordance with ORC § 4503.233 and impoundment of the license plates of that vehicle for ninety (90) days unless a vehicle immobilization waiver has been filed as required in ORC § 4503.235. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in division (K)(1)(d)(i), (ii) of this section, an offender who, within ten (10) years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) violations of division (A), (B), or (D) of this section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
(i)  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of division (A), (B)(1), (2), (3), (4), or (9) of this section, a mandatory jail term of thirty (30) consecutive days. The court shall impose the thirty-day mandatory jail term under this division unless, subject to division (K)(3) of this section, it instead imposes a sentence under that division consisting of both a jail term and a term of electronically monitored house arrest or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the thirty-day mandatory jail term. Notwithstanding the terms of imprisonment set forth in ORC ch. 2929, the additional jail term shall not exceed one (1) year, and the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense shall not exceed one (1) year. In addition, the court may authorize that the offender be granted work release during the thirty (30) consecutive days of imprisonment that the court is required by this section to impose. 
(ii)  If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of division (B)(5), (6), (7), or (8) or division (E)(1), (2) of this section, a mandatory jail term of sixty (60) consecutive days. The court shall impose the sixty-day mandatory jail term under this division unless, subject to division (K)(3) of this section, it instead imposes a sentence under that division consisting of both a jail term and a term of electronically monitored house arrest or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the sixty-day mandatory jail term. Notwithstanding the terms of imprisonment set forth in ORC ch. 2929, the additional jail term shall not exceed one (1) year, and the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense shall not exceed one (1) year. In addition, the court may grant the offender work release for the sixty (60) consecutive days. 
(iii)  In all cases, notwithstanding the fines set forth in ORC ch. 2929, if the sentence is being imposed for a violation of (A), (B)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (9) of this section, a fine of not less than one thousand fifty dollars ($1,050.00) and not more than two thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($2,750.00). If the sentence is being imposed for a violation of (B)(5), (6), (7) (8) or (E)(1) or (2) of this section, a fine of not less than one thousand seventy-five dollars ($1,075.00) and not more than two thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($2,750.00); 
(iv)  In all cases, a suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege for a definite period of two (2) to twelve (12) years. The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under ORC §§ 4510.021, 4510.13 and 4511.198. 
(v)  In all cases, if the vehicle is registered in the offender's name, criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense in accordance with ORC § 4503.234 [4503.23.4]. ORC § 4511.19(G)(6) applies regarding any vehicle that is subject to any order of criminal forfeiture under this division. 
(vi)  In all cases, the court shall order the offender to participate in an alcohol and drug addiction program authorized by ORC § 3793.02, subject to division (I) of this section, and shall order the offender to follow the treatment recommendations of the program. The operator of the program shall determine and assess the degree of the offender's alcohol dependency and shall make recommendations for treatment. Upon the request of the court, the program shall submit the results of the assessment to the court, including all treatment recommendations and clinical diagnoses related to alcohol use. 
(d)  (i)  If within ten (10) years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three (3) or four (4) violations of division (A), (B) or (D), or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within twenty (20) years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to five (5) or more violations of that nature, is guilty of a felony and is to be prosecuted under the appropriate state law. 
(ii)  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A) of ORC § 4511.19 or an equivalent offense under circumstances in which the violation was a felony, regardless of when the prior violation and the prior conviction or guilty plea occurred, the offender is guilty of a felony of the third degree and is to be prosecuted under the appropriate state law. 
(2)  An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A), (B), (D) or (E) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the driver's or occupational driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege suspended under this section as a result of the conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in ORC § 4511.191 [4511.19.1] division (F)(2). 
(3)  If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under division (K)(1)(b)(i) or (ii) or (K)(1)(c)(i) or (ii) of this section and if, within sixty (60) days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able to begin serving that term within the sixty-day period following the date of sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence under this division that includes a term of electronically monitored house arrest or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring, as defined in ORC § 2929.23. 
As an alternative to a mandatory jail term of ten (10) consecutive days required by division (K)(1)(b)(i) of this section, the court, under this division, may sentence the offender to five (5) consecutive days in jail and not less than eighteen (18) consecutive days of electronically monitored house arrest or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring. The cumulative total of the five (5) consecutive days in jail and the period of electronically monitored house arrest or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. The five (5) consecutive days in jail do not have to be served prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest. 
As an alternative to the mandatory jail term of twenty (20) consecutive days required by division (K)(1)(b)(ii) of this section, the court, under this division, may sentence the offender to ten (10) consecutive days in jail and not less than thirty-six (36) consecutive days of electronically monitored house arrest or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring. The cumulative total of the ten (10) consecutive days in jail and the period of electronically monitored house arrest or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. The ten (10) consecutive days in jail do not have to be served prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest. 
As an alternative to a mandatory jail term of thirty (30) consecutive days required by division (K)(1)(c)(i) of this section, the court, under this division, may sentence the offender to fifteen (15) consecutive days in jail and not less than fifty-five (55) consecutive days of electronically monitored house arrest or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring. The cumulative total of the fifteen (15) consecutive days in jail and the period of electronically monitored house arrest or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring shall not exceed one (1) year. The fifteen (15) consecutive days in jail do not have to be served prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest. 
As an alternative to the mandatory jail term of sixty (60) consecutive days required by division (K)(1)(c)(ii) of this section, the court, under this division, may sentence the offender to thirty (30) consecutive days in jail and not less than one hundred ten (110) consecutive days of electronically monitored house arrest or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring. The cumulative total of the thirty (30) consecutive days in jail and the period of electronically monitored house arrest or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring shall not exceed one (1) year. The thirty (30) consecutive days in jail do not have to be served prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest. 
(4)  If the offender has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B)(5), (6), (7) or (8) or (E)(1), (2) of this section or any equivalent offense, in addition to any other penalty or sanction authorized by this code or the Ohio Revised Code, the offender's driver's or occupational driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under division (K) of this section and if ORC § 4510.13 permits the court to grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving privileges in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section requires that the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted license plates that are issued under ORC § 4503.231, except as provided in division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender, except as provided in ORC § 4503.231(B). 
(5)  (a)  Whoever violates C.O. § 353.01(C) is guilty of having physical control of a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on the offender a class seven (7) suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(7) or division (A)(7) of ORC § 4510.02. 
(b)  The court shall also impose a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(c)  Division (C)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is in physical control of a vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in division (A)(1)(j) of ORC § 4511.19 or C.O. § 353.01(B)(9), if both of the following apply: 
(i)  The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs. 
(ii)  The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance in accordance with the health professional's directions. 
(d)  "Physical control" has the same meaning as in ORC § 4511.194. 
(6)  In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under division (K) of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in ORC § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to ORC § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under division (K) of this section. 
(L)  Whoever violates C.O. § 353.01(D) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  (a)  Except as otherwise provided in division (L)(2) of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six (6) suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(6) or division (A)(6) of ORC § 4510.02. The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under ORC §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13. The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with an ignition interlock device relative to the suspension and may reduce the period of suspension as authorized under ORC § 4510.022. If the court grants unlimited driving privileges under ORC § 4510.022, the court shall suspend any jail term imposed under division (L)(1) of this section as required by ORC § 4510.022. 
(b)  The court shall order the offender to attend and complete a drug and/or alcohol assessment by a certified chemical dependency counselor and/or any other alcohol and/or drug program recommended by the court. 
(2)  (a)  If, within one (1) year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) or more violations of division (A), (B), or (D) of this section or other equivalent offenses, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. In addition, to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class four (4) suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(4) or division (A)(4) of ORC § 4510.02. The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under ORC §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13. 
(b)  The court shall order the offender to attend and complete any treatment or education program through an alcohol and drug addiction service as authorized by ORC § 3793.02. 
(3)  If the offender also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a specification of the type described in ORC § 2941.1416 and if the court imposes a jail term for the violation of division (D) of this section, the court shall impose upon the offender an additional definite jail term pursuant to division (E) of ORC § 2929.24. 
(4)  The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in ORC § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to ORC § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the violation of division (D) of this section. 
(M)  (1)  No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment program under this section unless the treatment program complies with the minimum standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under ORC ch. 3793 by the director of alcohol and drug addiction services. 
(2)  An offender who stays in a drivers' intervention program or in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court may order that the cost be paid from the court's indigent drivers' alcohol treatment fund. 
(N)  If a person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under this section files an appeal regarding any aspect of the person's trial or sentence, the appeal itself does not stay the operation of the suspension. 
(O)  Division (B)(9) of this section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in that division, if both of the following apply: 
(1)  The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs. 
(2)  The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance in accordance with the health professional's directions. 
(P)  All terms defined in ORC § 4510.01 apply to this section. If the meaning of a term defined in ORC § 4510.01 conflicts with the meaning of the same term as defined in ORC § 4501.01 or 4511.01, the term as defined in ORC § 4510.01 applies to this section. 
(Q)  As used in C.O. § 353.01, equivalent offense means any of the following: 
(1)  A violation of ORC § 4511.19(A) or (B); or C.O. § 353.01(A), (B) or (D); 
(2)  A violation of a municipal OVI ordinance; 
(3)  A violation of ORC § 2903.04 in a case in which the offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section; 
(4)  A violation of ORC § 2903.06(A)(1) or 2903.08 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those divisions; 
(5)  A violation of ORC § 2903.06(A)(2), (3), or (4), ORC § 2903.08(A)(2), or former ORC § 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions or that former section, in a case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender was under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them; 
(6)  A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to ORC § 4511.19(A) or (B), or C.O. § 353.01(A), (B), or (D); 
(7)  A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially equivalent to ORC § 4511.19(A) or (B), or C.O. § 353.01(A), (B), or (D). 
(R)  Municipal OVI Ordinance and Municipal OVI Offense mean any municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine. 
(S)  Community control sanction, jail, mandatory prison term, mandatory term of local incarceration, sanction, and prison term, house arrest, and continuous alcohol monitoring have the same meanings as in ORC § 2929.01. 
(T)  "Controlled substance" and "marijuana" have the same meaning as in ORC § 3719.01. 
(U)  "Drug of abuse" has the same meaning as in ORC §§ 3719.011 and 4506.01. 
(V)  "Drug abuse offense," "cocaine," and "L.S.D.," have the same meanings as in ORC § 2925.01. 
(Ord. No. 40-2008; Ord. No. 88-2008, 11-10-2008; Ord. No. 12-2011; Ord. No. 70-2011; Ord. No. 14-2017 , § 2, 2-27-2017) 
§ 353.02 - RECKLESS OPERATION. 
(A)  No person shall operate a vehicle, trackless trolley or street-car on any street or highway in willful or wanton disregard of persons or property. 
(B)  Whoever violates C.O. § 353.02 on the first offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree; and on a second or subsequent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 353.03 - RECKLESS OPERATION OFF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS. 
(A)  No person shall operate a vehicle, trackless trolley or street-car on any public or private property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property. 
(B)  Whoever violates C.O. § 353.03 on the first offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree; and on a second or subsequent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 353.04 - FAILURE TO CONTROL. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street or highway or on any public or private property without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such vehicle. 
§ 353.05 - C.O. § 353.05 SPEED REGULATIONS: ASSURED CLEAR DISTANCE AHEAD. 
(A)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle in and upon the streets and highways at a speed greater or less than is reasonable or proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. 
(B)  It shall be prima-facie lawful for the operator of a motor vehicle, to operate the same at a speed not exceeding the following: 
(1)  Twenty (20) miles per hour in school zones during school recess and/or while children are going to and/or leaving school during the opening and/or closing hours, and when twenty (20) miles per hour school speed signs are erected. Nothing in this section or in the manual and specifications for a uniform system of traffic control devices shall be construed to require school zones to be indicated by signs equipped with flashing lights or other lights, or giving other special notice of the hours in which the school zone speed is in effect. 
(2)  Twenty-five (25) miles per hour in all other portions of the city except on state routes, other through streets or highways outside business districts as designated in C.O. § 311.02(B). 
(3)  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour on all state routes or streets and through highways within the city, outside business districts as designated in C.O. § 311.02, except as otherwise provided by law as contained in C.O. § 353.05. 
(4)  Fifty (50) miles per hour on controlled access highways and expressways. 
(5)  Fifty (50) miles per hour on state routes outside urban districts unless a lower prima-facie speed is established as provided by law. 
(6)  Fifteen (15) miles per hour on all alleys. 
(7)  Twenty-five (25) miles per hour as journalized on the following streets or portions thereof: 
(a)  Andover Road. 
(b)  Arlington Avenue. 
(c)  Brandon Road. 
(d)  Cambridge Boulevard. 
(e)  Canterbury Road. 
(f)  Coventry Road, from the north side of Wilshire Drive. 
(g)  Eastcleft Drive. 
(h)  Guilford Road, from North Star Road to Arlington Avenue. 
(i)  Kioka Avenue, from Middlesex Road to Zollinger Road. 
(j)  Leeds Road. 
(k)  Lyon Drive. 
(l)  Lytham Road. 
(m)  Mount Holyoke Road. 
(n)  Mountview Road. 
(o)  Northam Road. 
(p)  Nottingham Road. 
(q)  Redding Road, from Tremont Road to Farleigh Road. 
(r)  Ridgeview Road. 
(s)  Tremont Road, from North Star Road to Fishinger Road. 
(t)  Waltham Road. 
(u)  Woodbridge Road. 
(8)  Forty-five (45) miles per hour as journalized on Riverside Drive (State Highway No. 33). 
(9)  The reduced speed limit in any construction zone, as defined in C.O. ch. 301, during hours of actual work within the construction zone, where the speed limit has been altered in accordance with C.O. § 305.03 or C.O. § 353.06 and the construction zone has been clearly marked and posted with signs indicating a reduced speed limit. 
(C)  Notwithstanding C.O. § 315.99(A), if the offender operated a motor vehicle faster than thirty-five (35) miles an hour in a business district of a municipal corporation, provided the posted speed is twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less, faster than fifty (50) miles an hour in other portions of a municipal corporation, or faster than thirty-five (35) miles an hour in a school zone during recess or while children are going to or leaving school during the school's opening or closing hours, the violation is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(D)  It shall be prima-facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed limitations in this section. In every charge of violation of this section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and the speed at which this section declares shall be prima-facie lawful, at the time and place of alleged violation, except that in affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than will permit him to bring the vehicle to a stop, within the assured clear distance ahead the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven. 
(Ord. No. 33-2012) 
§ 353.06 - ALTERED SPEED LIMITS TO BE POSTED. 
(A)  Wherever appropriate signs are erected giving notice that the speed limits established above have been altered either lower or higher, as provided by law, it shall be prima-facie unlawful for any person to exceed any such posted speed limits. 
(B)  Notwithstanding C.O. § 353.05, should the Ohio Director of Transportation or city council, under the authority of ORC § 4511.21, determine and declare a reasonable and safe prima-facie speed limit different than those stated in C.O. § 353.05, and appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected in accordance with ORC § 4511.21, it shall be prima-facie lawful for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed not in excess of such designated speed and it shall be prima-facie unlawful for any person to exceed such speed. 
§ 353.07 - SLOW SPEED. 
(A)  No person shall stop or operate a vehicle, streetcar or trackless trolley at such an unreasonably slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to comply with law. 
(B)  In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator. 
(Ord. No. 40-2008) 
§ 353.08 - ENTERING AN INTERSECTION: OBSTRUCTED TRAFFIC. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle being operated without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
§ 353.09 - LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF VEHICLE. 
No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load carried on such vehicle which extends more than six (6) inches beyond the line of the fenders on the vehicle's left side. 
§ 353.10 - STOPPING MOTOR VEHICLE WHEN SIGNALED. 
No person while operating a motor vehicle shall fail to slow down and stop such vehicle when signaled to do so upon meeting or overtaking a horse-drawn vehicle or person on horseback and to remain stationary until such vehicle or person has passed, provided such signal to stop is given in good faith, under circumstances of necessity, and only as often and for such length of time as is required for such vehicle or person to pass, whether it is approaching from the front or rear. 
§ 353.11 - UNNECESSARY SQUEALING OF TIRES. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle or motorcycle unless necessary for safe operation or in compliance with the law, in such a manner as to cause a rapid acceleration or deceleration or an abrupt run resulting in unnecessary squealing of tires. 
§ 353.12 - SPEED EXCEPTIONS FOR EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. 
The prima-facie speed limitations set forth in C.O. § 353.05 do not apply to emergency vehicles or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls, and are equipped with and displaying at least one (1) flashing rotating or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of the vehicle and when the driver thereof sounds audible signals by bell, siren or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from his duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway. 
§ 353.13 - TEXT-MESSAGING WHILE DRIVING 
(A)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle, trackless trolley, or streetcar on any street, highway, or property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using a handheld electronic wireless communications device to write, send, or read a text-based communication, or to send, read, create, or interact with Internet-based content, play games, or otherwise interact with the Internet. 
(B)  Divisions (A) of this section do not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device in that manner for emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or entity; 
(2)  A person driving a public safety vehicle who uses a handheld electronic wireless communications device in that manner in the course of the person's duties; 
(3)  A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device in that manner whose motor vehicle is in a stationary position and who is outside a lane of travel; 
(4)  A person reading, selecting, or entering a name or telephone number in a handheld electronic wireless communications device for the purpose of making or receiving a telephone call; 
(5)  A person receiving wireless messages on a device regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle; safety-related information, including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or data used primarily by the motor vehicle; 
(6)  A person receiving wireless messages via radio waves; 
(7)  A person using a device for navigation purposes; 
(8)  A person conducting wireless interpersonal communication with a device that does not require manually entering letters, numbers, or symbols or reading text messages, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate the device or a feature or function of the device; 
(9)  A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data terminal that transmits and receives data; 
(10)  A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device in conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free device feature or function of the vehicle. 
(C)  Violation of division (A) of this section shall be a primary offense. 
(D)  Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 59-2012) 
§ 353.14 - USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICES WHILE DRIVING BY PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE 
(A)  No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years and no holder of a probationary driver's license shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an electronic wireless communications device. 
(B)  Division (A) of this section does not apply to either of the following: 
(1)  A person using an electronic wireless communications device for emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or entity; 
(2)  A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a lane of travel; 
(3)  A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving. 
(C)  (1)  Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). In addition, the court shall impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license or permit for a definite period of sixty (60) days. 
(2)  If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section, whoever violates this section shall be fined three hundred dollars ($300.00). In addition, the court shall impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license or permit for a definite period of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 59-2012) 
CHAPTER 355. - LICENSING 

§ 355.01 - OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE. 
(A)  (1)  No person, except those expressly exempted under ORC §§ 4507.03, 4507.04, 4507.05, or a holder of a probationary driver's license under ORC § 4507.071, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a street or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this city unless the person has a valid driver's license issued under ORC ch. 4507 or a commercial driver's license issued under ORC ch. 4506. 
(2)  No person, except a person expressly exempted under ORC §§ 4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05 shall operate any motorcycle upon a street or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this city unless the person has a valid license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the Registrar of the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles under ORC ch. 4507. The license shall be in the form of an endorsement, as determined by the registrar, upon a driver's or commercial driver's license, if the person has a valid license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted license as provided in ORC § 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle. 
(B)  Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a violation of division (A)(1) or (2) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima-facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid driver's or commercial driver's license at the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver's or commercial driver's license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of division (A)(1) or (2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  If the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit was expired at the time of the offense for no more than six (6) months, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  If at the time of the offense the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit was expired for more than six (6) months; or the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit privileges were cancelled for reasons other than pursuant to ORC ch. 4509; or the offender never has held a valid driver's or commercial driver's license or permit, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(D)  The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation of this section or if more than three (3) years have passed since the offender's last violation of this section or any equivalent offense. 
(E)  If the offender was convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) or more violations of this section or any equivalent offense within the past three (3) years, and if the offender's license was expired for more than six (6) months at the time of the offense, the court may impose a class seven (7) suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(7) or ORC § 4510.02(A)(7). 
(F)  Upon recommendation of the Upper Arlington City Prosecutor, a violation or violations of this section shall not prohibit an offender from eligibility into the traffic diversion program as provided in C.O. § 173.05. 
(Ord. No. 70-2011; Ord. No. 42-2015, § 2, 6-22-2015 ) 
§ 355.02 - PROHIBITED ACTS. 
No person shall do any of the following: 
(A)  Display, or cause or permit to be displayed or possess any identification card, driver's or operator's, or commercial driver's license, or motorized bicycle license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit, knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended or altered. 
(B)  Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver's, operator's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit, operator's, or motorized bicycle license issued to the person so lending or permitting the use thereof. 
(C)  Display, or represent as one's own, any identification card, driver's, operator's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit, operator's, or motorized bicycle license not issued to the persons so displaying the same. 
(D)  Failure to surrender to the Registrar of the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles, upon the registrar's demand, any identification card, driver's, operator's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit that has been suspended, or canceled. 
(E)  In any application for an identification card, driver's, operator's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit or any renewal or duplicate thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any physician's statement required under ORC § 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be false or fictitious. 
(F)  Whoever violates C.O. § 355.02 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 355.03 - WRONGFUL ENTRUSTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLE. 
(A)  No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under the person's control to be driven by another if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the other person does not have a valid driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or valid nonresident driving privileges. 
(2)  The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the other person's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under ORC ch. 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or any equivalent offense. 
(3)  The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the other person's act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition contained in ORC ch. 4509 or any equivalent offense. 
(4)  The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the other person's act of driving would violate ORC § 4511.19 or any equivalent offense. 
(5)  The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under ORC § 4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under that order. 
(B)  Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence in determining whether a violation of division (A)(1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima-facie evidence that the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender's control is in a category described in division (A)(1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this section if any of the following applies: 
(1)  Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in division (A)(1) (3), or (5) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by consanguinity or affinity. 
(2)  Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in division (A)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator's license, permit, or privilege. 
(3)  Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in division (A)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to the penalties imposed under ORC ch. 2929, the court may impose a class seven (7) suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(7) or in ORC 4510.02(A)(7), and, if the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the offender, the court shall order one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) or (3) of this section, the court may order, for thirty (30) days, the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle's license plates. The order shall be issued and enforced under ORC § 4503.233. 
(2)  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) violation of this section or any equivalent offense, the court may order, for sixty (60) days, the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle's license plates. The order shall be issued and enforced under ORC § 4503.233. 
(3)  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) or more violations of this section or any equivalent offense, the court may order the criminal forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under ORC § 4503.234. 
If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is assigned or transferred and ORC 4503.234(B)(2) or (3) applies, in addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National Automobile Dealer's Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this division shall be distributed in accordance with ORC § 4503.234(C)(2). 
(D)  If a court orders the immobilization of a vehicle under division (C) of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle from the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle. 
(E)  This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in ORC § 4549.65. 
(F)  For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the person's name. 
(Ord. No. 88-2008) 
§ 355.04 - DUTY TO DISPLAY LICENSE OR FURNISH SATISFACTORY PROOF OF LICENSE. 
(A)  The operator of a motor vehicle or motorized bicycle shall display the operator's driver's license, probationary driver's license, or temporary instruction permit, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver's license, probationary driver's license, or temporary instruction permit, upon demand of any law enforcement officer or of any person damaged or injured in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is properly made and the operator has the operator's driver's license, probationary driver's license, or temporary instruction permit on or about the operator's person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A person's failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed as required by law, when the person does not have the person's license on or about the person's person shall be prima-facie evidence of the person's not having obtained a driver's license, probationary driver's license, or temporary instruction permit. 
(B)  Whoever violates C.O. § 355.04 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
( Ord. No. 42-2015, § 3, 6-22-2015 ) 
§ 355.05 - DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION. 
(A)  Except as provided in division (B) of this section, and in C.O. §§ 355.13 and 355.20, no person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, other than ORC ch. 4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which the person's license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon the streets or highways or upon any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this city during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the limited driving privileges. 
(B)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a street or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this city in violation of any restriction of the person's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit imposed under ORC § 4506.10(D) or under § 4507.14. 
(C)  Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima-facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (A) of this section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at the time of the alleged violation of division (B) of this section. The person charged with a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence. 
(D)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under suspension or in violation of a license restriction, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the offender a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(7) or in ORC 4510.02(A)(7). 
(2)  Except as provided in division (D)(3) or (4) of this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender's name and if, within three (3) years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) violation of this section or ORC § 4510.111 or 4510.16, or any equivalent offense, the court, in addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense for thirty (30) days and the impoundment of that vehicle's license plates for thirty (30) days in accordance with ORC § 4503.233. 
(3)  If the vehicle is registered in the offender's name and if, within three (3) years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) violations of this section, or any combination of two (2) violations of this section or ORC § 4510.111 or 4510.16, or any equivalent offense, the court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense for sixty (60) days and the impoundment of that vehicle's license plates for sixty (60) days in accordance with ORC § 4503.233. 
(4)  If the vehicle is registered in the offender's name and if, within three (3) years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three (3) or more violations of this section, or any combination of three (3) or more violations of this section or ORC § 4510.111 or 4510.16, or any equivalent offense, the court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender may order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the state. 
(E)  Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section shall be issued and enforced under ORC §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable. The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization or impoundment ordered under this section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle. 
(F)  Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued and enforced under ORC § 4503.234. 
(G)  The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in ORC § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to ORC § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section. 
(Ord. No. 70-2011) 
§ 355.06 - DRIVING WITH FOREIGN LICENSE WHEN LICENSE SUSPENDED. 
(A)  Any non-resident or other person whose operator's or chauffeur's license, or right or privilege to operate a motor vehicle in this city, has been suspended or canceled shall not operate a motor vehicle in this city under a license, permit or registration certificate issued by any other jurisdiction, or otherwise operate a motor vehicle in this city during a period of such suspension. 
(B)  Whoever violates C.O. § 355.06 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 355.07 - USE OF UNAUTHORIZED PLATES; TRANSFER OF REGISTRATION. 
(A)  No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the streets or highways of this city, if it displays a license plate or a distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following criteria: 
(1)  Is fictitious. 
(2)  Is a counterfeit or an unlawfully-made copy of any distinctive number or identification mark. 
(3)  Belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the streets and highways in this city when the motor vehicle displays license plates that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the streets and highways in this city, during the thirty-day period described in ORC § 4503.12(A)(4). 
(B)  A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration provisions of ORC § 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section shall not be charged with a violation of this section. 
(C)  Whoever violates C.O. § 355.07 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
§ 355.08 - DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES. 
(A)  No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall fail to display in plain view on the front and rear of the motor vehicle the distinctive number and registration mark, including any county identification sticker and any validation sticker issued under ORC §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191, furnished by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, except that a manufacturer of motor vehicles or dealer therein, the holder of an in-transit permit, and the owner or operator of a motorcycle, motorized bicycle, manufactured home, mobile home, trailer or semitrailer shall display on the rear only. A motor vehicle that is issued two (2) license plates shall display the validation sticker only on the rear license plate, except that a commercial tractor that does not receive an apportioned license plate under the international registration plan shall display the validation sticker on the front of the commercial tractor. An apportioned vehicle receiving an apportioned license plate under the international registration plan shall display the plate only on the front of a commercial tractor and on the rear of all other vehicles. All license plates shall be securely fastened so as not to swing, and shall not be covered by any material, which obstructs their visibility. 
No person to whom a temporary license placard or windshield sticker has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under ORC § 4503.182, and no operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the temporary license placard in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either in the rear window or on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle, or fail to display the windshield sticker in plain view in the rear window of the motor vehicle. No temporary license placard or windshield sticker shall be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility. 
(B)  No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle which is parked or operated upon the public streets or highways shall fail to annually file the application for registration or to pay the tax therefore, as required by ORC ch. 4503. 
(C)  No person shall park or operate upon the public streets or highways of this City a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered the same in Ohio, while the vehicle displays the distinctive number or identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration. 
(D)  No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the public streets or highways of this city, while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the laws of this State relating to registration and identification of motor vehicles. 
(E)  No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street upon which is displayed an expired license plate or an expired validation sticker. 
(F)  No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street upon which are displayed any license plates not legally registered and issued for such vehicle, or upon which are displayed any license plates that were issued on an application for registration that contains any false statement by the applicant. 
§ 355.09 - OPERATING DEALER'S VEHICLE WITHOUT LICENSE PLATES. 
No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon a public road or highway a motor vehicle of a manufacturer or dealer unless such vehicle carries and displays two (2) placards, except as provided in C.O. § 355.08, issued by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, bearing the registration number of its manufacturer or dealer. 
§ 355.10 - DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION. 
The operator of a commercial car when such car is required by law to be registered, shall, when operating such commercial car, trailer or semitrailer on the streets, roads or highways of this city, display inside or on such vehicle the certificate of registration for such commercial car, trailer or semitrailer provided for, or shall carry such certificate on their person and display such certificate upon the demand of any law enforcement officer. 
Every person operating a commercial car, trailer or semitrailer required by law to be registered, shall permit the inspection of the certificate of registration upon demand of any law enforcement officer of this city. 
§ 355.11 - OPERATION OR SALE OF MOTOR VEHICLE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE. 
(A)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Operate in this city a motor vehicle for which a certificate of title is required without having such certificate in accordance with ORC ch. 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this city knowing that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has been entered into the automated title processing system by a clerk of a court of common pleas; 
(2)  Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer's or importer's certificate, or a certificate of title, or an assignment of a certificate of title for it as provided in ORC ch. 4505; 
(3)  Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar of the Ohio Bureau Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in ORC ch. 4505; 
(4)  Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a clerk of a court of common pleas as provided in ORC ch. 4505, in case of the destruction or dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the motor vehicle described in the certificate of title; 
(5)  Violate any rules promulgated pursuant to ORC ch. 4505; 
(6)  Except as otherwise provided in ORC chs. 4505 and 4517, sell at wholesale a motor vehicle the ownership of which is not evidenced by an Ohio certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the motor vehicle, or the manufacturer's certificate of origin, and all title assignments that evidence the seller's ownership of the motor vehicle, and an odometer disclosure statement that complies with ORC § 4505.06 and subchapter IV of the "Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act," 86 Stat. 961 (1972), 15 U.S.C. 1981; 
(7)  Operate in this city a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has been cancelled. 
(B)  This section does not apply to person engaged in the business of warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage disposition. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), imprisoned not more than ninety (90) days, or both. 
§ 355.12 - DRIVING UNDER OVI SUSPENSION. 
(A)  No person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under ORC § 4511.19, 4511.191, or 4511.196 or under ORC § 4510.07 for a conviction of a violation of a municipal OVI ordinance or any equivalent offense, shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways within this city during the period of the suspension. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under OVI suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under ORC ch. 2929, subject to the differences authorized or required by this section. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or (3) of this section, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
(a)  A mandatory jail term of three (3) consecutive days. The three-day term shall be imposed, unless, subject to ORC § 4510.14(C), the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than thirty (30) consecutive days of electronically monitored house arrest. A period of electronically monitored house arrest imposed under this division shall not exceed six (6) months. If the court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this division, the court may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six (6) months. 
(b)  A fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(c)  A license suspension under division (C) of this section. 
(d)  If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the offense is registered in the offender's name, immobilization for thirty (30) days of the offender's vehicle and impoundment for thirty (30) days of the identification license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be issued and enforced in accordance with ORC § 4503.233. 
(2)  If, within six (6) years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) violation of this section, ORC § 4510.14, or any equivalent offense, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
(a)  A mandatory jail term of ten (10) consecutive days. Notwithstanding the terms of imprisonment provided in ORC §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one (1) year. The ten-day mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to ORC § 4510.14(C), the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than ninety (90) consecutive days of electronically monitored house arrest. The period of electronically monitored house arrest shall not exceed one (1) year. In addition, the court may grant the offender work release under this section. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the fines provided for in ORC ch. 2929, a fine of not less than six hundred dollars ($600.00) and not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(c)  A license suspension under division (C) of this section. 
(d)  If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the offense is registered in the offender's name, immobilization of the offender's vehicle for sixty (60) days and the impoundment for sixty (60) days of the identification license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be issued and enforced in accordance with ORC § 4503.233. 
(3)  If, within six (6) years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) or more violations of this section, ORC § 4510.14, or two (2) or more equivalent offenses, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
(a)  A mandatory jail term of thirty (30) consecutive days. Notwithstanding the terms of imprisonment provided in ORC §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one (1) year. The court shall not sentence the offender to a term of electronically monitored house arrest in lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term. In addition, the court may authorize work release under this section. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the fines set forth in ORC ch. 2929, a fine of not less than eight hundred dollars ($800.00) and not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(c)  A license suspension under division (C) of this section. 
(d)  If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the offense is registered in the offender's name, criminal forfeiture to the state of the offender's vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture shall be issued and enforced in accordance with ORC § 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is assigned or transferred and division (B)(2) or (3) of ORC § 4503.234 applies, the court may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National Automobile Dealer's Association. The proceeds from any fine so imposed shall be distributed in accordance with ORC 4503.234(C)(2). 
(C)  In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor or magistrate of a mayor's court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section a class seven (7) suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(7) or in ORC 4510.02(A)(7). 
When permitted as specified in ORC § 4510.021, if the court grants limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this section, the privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the offender must display restricted license plates, issued under ORC § 4503.231, on the vehicle driven subject to the privileges, except as provided in division (B) of that section. 
(D)  The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in ORC § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to ORC § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under this section for which the offender is sentenced. 
(E)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Electronically monitored house arrest" has the same meaning as in ORC § 2929.23. 
(2)  "Equivalent offense" means any of the following: 
(a)  A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of this state, law of another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (A) of this section; 
(b)  A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially equivalent to division (A) of this section. 
(3)  "Jail" has the same meaning as in ORC § 2929.01. 
(4)  "Mandatory jail term" means the mandatory term in jail of three (3), ten (10), or thirty (30) consecutive days that must be imposed under division (B)(1), (2), or (3) of this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of this section and in relation to which all of the following apply: 
(a)  Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to ORC § 2929.51, 2951.02, or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(Ord. No. 70-2011) 
§ 355.13 - DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR CANCELLATION; DRIVING UNDER A NON-PAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION. 
(A)  No person, whose driver's or commercial driver's license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident's operating privilege has been suspended or canceled pursuant to ORC ch. 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle within this city, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to be operated by another person in the city, during the period of the suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by ORC ch. 4509. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within this city, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to be operated by another person in the city, during the period in which the person is required by ORC § 4509.45 to file and maintain proof of financial responsibility for a violation of ORC § 4509.101, unless proof of financial responsibility is maintained with respect to that vehicle. 
(B)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this state if the person's driver's or commercial driver's license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended pursuant to ORC § 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a judgment. 
(C)  Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima-facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (A) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (B) of this section. The person charged with a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence. 
(D)  Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(Ord. No. 70-2011) 
§ 355.14 - DRIVING UNDER A REPEAT OFFENDER POINTS SUSPENSION. 
(A)  No person whose driver's or commercial driver's license, permit, or nonresident operating privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under ORC § 4510.037 shall operate any motor vehicle upon any street or highway during the period of the suspension. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender to a minimum term of three (3) days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three (3) days of jail time imposed pursuant to this division or ORC § 4510.037(J). 
§ 355.15 - FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE. 
(A)  No person whose driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or nonresident's operating privilege has been suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a street or highway or any public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court, the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(B)  Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a violation of division (A) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima-facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by the person at the time of the alleged violation of division (A) of this section. The person charged with a violation of division (A) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a license, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the offender a class seven (7) suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(7) or division (A)(7) of ORC § 4510.02. 
(Ord. No. 70-2011) 
§ 355.16 - TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION PERMIT; PROBATIONARY DRIVER'S LICENSE. 
(A)  No person who holds a temporary instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued under ORC § 4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this city in violation of the conditions established under ORC § 4507.05(A). 
(B)  No person who holds a temporary instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card to operate a motorcycle or motorized bicycle shall operate a motorcycle or motorized bicycle upon a street or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this city in violation of the conditions established by the Registrar of the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles and as established under ORC § 4507.05(B). 
(C)  No person who holds a probationary driver's license issued under ORC § 4507.071 shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this city in violation of the conditions for probationary license holders under ORC § 4507.071. 
(D)  Whoever violates C.O. § 355.16(A) or (B) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(E)  Whoever violates C.O. § 355.16(C) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 42-2015, § 4, 6-22-2015 ) 
§ 355.17 - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE TO DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION AND FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY CHARGES. 
(A)  It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under C.O. § 355.05, § 355.12, § 355.13 or § 355.15 or ORC § 4510.11, 4510.14, 4510.16, or 4510.21 or under any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid permit or driver's or commercial driver's license, or in violation of a restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency. 
(B)  It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under C.O. § 355.13 or ORC § 4510.16 that the order of suspension resulted from the failure of the alleged offender to respond to a financial responsibility random verification request under ORC § 4509.101(A)(3)(c) and that, at the time of the initial financial responsibility random verification request, the alleged offender was in compliance with ORC 4509.101(A)(1) as shown by proof of financial responsibility that was in effect at the time of that request. 
§ 355.18 - OPERATION WITHOUT VALID LICENSE PROHIBITED; MULTIPLE LICENSES. 
(A)  (1)  No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking knowing the operator is not expressly exempted under ORC §§ 4507.03 or 4507.04, or knowing that the operator does not have a valid driver's license, probationary driver's license, or temporary instruction permit issued to the operator by the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles under ORC ch. 4507 or a valid commercial driver's license issued under ORC ch. 4506. 
(2)  No person shall receive a driver's license, or a motorcycle operator's endorsement of a driver's or commercial driver's license, unless and until the person surrenders to the registrar all valid licenses issued to the person by another jurisdiction recognized by this state. No person shall be permitted to have more than one (1) valid license at a time. 
(3)  Whoever violates (A)(1) or (2) of this division is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
( Ord. No. 42-2015, § 5, 6-22-2015 ) 
§ 355.19 - UNIQUE LICENSE PLATES FOR MOTOR VEHICLES WHOSE STANDARD PLATES HAVE BEEN IMPOUNDED. 
(A)  No motor vehicle registered in the name of a person whose certificate of registration and identification license plates have been impounded as provided by ORC § 4507.02(B)(1), and no vehicle that may be operated pursuant to an immobilization waiver order issued pursuant to ORC § 4503.235, shall be operated on any street in this city unless it displays restricted license plates that are a different color from those regularly issued and carry a special serial number that may be readily identified by law enforcement officers. 
(B)  No person operating a motor vehicle displaying restricted license plates as described in this division shall knowingly disguise or obscure the color of the restricted plate. 
(C)  If a person has been granted limited driving privileges with a condition of the privileges being that the person must display on the vehicle that is driven under the privileges restricted license plates that are described in this section, the person may operate a motor vehicle that is owned by the person's employer only if the person is required to operate that motor vehicle in the course and scope of the person's employment. Such a person may operate that vehicle without displaying on that vehicle restricted license plates that are issued under this section if the employer has been notified that the person has limited driving privileges and of the nature of the restriction and if the person has proof of the employer's notification in the person's possession while operating the employer's vehicle for normal business duties. A motor vehicle owned by a business that is partly or entirely owned or controlled by the person with the limited driving privileges is not a motor vehicle owned by an employer, for the purposes of this division. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unique license plates for motor vehicles whose standard plates have been impounded, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(Ord. No. 88-2008, 11-10-2008) 
§ 355.20 - DRIVING UNDER SUSPENDED LICENSE FOR FAILING TO APPEAR OR PAY FINE; DRIVING UNDER NONPAYMENT OF CHILD SUPPORT SUSPENSION; DRIVING UNDER OTHER SPECIFIED SUSPENSIONS. 
(A)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this state whose driver's or commercial driver's license has been suspended pursuant to ORC § 2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27, 3123.58, 4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33. 
(B)  Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may be admitted into evidence as prima-facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (A) or (B) of this section. The person charged with a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence. 
(C)  Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of driving under suspension, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(Ord. No. 44-2014) 
§ 355.21 - COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSING DEFINITIONS. 
As used in this chapter: 
(A)  "Commercial driver's license" means a license issued in accordance with ORC ch. 4506 that authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle. 
(B)  "Commercial driver's license information system" means the information system established pursuant to the requirements of the "Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986," 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C.A. App. 2701. 
(C)  "Commercial motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Any combination of vehicles with a combined gross vehicle weight rating of twenty-six thousand one (26,001) pounds or more, provided the gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being towed is in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds; 
(2)  Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of twenty-six thousand one (26,001) pounds or more, or any such vehicle towing a vehicle having a gross vehicle weight rating that is not in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds; 
(3)  Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a class A or class B vehicle, but is designed to transport sixteen (16) or more passengers including the driver; 
(4)  Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight rating of less than twenty-six thousand one (26,001) pounds that is designed to transport fewer than sixteen (16) passengers including the driver; 
(5)  Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required under subpart F of 49 C.F.R. part 172, as amended; 
(6)  Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by the federal motor carrier safety administration to be a commercial motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, a motorized crane, a vehicle whose function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a portable crane. 
(D)  "Drive" means to drive, operate, or be in physical control of a motor vehicle. 
(E)  "Driver" means any person who drives, operates, or is in physical control of a commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver's license. 
(F)  "Driver's license" means a license issued by the bureau of motor vehicles that authorizes an individual to drive. 
(G)  "Eligible unit of local government" means a village, township, or county that has a population of not more than three thousand (3,000) persons according to the most recent federal census. 
(H)  "Endorsement" means an authorization on a person's commercial driver's license that is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of commercial motor vehicle. 
(I)  "Farm truck" means a truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than one hundred fifty (150) miles, of products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry and its products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the transportation to the farm, from a distance of not more than one hundred fifty (150) miles, of supplies for the farm, including tile, fence, and every other thing or commodity used in agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock, and poultry production, and livestock, poultry, and other animals and things used for breeding, feeding, or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm, when the truck is operated in accordance with this division and is not used in the operations of a motor carrier, as defined in ORC § 4923.01. 
(J)  "Gross vehicle weight rating" means the value specified by the manufacturer as the maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross vehicle weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed unit. 
(K)  "Hazardous materials" means any material that has been designated as hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103 and is required to be placarded under subpart F of 49 C.F.R. part 172 or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or toxin in 42 C.F.R. part 73, as amended. 
(L)  "Medical variance" means one of the following received by a driver from the federal motor carrier safety administration that allows the driver to be issued a medical certificate: 
(1)  An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial motor vehicle under 49 C.F.R. 381, subpart C or 49 C.F.R. 391.64; 
(2)  A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting operation of a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. 391.49. 
(M)  "Motor vehicle" means a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that such term does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer operated exclusively on a rail. 
(N)  "Out-of-service order" means a declaration by an authorized enforcement officer of a federal, state, local, Canadian, or Mexican jurisdiction declaring that a driver, commercial motor vehicle, or commercial motor carrier operation is out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. 390.5. 
(O)  "Public safety vehicle" has the same meaning as in ORC 4511.01(E)(1) and (3). 
(P)  "Recreational vehicle" includes every vehicle that is defined as a recreational vehicle in ORC § 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes other than engaging in business for profit. 
(Q)  "School bus" has the same meaning as in ORC § 4511.01. 
(R)  "State" means a state of the United States and includes the District of Columbia. 
(S)  "Tester" means a person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement entered into pursuant to ORC § 4506.09(B). 
(T)  "United States" means the fifty (50) states and the District of Columbia. 
(U)  "Vehicle" has the same meaning as in ORC § 4511.01. 
§ 355.22 - COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  Except as provided in divisions (B) and (C) of this section, the following shall apply: 
(1)  No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this city unless the person holds, and has in the person's possession, a valid commercial driver's license with proper endorsements for the motor vehicle being driven, issued by the registrar of motor vehicles, a valid examiner's commercial driving permit issued under ORC § 4506.13, a valid restricted commercial driver's license and waiver for farm-related service industries issued under ORC § 4506.24, or a valid commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit issued by the registrar and is accompanied by an authorized state driver's license examiner or tester or a person who has been issued and has in the person's immediate possession a current, valid commercial driver's license with proper endorsements for the motor vehicle being driven. 
(2)  No person who has been a resident of this state for thirty (30) days or longer shall drive a commercial motor vehicle under the authority of a commercial driver's license issued by another jurisdiction. 
(B)  Nothing in division (A) of this section applies to any qualified person when engaged in the operation of any of the following: 
(1)  A farm truck; 
(2)  Fire equipment for a fire department, volunteer or nonvolunteer fire company, fire district, or joint fire district; 
(3)  A public safety vehicle used to provide transportation or emergency medical service for ill or injured persons; 
(4)  A recreational vehicle; 
(5)  A commercial motor vehicle within the boundaries of the city, if the person is employed by the city and is operating the commercial motor vehicle for the purpose of removing snow or ice from a roadway by plowing, sanding, or salting, but only if either the employee who holds a commercial driver's license issued under ORC ch. 4506 and ordinarily operates a commercial motor vehicle for these purposes is unable to operate the vehicle, or the city manager or designee determines that a snow or ice emergency exists that requires additional assistance; 
(6)  A vehicle operated for military purposes by any member or uniformed employee of the armed forces of the United States or their reserve components, including the Ohio National Guard. This exception does not apply to United States reserve technicians. 
(7)  A commercial motor vehicle that is operated for nonbusiness purposes. "Operated for nonbusiness purposes" means that the commercial motor vehicle is not used in commerce as "commerce" is defined in 49 C.F.R. 383.5, as amended, and is not regulated by the public utilities commission pursuant to ORC chs. 4905, 4921, or 4923. 
(8)  A motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the transportation of goods and not persons, while that motor vehicle is being used for the occasional transportation of personal property by individuals not for compensation and not in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise; 
(9)  A police SWAT team vehicle; 
(10)  A police vehicle used to transport prisoners. 
(C)  Nothing contained in division (B)(5) of this section shall be construed as preempting or superseding any law, rule, or regulation of this state or the city concerning the safe operation of commercial motor vehicles. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 355.23 - CONDITIONS FOR DRIVING COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. 
(A)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person may drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this city if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The person has a valid commercial driver's license or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit issued by any state or jurisdiction in accordance with the minimum standards adopted by the federal motor carrier safety administration under the "Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986," 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C.A. App. for issuance of commercial driver's licenses; 
(2)  The person's commercial driver's license or permit is not suspended, revoked, or canceled; 
(3)  The person is not disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle; 
(4)  The person is not subject to an out-of-service order; 
(5)  The person is medically certified as physically qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle in accordance with ORC ch. 4506 and is able to verify the medical certification when on duty as follows: 
(a)  A person who submitted a medical examiner's certificate to the registrar in accordance with ORC § 4506.10(A)(2) and whose medical certification information is maintained in the commercial driver's license information system is not required to have the medical examiner's certificate in the person's possession when on duty. 
(b)  A person whose medical certification information is not maintained in the commercial driver's license information system is required to have in the person's possession when on duty the original or copy of a current medical examiner's certificate that was issued prior to January 30, 2012, except that after January 30, 2014, such person is required to have in the person's possession when on duty, the original or a copy of the current medical examiner's certificate that was submitted to the registrar, but the person may operate a commercial motor vehicle with such proof of medical certification for not more than fifteen (15) days after the date the current medical examiner's certificate was issued to the person. 
(c)  A person who has a medical variance shall have in the person's possession the original or copy of the medical variance documentation at all times while on duty. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 355.24 - PHYSICAL QUALIFICATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE. 
(A)  No person who holds a valid commercial driver's license shall drive a commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to do so in accordance with ORC § 4506.10. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 355.25 - DRIVING UNDER HABITUAL ALCOHOLIC OR DRUG USER SUSPENSION. 
(A)  No person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under ORC § 4507.08(D)(1) as an habitual alcoholic or drug user shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways within this city during the period of the suspension. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under habitual alcoholic or drug user suspension, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
(1)  A mandatory jail term of five (5) consecutive days. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the mandatory five-day term, provided that in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six (6) months. 
(2)  A mandatory term of continuous alcohol monitoring for thirty (30) consecutive days. The court may impose a term of continuous alcohol monitoring in addition to the mandatory thirty-day term. 
(C)  If, within six (6) years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, one (1) violation of this section, section 355.12 of the Codified Ordinances, ORC § 4510.14, ORC § 4510.11 where the offender was driving under an habitual alcoholic or drug user suspension, or any equivalent offense, then a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
(1)  A mandatory jail term of ten (10) consecutive days. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the mandatory ten-day term, provided that in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six (6) months. 
(2)  A mandatory term of continuous alcohol monitoring for sixty (60) consecutive days. The court may impose a term of continuous alcohol monitoring in addition to the mandatory sixty-day term. 
(D)  If, within six (6) years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, two (2) violations of this section, section 355.12 of the Codified Ordinances, ORC § 4510.14, ORC § 4510.11 where the offender was driving under an habitual alcoholic or drug user suspension, or any equivalent offense, then a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
(1)  A mandatory jail term of thirty (30) consecutive days. The court may impose a jail term in addition to the mandatory thirty-day term, provided that in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six (6) months. 
(2)  A mandatory term of continuous alcohol monitoring for ninety (90) consecutive days. The court may impose a term of continuous alcohol monitoring in addition to the mandatory ninety-day term. 
(E)  No credit toward the mandatory terms of continuous alcohol monitoring imposed under divisions (B)(2), (C)(2), and (D)(2) of this section shall be given for any period where the offender is in jail. 
(F)  If a term of continuous alcohol monitoring is ordered between the arrest and the sentencing of an offender under this section, the time of continuous alcohol monitoring under such order shall be credited against the mandatory term of continuous alcohol monitoring provided in divisions (B)(2), (C)(2), and (D)(2) of this section. 
(G)  The mandatory jail terms and terms of continuous alcohol monitoring under this section shall not be suspended. 
( Ord. No. 19-2015, § 1, 4-13-2015 ) 
§ 355.26 - TAMPERING WITH OR CIRCUMVENTING AN IGNITION INTERLOCK DEVICE; DRIVING IN VIOLATION OF AN IGNITION INTERLOCK ORDER. 
(A)  No person who is subject to an order under ORC § 4510.022 granting unlimited driving privileges with a certified ignition interlock device shall tamper with or circumvent the device, or cause another to tamper with or circumvent the device during the period of suspension imposed by the court during the period of suspension imposed by the court as a result of the person being convicted of or pleading guilty to an OVI offense. 
(B)  No person who is subject to an order under ORC § 4510.022 granting unlimited driving privileges with a certified ignition interlock device shall operate a vehicle that is not equipped with a certified ignition interlock device during the period of suspension imposed by the court as a result of the person being convicted of or pleading guilty to an OVI offense. 
(C)  Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of tampering with or circumventing an ignition interlock device. A person who violates division (B) of this section is guilty of driving in violation of an ignition interlock order. The court shall sentence the offender under ORC ch. 2929, subject to the differences authorized or required by this section. 
(1)  A violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following: 
(a)  A mandatory jail term of three (3) consecutive days. The three-day term shall be imposed, unless the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than thirty (30) consecutive days of electronically monitored house arrest. A period of electronically monitored house arrest imposed under this division shall not exceed six (6) months. If the court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this division, the court may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six (6) months. Except as specifically authorized under this section, the mandatory jail term cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to ORC § 2929.51, 2951.02, or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(b)  A fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(D)  Prosecution and conviction under this section shall not affect the court's ability to issue any order authorized or required under division (E) of ORC § 4510.022. 
(E)  The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in ORC § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to ORC § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing an offense under this section. 
(F)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Electronically monitored house arrest" has the same meaning as in ORC § 2929.23. 
(2)  "Jail" has the same meaning as in ORC § 2929.01. 
(Ord. No. 14-2017 , § 3, 2-27-2017) 
CHAPTER 357. - ACCIDENTS 

§ 357.01 - FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT OR COLLISION. 
(A)  Whenever a vehicle is involved in an accident or collision with either persons or property upon any public street or highway, or upon any public or private property, the operator of any such vehicle who has knowledge of the accident or collision shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. 
(2)  Remain at the scene of the accident or collision, until all requirements of this section have been met. 
(3)  Provide the operator's name and address to all other persons or operators involved in the accident or collision. 
(4)  If the operator of the vehicle involved in the accident or collision is not the owner of the vehicle, then the operator shall provide the name and address of the owner of the vehicle to all other persons or operators involved in the accident or collision. 
(5)  Upon request, the operator of the vehicle involved in the accident or collision shall exhibit or display the operator's driver's license or commercial driver's license to all other persons or operators involved in the accident or collision. 
(6)  The operator of the vehicle involved in the accident or collision shall provide the registration number of the operated vehicle involved in the accident or collision to all other persons or operators involved in the accident or collision. 
(7)  If any other person or operator involved in the accident or collision is unable to comprehend and record the information required to be provided by this section, then the other person or operator involved in the accident or collision shall immediately notify the Upper Arlington Police concerning the fact and location of the accident or collision, and such other person or operator making the notification shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until a law enforcement officer arrives at the scene, unless the person or operator notifying the appropriate law enforcement agency is removed from the scene of the accident or collision by an emergency/public safety vehicle operated by a political subdivision. 
(8)  Provide the name and address of any business entity that provides an insurance liability policy or bond for the operator to be in compliance with the State Financial Responsibility Law. 
(9)  A description of the circumstances of the accident including the location, date and time, extent of damage and any contributing causes. 
(10)  The operator of a vehicle involved in an accident or collision shall provide all of the information required by this section to any law enforcement officer at the scene of such accident or collision. 
(11)  If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended vehicle, then the operator of the vehicle that was involved in the accident or collision shall: 
(a)  Remain at the scene of such accident or collision until the operator has located the owner or operator of the other vehicle and provided the information required to be provided by this section, 
(b)  Remain at the scene until the operator has securely attached the information required to be provided by this section, in writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle and, if available, a telephone number where the operator may be reached, or 
(c)  Immediately notify the Upper Arlington Police concerning the fact and location of the accident or collision and remain at the scene of the accident or collision until a law enforcement officer arrives at the scene. 
(B)  (1)  Whoever violates C.O. § 357.01 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  The court, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five (5) suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privileges from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(5) or in ORC § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge, mayor or magistrate shall suspend the first six (6) months of the suspension of the offender's license, permit, or privilege required by this division. 
(3)  The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in ORC § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to ORC § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding the jurisdiction of the court for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense charged under this section. 
(4)  If the accident or collision in violation of this section results in serious physical harm or death to a person, failure to stop after an accident or collision is a felony to be prosecuted under applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 10-2012) 
§ 357.02 - ACCIDENT OR COLLISION RESULTING IN PROPERTY DAMAGE. 
(A)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damage to real property or personal property attached to such real property, legally upon or adjacent to a public road, street or highway, shall immediately stop and take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of such fact, including remaining at the scene of the accident for a minimum of thirty (30) minutes after the accident or collision, unless transported for medical treatment. Once the owner or person in charge of such property is located, the operator shall provide the owner or person in charge with the information required in C.O. § 357.01(A)(3), (4), (6), (8), and (9). 
(B)  If the owner or person in charge of such property is not present and cannot be located after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident or collision resulting in damage to such property shall: 
(1)  Remain at the scene until the operator has securely attached the information required to be provided by C.O. § 357.01(A) (3), (4), (6), (8), and (9), in writing, to a conspicuous place on or adjacent to the damaged property and, if available, a telephone number where the operator may be reached, or 
(2)  Immediately notify the Upper Arlington Police concerning the fact and location of the accident or collision and remain at the scene of the accident or collision until a law enforcement officer arrives at the scene. 
(C)  (1)  Whoever violates C.O. § 357.02 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  The court, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five (5) suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privileges from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(5) or in ORC § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge, mayor or magistrate shall suspend the first six (6) months of the suspension of the offender's license, permit, or privilege required by this division. 
(3)  The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in ORC § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to ORC § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding the jurisdiction of the court for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense charged under this section. 
(Ord. No. 10-2012) 
§ 357.03 - ACCIDENT REPORT REQUIRED. 
(A)  The driver of a vehicle, bicycle or push cart involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of four hundred dollars ($400.00) or more shall, within twenty-four (24) hours after such accident, forward a written report of such accident to the police division of this city. 
(B)  The police division may require any driver of a vehicle, bicycle or push cart involved in an accident, of which a report must be made as provided in this section, to file supplemental reports whenever the original report is insufficient in the opinion of the police division, with reference to the time, the date, the place, the nature of the accident, weather conditions, road conditions, the name and address of the persons and the ownership of the vehicles, bicycles or push carts directly involved. 
(C)  Whoever violates C.O. § 357.03 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 357.04 - OCCUPANT TO MAKE ACCIDENT REPORT. 
(A)  Whenever the driver of a vehicle, bicycle or push cart is physically incapable of making a required accident report and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making a report, such occupant shall make such report, or cause it to be made. 
(B)  Whoever violates C.O. § 357.04 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
CHAPTER 359. - SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT 

§ 359.01 - OPERATING UNSAFE VEHICLES; APPLICATION OF CODE. 
(A)  No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any street or highway, any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such an unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property. 
(B)  The provisions of this traffic code with respect to equipment on vehicles do not apply to implements of husbandry, road machinery, road rollers or agricultural tractors except as made applicable to such articles of machinery. 
(C)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the use of additional parts and accessories on any vehicles not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
§ 359.02 - MOTOR VEHICLE BUMPERS. 
(A)  No person shall operate upon any street or highway any motor vehicle that: 
(1)  Was originally equipped with bumpers as standard equipment, unless the vehicle is equipped with bumpers equal to the original equipment when so operated. 
(2)  Has a suspension system or body so modified that the height of any bumper on the vehicle varies more than three (3) inches from the original manufactured bumper height for the vehicle. 
§ 359.03 - LIGHTED LIGHTS REQUIRED. 
(A)  Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street or highway open to traffic within the city shall display lighted lights and illuminating devices as required by ORC §§ 4513.04 to 4513.37 during all of the following times: 
(1)  The time from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise; 
(2)  At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles, and substantial objects on the street or highway are not discernible at a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet ahead. 
(3)  At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use because of precipitation on the windshield. 
(B)  Every motorized bicycle shall display at said times lighted lights meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under ORC § 4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be operated upon a street or highway within this city using only parking lights as illumination. 
(C)  Whenever in this traffic code a requirement is declared as to the distance from which certain lights and devices shall render objects visible, or within which the lights or devices shall be visible, the distance shall be measured upon a straight, level, unlighted street or highway under normal atmospheric conditions unless a different condition is expressly stated. 
(D)  Whenever in this traffic code a requirement is declared as to the mounted height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of the light or device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands. 
(E)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a street or highway within this city to stop the vehicle solely because the officer observes that a violation of division (A)(3) of this section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009) 
§ 359.04 - HEADLIGHTS, VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE. 
(A)  Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped with at least two (2) headlights with at least one (1) near each side of the front of the motor vehicle. 
(B)  Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one (1) and not more than two (2) headlights. 
§ 359.05 - TAIL LIGHTS; ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATES. 
(A)  Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be equipped with at least one (1) tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear, provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified. 
(B)  Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when such registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of fifty (50) feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of illuminating such registration plate. 
§ 359.06 - RED REFLECTORS REQUIRED. 
(A)  Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and operated on a street or highway, other than a commercial tractor, to which a trailer or semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail lights or separately, two (2) red reflectors meeting the requirements of this section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in C.O. § 359.08 shall be equipped with reflectors as required by the regulations provided for in such section. 
(B)  Every such reflector shall be of such size and characteristics and so maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within three hundred (300) feet to fifty (50) feet from such vehicle. 
(C)  On every trailer or semitrailer, when operated upon the streets or highways of the city during the time specified in C.O. § 359.03, there shall be carried on each side thereof a red reflector located at or near the rear thereof so fixed as to be plainly visible to other drivers or pedestrians. 
§ 359.07 - SAFETY LIGHTING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES. 
(A)  Buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole trailers, when operated upon any street or highway, shall be equipped with such clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop lights as are lawfully required by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. Such equipment shall be lighted at all times mentioned in C.O. § 359.03, except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be lighted on any such vehicle when it is operated where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the street or highway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet. 
(B)  Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights specifically required by C.O. §§ 359.03 to 359.19, inclusive. 
(C)  Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio are not subject to this section. 
§ 359.08 - OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES IN COMBINATION. 
Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the time that lights are required, any lights, except tail lights, which by reason of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another vehicle of the combination need not be lighted, but this section does not affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front of the foremost vehicles required to have clearance lights or that all lights required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be lighted. 
§ 359.09 - EXTENDED LOADS: RED LIGHT OR FLAG REQUIRED. 
Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four (4) feet or more beyond the bed or body of such vehicle, there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in C.O. § 359.03, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the sides and rear. The red light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than sixteen (16) inches square. No person shall operate any vehicle under conditions described herein, without displaying the red light or red flag on the extending load. 
§ 359.10 - LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED VEHICLES. 
Except in the case of an emergency whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a street or highway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in C.O. § 359.03, such vehicle shall be equipped with one (1) or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the street or highway side, visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle, and a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear. No lights need be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object within a distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such street or highway. Any lighted headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
§ 359.11 - LIGHTS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES; EMBLEMS REQUIRED. 
(A)  All vehicles, other than bicycles, including those referred to in C.O. §§ 359.02 to 359.10, inclusive, shall at the time and under the circumstances specified in C.O. § 359.03 be equipped with at least one (1) lamp displaying a white light visible from a distance of not less than one thousand (1,000) feet to the front of the vehicle, and shall also be equipped with two (2) lamps displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than one thousand (1,000) feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one (1) lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than one thousand (1,000) feet to the rear and two (2) red reflectors visible from all distances of six hundred (600) feet to one thousand (1,000) feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful low beams of headlamps. 
Lamps and reflectors required or authorized by this section shall meet standards adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. 
(B)  All boat trailers, all farm machinery and other machinery, including all road construction machinery, upon a street or highway, except when being used in actual construction and maintenance work in an area guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used, or when operating or traveling within the limits of a construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation, the city or county engineer, when such construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the director of transportation and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as set forth in ORC § 4511.09, which is designed for operation at a speed of twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less shall be operated at a speed not exceeding twenty-five (25) miles per hour, and shall display a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem (SMV). Such emblem shall be mounted as so to be visible from a distance of not less than five hundred (500) feet to the rear. The standards and specifications for SMV emblems referred to in this section shall correlate with and, so far as possible, conform with those approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers. As used in this section, machinery does not include any vehicle designed to be drawn by an animal. 
(C)  The use of this SMV emblem shall be restricted to the slow-moving vehicles specified in subsections (B) and (F) hereof operating or traveling within the limits of the highway. Its use on slow-moving vehicles being transported upon other types of vehicles or on any other type of vehicle or stationary object on the highway is prohibited. 
(D)  No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate any slow-moving vehicle, as defined in subsection (B) hereof, except those units designed to be completely mounted on a primary power unit, which is manufactured or assembled on or after April 1, 1966, unless such vehicle is equipped with a slow-moving vehicle emblem mounting device as specified in subsection (B) hereof. 
(E)  Any boat trailer, farm machinery, or other machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle in subsection (B) hereof, in addition to the use of the slow-moving vehicle emblem, be equipped with a red flashing light which shall be visible from a distance of not less than one thousand (1,000) feet to the rear at all times as specified in C.O. § 359.03. When a double faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the forward red light to the rear. 
In addition to the lights described in this division, farm machinery and motor vehicles escorting farm machinery may display a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber light, as permitted by C.O. § 359.17, and also may display simultaneously flashing turn signals or warning lights, as permitted by that section. 
(F)  Every animal-drawn vehicle upon a street or highway shall at all times be equipped in one of the following ways: 
(1)  With a slow-moving vehicle emblem complying with subsection (B) of this division; 
(2)  With alternate reflective material complying with rules adopted under this division; 
(3)  With both a slow-moving vehicle emblem and alternate reflective material as specified in this division. 
The red flashing light or reflective devises and lantern shall be approved by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The Ohio Director of Public Safety, subject to ORC ch. 119, shall adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the position of mounting of the alternate reflective material authorized by this division. The rules shall permit, as a minimum, the alternate reflective material to be black, gray or silver in color. The alternate reflective material shall be mounted on the animal-drawn vehicle so as to be visible, at all times as specified in C.O. § 359.03, from a distance of not less than five hundred (500) feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps. 
(G)  As used in this section boat trailer means any vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of not more than ten (10) miles and at a speed of twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less. 
§ 359.12 - SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY DRIVING LIGHTS. 
(A)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one (1) spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle, or more than one hundred (100) feet ahead of the vehicle. 
(B)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three (3) auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle, which when used shall conform to state regulations. 
(C)  No person shall operate a vehicle with a greater number of spotlights or auxiliary lights than is permitted under this section nor with a spotlight or auxiliary light focused or used in a manner prohibited by this section. 
§ 359.13 - COWL, FENDER AND BACK-UP LIGHTS. 
(A)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare. 
(B)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof which shall emit a white or amber light without glare. 
(C)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either separate or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion. 
§ 359.14 - LIGHTS TO BE DISPLAYED. 
At all times mentioned in C.O. § 359.03, at least two (2) state approved lighted lights shall be displayed conforming to state regulations, one (1) near each side of the front of every motor vehicle except when such vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing lights of parked vehicles. 
§ 359.15 - HEADLIGHTS: DISTRIBUTION OF BEAMS. 
Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto during the times specified in C.O. § 359.03, the driver shall use a distribution of lights, or composite beam, directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements: 
(A)  Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle, such driver shall use a distribution of light or composite beam, so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver. 
(B)  Every motor vehicle which has multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator, which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the headlights is in use. The indicator shall be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible without glare to the driver of the vehicle. 
§ 359.16 - SPEED WITH LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY. 
Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in C.O. § 359.03 when it is equipped with two (2) lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing persons and substantial objects seventy-five (75) feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in C.O. § 359.15, provided that such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour. 
§ 359.17 - NUMBER OF LIGHTS: RED, BLUE, WHITE FLASHING LIGHTS. 
(A)  Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped with any auxiliary lights or spotlights or any other light on the front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity greater than three hundred (300) candle power, not more than a total of five (5) of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one (1) time when such vehicle is upon a street or highway. 
(B)  Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other than headlights, spotlights, signal lights or auxiliary driving lights, which projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than three hundred (300) candle power shall be so directed that no part of the beam shall strike the level of the street or highway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than seventy-five (75) feet from the vehicle. 
(C)  No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment upon any street or highway with any light or device thereon displaying a red light mounted on the front thereof. This section does not apply to emergency/public safety vehicles, school buses, traffic line stripers, snow plows, rural mail delivery vehicles, State highway survey vehicles, funeral escort vehicles and similar equipment operated by the Ohio Department of Transportation or the city. 
(D)  Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a means for indicating a right or left turn or as stop lights. This section does not apply to emergency vehicles, school buses, traffic line stripers, snow plows, rural mail delivery vehicles, State highway survey vehicles, funeral escort vehicles and similar equipment operated by the Ohio Department of Transportation or the city nor to vehicles or machinery required by C.O. § 359.11 to have a flashing red light. 
(E)  No person shall drive or move any vehicle upon any street or highway with any light or device thereon displaying a blue light, or alternate red and blue flashing light mounted on such vehicle. This section does not apply to police public safety vehicles. 
(F)  Except as may be otherwise permitted in this section, no person shall drive or move any vehicle upon any street with any light or device mounted in the top thereof displaying a flashing white light or alternate red and white flashing light mounted on the top of such vehicle. This section does not apply to fire public safety vehicles. 
§ 359.18 - LIGHTS ON SNOW REMOVAL EQUIPMENT. 
It is unlawful to operate snow removal equipment on a highway unless the lights thereon comply with and are lighted when and as required by the lawful standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio Department of Transportation. 
§ 359.19 - FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS. 
No person shall use any lights mentioned in C.O. §§ 359.03 to 359.18(B), inclusive, upon any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, unless such lights are equipped, mounted and adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are prescribed by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. 
§ 359.20 - BRAKE EQUIPMENT. 
The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles: 
(A)  Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such motor vehicle, including two (2) separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least two (2) wheels. If these two (2) separate means of applying the brakes are connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one (1) part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at least two (2) wheels. 
(B)  Every motorcycle, and bicycle with motor attached, when operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped with at least one (1) adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot. Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the rules adopted by the director of public safety under ORC § 4511.521. 
(C)  Every trailer or semitrailer, except a pole trailer, of a gross weight of two thousand (2,000) pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942, when registered in this state and operated upon the streets or highways of this city shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to hold such vehicle and so designed as to be applied by the driver of the towing motor vehicle from its cab, and such brakes shall be so designed and connected that, in case of a breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied. 
(D)  In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the faster rate; or means shall be provided by applying the braking effort first on the rearmost brakes, or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be employed. 
(E)  Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semi-trailers of a gross weight of less than two thousand (2,000) pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow or ice or loose material. The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements by the driver's muscular effort or by spring or the equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking brakes shall be designed then when once applied they shall remain applied with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or of any kind. 
(F)  The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe anchors and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service brakes are connected that failure of any one (1) part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes. 
(G)  Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall be capable at all times and under all conditions of loading or being stopped on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these distances: 
(1)  Vehicles, or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels shall come to a stop in thirty (30) feet or less from a speed of twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(2)  Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all wheels shall come to a stop in forty (40) feet or less from a speed of twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(H)  All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle. 
(I)  The owner of any motor vehicle not adequately equipped with brakes as provided herein who permits or authorizes such vehicle to be operated upon the streets or highways of the city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished as provided in this Code. No person shall operate any vehicle which does not conform to these requirements. 
§ 359.21 - HORNS, SIRENS AND WARNING DEVICES. 
(A)  Every motor vehicle when operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than two hundred (200) feet. 
(B)  No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, or shall any person use upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a theft alarm signal which shall be so arranged that it can not be used as an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a State approved siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than five hundred (500) feet. Such equipment shall not be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case the driver of the emergency vehicle shall sound such equipment when it is necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof. 
§ 359.22 - MUFFLER; EXCESSIVE NOISE, SMOKE OR GAS. 
(A)  All motor vehicles and motorcycles shall be equipped with a muffler which is maintained in proper working condition and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise. Every motorcycle shall be equipped with baffle plates. Defects in the muffling system, which constitute a violation of this section, include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  The absence of the muffler. 
(2)  The presence of a muffler cut-out, bypass or similar devices. 
(3)  Defects in the exhaust system including, but not limited to, pinched outlets, holes or rusted through areas of the muffler or pipes. 
(4)  The presence of equipment which produces or facilitates excessive or unusual noise from the exhaust system. 
(5)  The presence of any modified exhaust system which amplifies or increases the noise emitted by the engine above that was emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle. 
(6)  The presence of any equipment for producing excessive smoke, or gas, or the exhaust pipe or muffler of a vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an internal combustion engine under normal operation. 
(B)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle or motorcycle unless necessary for safe operation or in compliance with the law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position that the exhaust system emits a loud crackling, chattering or clattering noise, unusual to this normal operation, except when necessary to make repairs or adjustments for proper operating purposes. 
(C)  The creation of noise by a crackling, chattering or clattering noise from the exhaust shall be prima-facie evidence of the intent of the operator to violate this section. No person shall disturb the peace and quiet of the city by making unnecessary noise in the operation of a motor vehicle in any of the following respects: 
(1)  By the use of bells, horns, whistles, loud speakers, musical devices or other sound producing devices to advertise or call attention to the offering for sale of merchandise or services or for other commercial purposes, on or from a motor vehicle. 
(2)  By creating other noise in the operation of a motor vehicle, which noise is not necessary in the reasonable operation of said motor vehicle. 
§ 359.23 - REAR VIEW MIRRORS. 
Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the operator a view of the street or highway to the rear of such vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles, by mirror. 
§ 359.24 - WINDSHIELDS AND WIPERS, SIGN OR POSTER UPON WINDSHIELD. 
(A)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, sidewings, side or rear windows of such vehicle other than a certificate or other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the lower right hand corner of the windshield a sign or poster not to exceed four (4) inches in height by six (6) inches in width. 
No sign, poster or decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in accordance with Federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without moving any part of the vehicle. 
(B)  The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield, which device shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle. 
(C)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle, or bus, whether or not equipped as required in C.O. § 359.24(B) hereof, where the vision through the front windshield is obscured by dirt, rain, frost, snow or other moisture. 
§ 359.25 - OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES. 
(A)  Definitions: As used in this section, certain terms are defined, as follows: 
    Automobile: has the same meaning as provided in ORC § 4513.263. 
    Commercial tractor, passenger car and commercial car: have the same meaning as provided in ORC § 4501.01. 
    Passenger: means any person in an automobile, other than its operator, who is occupying a seating position for which a seat belt is provided. 
    Occupant restraining device: means a seat safety belt, shoulder belt, harness or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of or a passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum Federal vehicle safety standards established by the United States Department of Transportation. 
    Vehicle and motor vehicle: as used in the definitions of the terms set forth in C.O. § 359.25, have the same meaning as in ORC § 4511.01. 
(B)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless that person is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining device installed for use in its operator's seat unless that person is wearing all of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted. 
(2)  Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in division (B)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device. 
(3)  Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an automobile being operated on any street or highway unless that person is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device. 
(4)  Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable form. 
(C)  C.O. § 359.25(B)(2) and (B)(3) does not apply to a person who is required by ORC § 4511.81 to be secured in a child restraining device. C.O. § 359.25(B)(1) does not apply to a person who is an employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery service during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees. C.O. §§ 359.25(B)(1), (B)(2), and (B)(3) do not apply to a person who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this state under ORC ch. 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under ORC ch. 4734 that states that the person has a physical impairment that makes the use of an occupant restraining device impossible or impractical. 
(D)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of C.O. § 359.25(B) has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for a violation of that nature or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that nature, and no law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of that nature has been or is being committed. 
(E)  All fines collected for violations of C.O. § 359.25(B) shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of State for deposit pursuant to ORC § 4513.263(E). 
(F)  Whoever violates C.O. § 359.25(B)(1) shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(G)  A person's failure to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device or to ensure that each passenger of an automobile being operated by the person is wearing all of the available elements of such a device, in violation of C.O. § 359.25(B), shall not be considered or used as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence, shall not diminish recovery for damages in any civil action involving the person arising from the ownership, maintenance or operation of an automobile, shall not be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution for a violation of this section, and shall not be admissible as evidence in any civil or criminal action involving the person other than a prosecution for a violation of C.O. § 359.25(B). 
(H)  Whoever violates C.O. § 359.25(B)(2) shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(I)  Whoever violates C.O. § 359.25(B)(3) shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(J)  Whoever violates C.O. § 359.25(B)(4) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor; if the offender previously has been convicted of, forfeited bond, or pleaded guilty to a violation of this division or any equivalent offense, the offense is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
§ 359.26 - CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM. 
(A)  When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in ORC § 4511.01, that is registered in this State and is required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with occupant restraining devices at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system that meets Federal motor vehicle safety standards: 
(1)  A child who is less than four (4) years of age; 
(2)  A child who weighs less than forty (40) pounds. 
(B)  When any child who is in either or both of the following categories and being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is registered in this State and is owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of a nursery school, kindergarten or day-care center, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system that meets Federal motor vehicle safety standards: 
(1)  A child who is less than four (4) years of age; 
(2)  A child who weighs less than forty (40) pounds. 
(C)  When any child who is less than eight (8) years of age and less than four feet nine inches (4'9") in height, who is not required by division (A) or (B) of this section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in ORC § 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under ORC § 5104.011, that is required by the United States department of transportation to be equipped with "seat belts" at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions on a booster seat that meets Federal motor vehicle safety standards. 
(D)  When any child who is at least eight (8) years of age but not older than fifteen (15) years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division (A), (B), or (C) of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in ORC § 4511.01, that is required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with "seat belts" at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system that meets Federal motor vehicle safety standards or in an occupant restraining device as defined in ORC § 4513.263. 
(E)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law enforcement officer's view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose of determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has been or is being committed. 
(F)  The Upper Arlington City Manager or designee shall adopt rules as are necessary to carry out this section. 
(G)  The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a child restraint system, a booster seat, or an occupant restraining device as required by this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section. 
(H)  This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this state under ORC ch. 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under ORC ch. 4734 that states that the child who otherwise would be required to be restrained under this section has a physical impairment that makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat, or an occupant restraining device impossible or impractical, provided that the person operating the vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the child in accordance with any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit. 
(I)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against any ticket, citation, or summons issued for violating this section. 
(J)  If a person who is not a resident of this state is charged with division (A), (B), (C) or (D) of this section and does not prove to the court, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the person's use or non-use of a child restraint system was in accordance with the law of the state of which the person is a resident, the court shall impose the fine levied by C.O. § 359.26(L)(2). 
(K)  The court shall not dismiss a charge brought against a person who is a resident of this state and is charged with a violation of division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this section when a child has suffered physical harm, as defined in C.O. § 501.14, as a result of the failure of the operator of the motor vehicle to comply with this statute; and the court shall impose the fine levied by C.O. § 359.26(L)(3) hereof. 
(L)  Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of child restraint system and sentenced as follows: 
(1)  Whoever is a resident of this state and violates division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this section shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure more than one (1) child in a child restraint system, booster seat, or occupant restraining device as required by this section that occurred at the same time, on the same day, and at the same location is deemed to be a single violation of this section: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in division (L)(1)(b) of this section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than seventy dollars ($70.00) nor more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(b)  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this section or of a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any of those divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(2)  Whoever is not a resident of this state and violates division (A),(B), (C), or (D) of this section and fails to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the use or non-use of a child restraint system was in accordance with the law of the state of which the violator is a resident of, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; if the offender previously has been convicted of, forfeited bond, or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A),(B), (C), or (D) of this section or of a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any of those divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(3)  Whoever is not a resident of this state and violates division (A), (B), (C) or (D) of this section and the child has suffered physical harm, as defined in C.O. § 501.14 as a result from failure to comply with this statute, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009) 
§ 359.27 - MOTOR VEHICLE STOP LIGHTS. 
Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer when operated upon a street, highway or alley shall be equipped with two (2) or more stop lights, except that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967, motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one (1) stop light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle which shall be actuated upon application of the service brake, and which may be incorporated with other rear lights. Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear, provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the stop lights on the rear-most vehicle need be visible from the distance specified. 
Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light to the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the vehicle to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles. 
When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations under ORC § 4513.19. 
Historical motor vehicles as defined in ORC § 4503.181, not originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section. 
§ 359.28 - LIMITED LOAD EXTENSION ON SIDES OF PASSENGER VEHICLES. 
No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a street or highway with any load carried on such vehicles which extends more than six (6) inches beyond the line of the fenders on the vehicle's left side nor more than twelve (12) inches beyond the line of the fenders on the vehicle's right side. 
§ 359.29 - RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF TINTED GLASS AND OTHER OBSCURING MATERIAL. 
(A)  Definitions: As used in this section, certain terms are defined, as follows: 
    Limousine: means any vehicle of the type generally described as a limousine, designed to transport seven (7) or more people. 
    Manufacturer: unless otherwise specified in this section, means any person who engages in the manufacturing or assembling of sunscreening products or materials or any person who fabricates, laminates or tempers a safety glazing material, incorporating, during the manufacturing process, the capacity to reflect or reduce the transmission of light. 
    Sunscreening material: means products or materials, including film, glazing and perforated sunscreening which, when applied to the windshield or windows of a motor vehicle, reduce the effects of the sun with respect to light reflectance or transmittance. 
    Transmittance: means the ratio of the amount of total light expressed in percentages, which is allowed to pass through the product or material, including glazing, to the amount of total light falling on the product or material and the glazing. 
    Window: means any device designed for exterior viewing from a motor vehicle, except the windshield or any roof-mounted viewing device. 
    Windshield: means the front exterior viewing device of a motor vehicle. 
(B)  Pursuant to ORC ch. 119. and § 4513.241, the Ohio Director of Public Safety has adopted rules governing the use of tinted glass, and the use of transparent, nontransparent, translucent, and reflectorized materials in or on motor vehicle windshields, side windows, sidewings, and rear windows that prevent a person of normal vision looking into the motor vehicle from seeing or identifying persons or objects inside the motor vehicle. 
(C)  The rules adopted under ORC § 4513.241 may provide for persons who meet either of the following qualifications: 
(1)  On November 11, 1994, or the effective date of any rule adopted under ORC § 4513.241, own a motor vehicle that does not conform to any requirements of, or rules adopted under, ORC § 4513.241 or any rule adopted under that section. 
(2)  Establish residency in this State and are required to register a motor vehicle that does not conform to any requirements of, or rules adopted under, ORC § 4513.241. 
(D)  No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease, or rent any motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle conforms to any requirements of, or rule adopted under, ORC § 4513.241. 
(E)  No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle, any glass or other material that fails to conform to any requirements of, or rules adopted under, ORC § 4513.241. 
(F)  (1)  No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as defined in ORC § 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform to any requirements of, or rules adopted under, ORC § 4513.241. 
(2)  No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor, as defined in ORC § 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under ORC ch. 4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that fails to conform to the requirements of this section or of any rule adopted under ORC § 4513.241. 
(G)  No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front windshield, side windows, sidewings, or rear window. 
(H)  This section does not apply to the manufacturer's tinting or glazing of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or permitted by federal motor vehicle safety standard number two hundred five (205). 
(I)  With regard to any side window behind a driver's seat or any rear window other than any window on an emergency door, this section does not apply to any school bus used to transport a handicapped child pursuant to a special education program under ORC ch. 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by regular school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a school district. As used in this division, "handicapped child" and "special education program" have the same meanings as in ORC § 3323.01. 
(J)  This section does not apply to any school bus that is to be sold and operated outside this state. 
(K)  (1)  This section and the rules adopted under ORC § 4513.241 do not apply to a motor vehicle used by a law enforcement agency under either of the following circumstances: 
(a)  The vehicle does not have distinctive markings of a law enforcement vehicle but is operated by or on behalf of the law enforcement agency in an authorized investigation or other activity requiring that the presence and identity of the vehicle occupants be undisclosed. 
(b)  The vehicle primarily is used by the law enforcement canine unit for transporting a police dog. 
(2)  As used in this division, "law enforcement agency" means a police department, the office of a sheriff, the state highway patrol, a county prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental body that enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory power of arrest. 
(L)  (1)  Whoever violates division (D), (F)(2), or (G) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  Whoever violates division (F)(1) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer's agent knew of the nonconformity at the time of sale. 
(3)  (a)  Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an organization may not be convicted unless the act of installation was authorized by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer acting on behalf of the organization, and installation was performed by an employee of the organization acting within the scope of the person's employment. 
(b)  In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, whoever violates division (E) of this section is liable in a civil action to the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the nonconforming glass or material for any damages incurred by that person as a result of the installation of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of maintaining the civil action, and attorney fees. 
(c)  In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E) of this section and the offender is a motor vehicle repair operator registered under ORC ch. 4775 or a motor vehicle dealer licensed under ORC ch. 4517, whoever violates division (E) of this section is subject to a registration or license suspension, as applicable, for a period of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(Ord. No. 47-2013) 
§ 359.30 - USE OF TIRE PROTRUSIONS, CHAINS AND STUDS-PERMITTED. 
No tire on a vehicle moved on a street or highway shall have on its periphery any block, flange, stud, cleat or spike or any other protrusion of any material other than rubber which projects beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire. This section does not prohibit farm machinery with tires having protrusions which will not injure the street, the use of tire chains of reasonable proportions upon any snow, ice or other conditions tending to cause a vehicle to skid, or the use of snow tires which have metal studs inserted in the tires. 
§ 359.31 - USE OF STUDDED TIRES. 
(A)  For purposes of this section, studded tire means any tire designed for use on a vehicle, and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-resisting material that project beyond the tread of the traction service of the tire. 
(B)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle, other than a public safety vehicle or school bus, that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in this city; except, during the period extending from the first of November through the fifteenth day of April of the succeeding year. 
(C)  This section does not apply to the use of tire chains when there is snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are being used, or the immediate vicinity thereof. 
CHAPTER 361. - COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES 

§ 361.01 - MAXIMUM WIDTH OF VEHICLES, HEIGHT AND LENGTH. 
(A)  No dimensions exceed those specified in this section. 
(B)  No vehicle shall have a width in excess of: 
(1)  One hundred four (104) inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated exclusively within municipal corporations; 
(2)  One hundred two (102) inches, excluding safety devices as are required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and other state roads with minimum pavement widths of twenty-two (22) feet, except those roads or portions thereof over which operation of one hundred two-inch buses is prohibited by order of the Ohio Department of Transportation Director; 
(3)  One hundred thirty-two (132) inches for traction engines; 
(4)  One hundred two (102) inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six (6) inches or less in width and except that the director may prohibit the operation of one hundred two-inch recreational vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways; 
(5)  One hundred two (102) inches, including load, for all other vehicles, except that the director may prohibit the operation of one hundred two-inch vehicles on state highways or portions thereof as the director designates. 
(C)  No vehicle shall have a length in excess of: 
(1)  Sixty-six (66) feet for passenger bus type vehicles and articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to ORC §§ 306.30 to 306.54; 
(2)  Forty-five (45) feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles; 
(3)  Fifty-three (53) feet for any semitrailer when operated in a commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that the director may prohibit the operation of any commercial tractor-semitrailer combination on state highways or portions thereof as the Director designates; 
(4)  Twenty-eight and one-half (281/2) feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated in a commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, except that the director may prohibit the operation of any commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination on state highways or portions thereof as the Director designates; 
(5)  (a)  Ninety-seven (97) feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route, or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a distance not to exceed one (1) road mile from any interstate, United States route, or state route, not to exceed three (3) saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one (1) fullmount; 
(b)  Seventy-five (75) feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter combinations, when operated on any roadway not designated as an interstate, United States route, or state route, not to exceed three (3) saddlemounted vehicles, but may include one (1) fullmount; 
(6)  Sixty-five (65) feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled together, with or without load, except as provided in divisions (C)(3) and (4), and in division (E) of this section; 
(7)  Forty-five (45) feet for recreational vehicles; 
(8)  Forty (40) feet for all other vehicles except trailers and semitrailers, with or without load. 
(D)  No vehicle shall have a height in excess of thirteen (13) feet six (6) inches, with or without load. 
(E)  An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a length of sixty-five (65) feet and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of seventy-five (75) feet, except that the load thereon may extend no more than four (4) feet beyond the rear of the vehicles and may extend no more than three (3) feet beyond the front of the vehicles, and except further that the director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter, or a B-train assembly on any state highway or portion thereof that the director designates. 
(F)  The widths prescribed in division (B) of this section shall not include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant devices, and load-induced tire bulge. 
The width prescribed in division (B)(5) of this section shall not include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three (3) inches from each side of the vehicle. 
The lengths prescribed in divisions (C)(2) to (8) of this section shall not include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of the bus or combination, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying refrigeration equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases, vehicles whose dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in accordance with rules adopted by the director. 
(G)  This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks, or other vehicles or apparatus belonging to any municipal corporation or to the volunteer fire department of any municipal corporation or used by the department in the discharge of its functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment. The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery, or equipment not specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways and streets of this state, shall comply with the rules of the director governing the movement, which the director may adopt. ORC §§ 119.01 to 119.13 apply to any rules the director adopts under this section, or the amendment or rescission thereof, and any person adversely affected shall have the same right of appeal as provided in those sections. 
This section does not require the state, a municipal corporation, county, township, or any railroad or other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing structures now crossing streets, roads, and other public thoroughfares in this State. 
(H)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Recreational Vehicle: has the same meaning as in ORC § 4501.01. 
(2)  Vehicle: means any single vehicle when not in combination, or any combination of vehicles, as defined in ORC § 4501.01. 
(I)  In special cases vehicles whose dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager or designee. 
§ 361.02 - HEAVY LOADS PROHIBITED ON CENTER DRIVE BRIDGE. 
No person shall operate or otherwise transport a truck, bus, commercial tractor, trailer or semi-trailer on or across the bridge on Center Drive. 
§ 361.03 - MACHINERY ON PUBLIC STREETS. 
(A)  All machinery, including all road construction machinery, upon a street or highway, except when being used in actual construction and maintenance work in an area guarded by a flagman, or where flares are used, or when operating or traveling within the limits of a construction area designated by the city manager or designee, or the county engineer of several counties, when such construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the city manager or designee and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as set forth in ORC § 4511.09, which is designed for operation at a speed of twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less, shall be operated at a speed not exceeding twenty-five (25) miles per hour, and shall display a triangular slow-moving emblem (SMV). The emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance of not less than five hundred (500) feet to the rear. As used in this section, machinery does not include any vehicle designed to be drawn by an animal. 
(B)  No person shall operate or use any excavating equipment or machinery in such a way as to cause any damage or injury to city property or personnel. It is expressly intended that strict liability be imposed for violation of this section. 
(C)  Whoever violates C.O. § 361.03(B) is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Any organization as defined in C.O. § 501.07(A) which violates C.O. § 361.03(B) shall be fined in accordance with ORC § 2929.31. 
§ 361.04 - TRUCKS ON RESIDENTIAL (LOCAL AND COLLECTOR) STREETS DURING CERTAIN HOURS. 
(A)  Any truck or commercial tractor or semi-trailer may be driven upon any residential (local or collector) street or part of a street, for the shortest distance possible to load or unload merchandise, freight or material, at a place contiguous to such street or part thereof, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(B)  The provision of C.O. § 361.04(A) does not apply to vehicles of a gross weight less than ten thousand one (10,001) pounds, and vehicles owned or operated by this city. 
§ 361.05 - TOWING REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  When one (1) vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet from one (1) vehicle to the other, except the connection between any tow vehicles transporting poles, pipes, machinery or other objects of structural nature which cannot readily be dismembered. 
(B)  When one (1) vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only of a chain, rope or cable, there shall be displayed upon the connection a white flag or cloth not less than twelve (12) inches square. 
(C)  In addition to the drawbar or other connection, each trailer and each semi-trailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which it is being drawn. The chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's parting from the drawing vehicle in case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's parting from the drawing vehicle. 
(D)  Every trailer or semi-trailer, except pole and cable trailers and pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in ORC § 5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. 
§ 361.06 - WARNING DEVICES ON DISABLED VEHICLES. 
The following regulations govern the display of warning devices in cases of disabled or parked overnight vehicles upon the highway: 
(A)  Whenever any motor truck, trackless trolley, bus, commercial tractor, trailer, semitrailer or pole trailer is disabled upon the traveled portion or shoulder of any city street or highway at any time when lighted lights are required on vehicles, the operator of the vehicle or trackless trolley shall display the following warning devices upon the street or highway during the time the vehicle or trackless trolley is so disabled on the street or highway except as provided in division (B) of this section: 
(1)  A lighted fusee shall be immediately placed on the roadway at the traffic side of the vehicle or trackless trolley, unless red electric lanterns or red reflectors are displayed. 
(2)  Within the burning period of the fusee and as promptly as possible, three (3) lighted flares or pot torches, or three (3) red reflectors or three (3) red electric lanterns shall be placed on the roadway as follows: 
(a)  One (1) at a distance of forty (40) paces or approximately one hundred (100) feet in advance of the vehicle; 
(b)  One (1) at a distance of forty (40) paces or approximately one hundred (100) feet to the rear of the vehicle or trackless trolley except as provided in this section, each in the center of the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle or trackless trolley; 
(c)  One (1) at the traffic side of the vehicle or trackless trolley. 
(B)  Whenever any vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in bulk, or in transporting compressed flammable gases is disabled upon a street or highway at any time or place mentioned in division (A) of this section, the driver of the vehicle shall display upon the roadway the following warning devices: 
(1)  One (1) red electric lantern or one (1) red reflector shall be immediately placed on the roadway at the traffic side of the vehicle; 
(2)  Two (2) other red electric lanterns or two (2) other red reflectors shall be placed to the front and rear of the vehicle in the same manner prescribed for flares in division (A) of this section. 
(C)  When a vehicle of a type specified in division (B) of this section is disabled, the use of flares, fusees, or any signal produced by flame as warning signals is prohibited. 
(D)  Whenever any vehicle or trackless trolley of a type referred to in this section is disabled upon the traveled portion of a street or highway or the shoulder thereof, outside of any municipality, or upon any freeway, expressway, thruway and connecting, entering or exiting ramps within a municipality, at any time when the display of fusees, flares, red reflectors, or electric lanterns is not required, the operator of the vehicle or trackless trolley shall display two (2) red flags upon the roadway in the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle or trackless trolley, one (1) at a distance of forty (40) paces or approximately one hundred (100) feet in advance of the vehicle or trackless trolley, and one (1) at a distance of forty (40) paces or approximately one hundred (100) feet to the rear of the vehicle or trackless trolley, except as provided in this section. 
(E)  The flares, fusees, lanterns, red reflectors, and flags to be displayed as required in this section shall conform with the requirements of ORC § 4513.27 applicable thereto. 
(F)  In the event the vehicle or trackless trolley is disabled near a curve, crest of a hill, or other obstruction of view, the flare, flag, reflector, or lantern in that direction shall be placed as to afford ample warning to other users of the highway, but in no case shall it be placed less than forty (40) paces or approximately one hundred (100) feet nor more than one hundred twenty (120) paces or approximately three hundred (300) feet from the disabled vehicle or trackless trolley. 
(G)  This section does not apply to the operator of any vehicle in a work area designated by protection equipment devices that are displayed and used in accordance with the manual adopted by the department of transportation under ORC § 4511.09. 
§ 361.07 - VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES. 
Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a street or highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements: 
(A)  The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the rear with the word "Explosives" in letters not less than eight (8) inches high, or there shall be displayed on the rear of the vehicle a red flag not less than twenty-four (24) inches square marked with the word "Danger" in white letters six (6) inches high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with section 177.823 of the United States Department of Transportation Regulations. 
(B)  The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two (2) fire extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient points on the vehicle. 
(C)  No person in charge of a vehicle containing explosives shall: 
(1)  Smoke in, upon or near vehicle. 
(2)  Load or unload the vehicle in a reckless manner. 
(3)  Make unnecessary stops. 
(D)  No person shall place or carry, or cause to be placed or carried, any metal tool or other similar piece of metal in the bed or body of the vehicle containing explosives, unless contained in a box or other container approved by the department of industrial relations. No person shall place or carry, or cause to be placed or carried, in the bed or body of a vehicle containing explosives, any exploders, detonators, blasting caps or other similar explosive material, or carry in or upon the vehicle any matches or any other flame-producing device. Vehicles used for transportation of explosives, shall not be driven at a rate of speed exceeding fifteen (15) miles per hour. This section does not prohibit the transportation of explosives in motor-driven vehicles. 
§ 361.08 - SECURING OF LOADS. 
(A)  No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street or highway unless the vehicle is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the roadway. 
(B)  No person shall operate on any street or highway a vehicle with a load unless the load is covered and is securely fastened so as to prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached, or in any manner a hazard to other users of the street or highway. 
(C)  No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track mud on the public street or alley. 
(D)  It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops and deposits mud or permits the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or deposited upon any street, highway, sidewalk or other public place to immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
§ 361.09 - WHEEL PROTECTORS. 
(A)  No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated, any commercial car, trailer or semitrailer, used for the transportation of goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three (3) tons, upon the public highways, streets, bridges and culverts within this city, unless the vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of the vehicle or combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from throwing dirt, water, or other materials on the windshields of following vehicles. The protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more than one third ( 1/3 ) of the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they shall be at least as wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is so designed and constructed that the requirements are accomplished by means of fenders, body construction or other means of enclosure, then no protectors or flaps are required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by fenders, bodies or other parts of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by protective means extending at least to the center line of the rearmost axle. 
CHAPTER 363. - SCHOOL BUSES 

§ 363.01 - REGULATIONS OF DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION. 
No person shall operate a school bus upon the public streets or highways in the city in violation of the regulations of the Ohio Department of Education, made pursuant to the provisions of ORC § 4511.76. No person, being the owner, thereof or having the supervisory responsibility therefor, shall permit the operation of a school bus upon the public streets in the city in violation of such regulations of the Ohio Department of Education. 
§ 363.02 - REGULATIONS OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY. 
No person shall operate a school bus upon the public streets in the city in violation of the regulations of the Ohio Department of Public Safety, made pursuant to the provisions of ORC § 4511.76. No person, being the owner thereof or having the supervisory responsibility therefor, shall permit the operation of a school bus upon the public streets in the city in violation of such regulations of the Ohio Department of Public Safety. 
§ 363.03 - DISPLAY OF INSPECTION DECAL. 
No person shall operate, or shall any person being the owner thereof or having supervisory responsibility therefor permit the operation of a school bus upon the public streets in the city, unless there is displayed thereon the decal issued by the Ohio State Highway Patrol stating that on a certain date, which shall be within one (1) year of the date of operation, a member of the Ohio State Highway Patrol inspected the school bus and found on the date of inspection the school bus complied with all the regulations adopted pursuant to ORC §§ 4511.76 [4511.76.1] and 4511.761. 
§ 363.04 - USE OF SCHOOL BUS FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
No person who is the owner of a school bus which is used or is to be used exclusively for purposes other than the transportation of children, shall operate such bus or permit it to be operated upon the public streets in the city unless such bus has been painted a color different from that prescribed for school buses by ORC § 4511.77 and painted in such a way that the letters stop and school bus are obliterated. 
§ 363.05 - PAINTING AND MARKINGS REQUIRED. 
No person shall operate, or shall any person being the owner thereof or having supervisory responsibility therefor permit the operation of a school bus upon the public streets in the city unless it is painted national school bus chrome number two (2) and is marked on both front and rear with the words school bus in black lettering not less than eight (8) inches in height and on the rear of the bus with the word stop in black lettering not less than ten (10) inches in height. 
§ 363.06 - STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS; SIGNALS ON BUS. 
(A)  The driver of a vehicle upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school child or person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and mental retardation and county boards of mental retardation and developmental disabilities or child attending a program offered by a Head Start agency, shall stop the vehicle not less than ten (10) feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the bus driver to proceed. 
It is no defense to a charge under this division that the school bus involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign as required by division (E) of this section. 
(B)  Where a street or highway has been divided into four (4) or more traffic lanes, a driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school child or persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and mental retardation and county boards of mental retardation and developmental disabilities, or children attending programs offered by Head Start agencies. The driver of any vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (A) of this section. 
(C)  School buses operating on divided streets or highways or on streets or highways with four (4) or more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children or persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and mental retardation and county boards of mental retardation and developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered by Head Start agencies on their residence side of the street or highway. 
(D)  No school bus driver shall start the driver's bus until after any child or person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and mental retardation and county boards of mental retardation and developmental disabilities, or child attending a program offered by a Head Start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a place of safety on the child's or person's residence side of the road. 
(E)  Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of ORC § 4511.771, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type approved by the Ohio State Board of Education, which shall be actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and mental retardation and county boards of mental retardation and developmental disabilities, or children attending programs offered by Head Start agencies. A school bus driver shall not activate the visual signals or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading areas where the bus is entirely off the street, highway or road or at school buildings when children or persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and mental retardation and county boards of mental retardation and developmental disabilities are loading or unloading at curbside or at buildings when children attending programs offered by Head Start agencies are loading or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and stop warning signs shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by rule of the board. 
(F)  (1)  Whoever violates C.O. § 363.06(A) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(2)  In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by law, the court, mayor or magistrate may impose upon the offender who violates this section a class seven (7) suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(7) or ORC § 4510.02(A)(7). When a license is suspended under this section, the court, mayor or magistrate shall cause the offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court or clerk of court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles, together with notice of the court's action. 
(G)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Head Start Agency" has the same meaning as in ORC § 3301.31. 
(2)  "School bus" as used in relation to children who attend a program offered by a Head Start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a Head Start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type approved by the Ohio State Board of Education, is painted the color and displays the markings described in ORC § 4511.77, and is equipped with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of ORC § 4511.771, irrespective of whether or not the bus has fifteen (15) or more children aboard at any time. "School bus" does not include a van owned and operated by a Head Start agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings. 
CHAPTER 371. - PARKING GENERALLY 

§ 371.01 - PARKING ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS. 
Upon any street or highway outside a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part of the street or highway, if it is practicable to stop, park or so leave the vehicle off the paved or main traveled part of the street or highway. In every event a clear and unobstructed portion of the street or highway opposite the standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of the stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of two hundred (200) feet in each direction upon the street or highway. 
This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a street or highway in a manner and to the extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in that position. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009) 
§ 371.02 - LAW ENFORCEMENT MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE. 
(A)  Whenever any law enforcement officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or highway in violation of C.O. § 371.01, the officer may move the vehicle or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same to a position off the paved or improved or main traveled part of the street or highway. 
(B)  Whenever any law enforcement officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street or highway, where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, the officer may provide for the removal of the vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. 
(C)  Notwithstanding the provisions set forth under C.O. § 371.15, whenever any law enforcement officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any public or private property where the vehicle is parked in an undesignated space without the permission of the owner, the officer may provide for the removal of the vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009) 
§ 371.03 - PARKING PROHIBITIONS. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this traffic code, or while obeying the directions of a law enforcement officer or a traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(A)  On a curb or sidewalk, or on any portion of the right-of-way between the curb and the right-of-way line, provided that this shall not prevent the parking of a vehicle on a paved driveway, between curb cuts, if the parking does not materially interfere with pedestrian traffic across said driveway, and provided further that the vehicle is parked with the express or implied authority of the owner or occupant of the premises served by the driveway. 
(B)  In front of a public or private driveway or garage, or within five (5) feet of the intersection of the driveway with the curb or with the roadway, if there is no curb. Provided, however, that if the Upper Arlington City Manager or designee makes a finding as to any driveway, that a greater clear distance from the driveway than five (5) feet is required for safe and convenient ingress to or egress from the driveway, the Upper Arlington City Manager or designee may determine the distance, not to exceed ten (10) feet on either side of the driveway, and when the Upper Arlington City Manager or designee has made the determination and indicated the limits either by an appropriate sign or by painting the curb yellow, it shall be a violation of this section to stand or park a vehicle within the limits. 
(C)  Within an intersection. 
(D)  Within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant, whether on public or private property, or within ten (10) feet of that point on a street curb which is nearest to any fire hydrant located within fifteen (15) feet of the curb. 
(E)  On a cross walk. 
(F)  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk ; or, if there is no marked crosswalk, within twenty (20) feet of an intersection except as noted in (G) of this section. 
(G)  Within thirty (30) feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon, stop sign, yield sign or traffic control device. 
(H)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by a traffic control device. 
(I)  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
(J)  Within twenty (20) feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs. 
(K)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when the standing or parking would obstruct traffic. (Per Ordinance No. 92-2009) 
(L)  Alongside any vehicles stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(M)  Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a street or within a street tunnel unless the bridge or tunnel is properly posted with a sign to allow parking. 
(N)  At any place where signs, lawfully erected, prohibit parking. 
(O)  Within two (2) feet of another parked vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009) 
§ 371.04 - PROHIBITED PARKING OPPOSITE DRIVEWAY ENTRANCE. 
The Upper Arlington City Manager is authorized to prohibit parking for a reasonable distance on the portion of a street opposite an entrance driveway, if the street pavement width is less than twenty-five (25) feet, or upon proper engineering study as noted in (B) of this section, under the terms and conditions herein set forth: 
(A)  An application shall be made by the owner or occupant of the property on which the driveway is located, setting forth facts indicating that the parking sought to be prohibited creates a hardship in entering or leaving the driveway. 
(B)  The Upper Arlington City Manager or designee shall make an investigation as to whether the parking constitutes an undue obstruction to ingress or egress and whether the prohibition of parking will have adverse effects on other residents of the neighborhood, and shall then determine whether the granting of the application is warranted. If the application is approved, the Upper Arlington City Manager or designee shall cause suitable signs to be erected. 
(C)  The Upper Arlington City Manager or designee shall periodically review the location, and may, if the Upper Arlington City Manager or designee deems it advisable, terminate or modify the parking restriction. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009) 
§ 371.05 - STOPPING PROHIBITED IN BUS LOADING ZONES. 
(A)  No person shall, except on Sunday, stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than a motor bus, in a bus loading and unloading area when the area has been designated as a loading area by the Upper Arlington City Manager and identified by appropriate signs or other marking, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily therein for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers, where the stopping does not interfere with any motor bus entering or leaving the loading or unloading area. 
(B)  No person shall, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any school day, stop, stand or park a vehicle in any space adjacent to a public or parochial school ground which has been designated by the Upper Arlington City Manager or designee as a loading or unloading zone for school buses. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009) 
§ 371.06 - PARKING NEAR CURB. 
(A)  Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the wheels of the vehicle nearest the curb parallel with and not more than twelve (12) inches from the curb, unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in which case the stop shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. 
(B)  No vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a street or highway with the vehicle facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009) 
§ 371.07 - PARKING OR STOPPING PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS DURING CERTAIN HOURS. 
(A)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets designated by the city manager or designee. 
(B)  When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., or variation(s) thereof based on the recommendation of the Upper Arlington City Manager or designee of any school day upon any of the streets designated by the city manager or designee. The provisions of this section do not apply to a bus stopping or standing at an officially designated bus stop for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers. 
(C)  When signs are erected giving adequate notice thereof, no person shall park or stop a vehicle upon any street designated by the city manager or designee, between the hours set forth in said designation as to that street. 
(D)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets designated by the city manager or designee, except vehicles displaying a valid residential parking permit issued by the Upper Arlington Police Division, and non-residential commercial vehicles and delivery vehicles providing services to Residents of those streets. The permitted parking in this section is subject to the prohibited parking provisions of C.O. § 371.11(E). 
(Ord. No. 92-2009; Ord. No. 8-2016, § 7, 2-22-2016 ) 
§ 371.08 - LIMITED PARKING. 
(A)  When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than five (5) minutes, fifteen (15) minutes, two (2) hours or three (3) hours at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday within the district or upon any of the streets designated by the city manager or designee. 
( Ord. No. 8-2016, § 8, 2-22-2016 ) 
§ 371.09 - LOADING ZONES. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or materials in any place marked as a passenger or loading zone during the hours when the provisions applicable to passenger and loading zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading materials exceed thirty (30) minutes, and for loading and unloading passengers three (3) minutes. The Upper Arlington City Manager or designee is authorized to designate loading zones and erect appropriate signs thereat. 
§ 371.10 - PARKING IN BUS STOP OR TAXICAB STAND. 
(A)  The driver of any bus, other than a chartered bus, or the driver of a taxicab shall not stand or park upon any street in any business district at any place other than a bus stop, or taxicab stand respectively; except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of those vehicles from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers. 
(B)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter that zone. 
(C)  The Upper Arlington City Manager or designee is authorized to establish bus stops and taxicab stands and to designate the same by appropriate signs or other means. (Per Ordinance No. 92-2009) 
§ 371.11 - PARKING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. 
(A)  The parking of vehicles on public property excluding dedicated streets and highways set out for public travel and heretofore regulated, shall be prohibited without the consent of the proper governmental agencies in charge of public property. 
(B)  No vehicle shall be parked on public property in violation of rules and regulations set out by the governmental agencies controlling the public property. 
(C)  No person shall park, stop or leave standing any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any public property, other than a public street or highway, except in locations set aside and designated for the parking of motor vehicles. 
(D)  No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle upon any public street or highway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying it for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(3)  Advertising. 
(E)  No person who is the owner, agent, operator or other person in charge of any vehicle shall permit the vehicle to remain parked, standing or abandoned upon any street or highway for a continuous period longer than twenty-four (24) hours. This section shall not be construed as affecting any other parking regulation now in effect or that may hereafter become effective but shall be construed as an additional parking limitation. The purpose of this section is to prohibit continuous long-term parking and the storage of vehicles on the streets of the city. 
(F)  (1)  No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle at special parking locations provided under ORC § 4511.69(E) or at special clearly marked parking locations, also known as handicapped parking spaces or disability parking spaces as defined in C.O. ch. 301, provided in or on publicly owned parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in accordance with that division, unless one of the following applies: 
(a)  The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is displaying a valid removable windshield placard or special license plates; 
(b)  The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card or special handicapped license plates. 
(2)  If a person is charged with a violation of division (F)(1)(a) or (b) of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that the person suffered an injury not more than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the time the person was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the person meets at least one of the criteria contained in ORC § 4503.44(A)(1). 
(G)  Whoever violates division (F)(1)(a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 92-2009) 
§ 371.12 - FIRE LANES, PROHIBITED PARKING. 
With the written approval of the owner or person in charge of private property, the Upper Arlington City Manager is authorized to designate fire lanes on the property, which lanes shall be kept open and free of obstructions, in order to permit free access of fire and other emergency equipment and to facilitate the rendering of service by the fire division and other emergency agencies. When so designated and identified by signs or pavement markings, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in a fire lane or to otherwise obstruct the same. Provided, however, that the Upper Arlington City Manager may, by written regulation, modify the prohibition to the extent necessary to permit the performance of necessary maintenance or repair work on an adjacent building or other improvements, or to permit loading and unloading of materials to the extent necessary for the use of any building on said premises. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009) 
§371.13 - REMOVAL OF VEHICLES IN VIOLATION. 
Any law enforcement officer of this city is authorized to remove any vehicle which has been parked, left standing or abandoned in violation of C.O. and C.O. § 371.12 or any other provision of this chapter, as provided in C.O. ch. 313. 
§ 371.14 - PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY-SPECIFIC. 
(A)  The parking of vehicles on private property streets and highways set out for public travel shall be prohibited without the consent of the owner of private property. 
(B)  No person shall park, stop or leave standing any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any private property, without permission of the owner or person in charge, except in locations set aside and designated for the parking of motor vehicles. 
(C)  No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle upon any property not owned by the person for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying it for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle without the consent of the property owner except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(3)  Advertising. 
(D)  (1)  No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle at special parking locations provided under ORC § 4511.69(E) or at special clearly marked parking locations, also known as handicapped parking spaces or disability parking spaces as defined in C.O. ch. 301, provided in or on privately owned parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in accordance with that division, unless one of the following applies: 
(a)  The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is displaying a valid removable windshield placard or special license plates; 
(b)  The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card or special handicapped license plates. 
(2)  If a person is charged with a violation of division (D)(1)(a) or (b) of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that the person suffered an injury not more than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the time the person was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the person meets at least one of the criteria contained in ORC § 4503.44(A)(1). 
(E)  Whoever violates division (D)(1)(a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(F)  The provisions of C.O. §§ 371.14(A) and (B) hereof shall not be applicable unless the private or public property is posted in a conspicuous manner setting forth the prohibition of parking or the conditions and regulations under which parking is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009; Ord. No. 59-2012) 
§ 371.15 - PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY, GENERALLY. 
(A)  Any law enforcement officer, upon complaint of any person adversely affected, may order into storage any motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in C.O. § 537.09 that has been left on private residential or private agricultural property at least four (4) hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the property or any motor vehicle in violation of C.O. § 371.14. The Upper Arlington Chief of Police, upon complaint of the owner of a repair garage or place of storage, may order into storage any motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle, that has been left at the garage or place of storage for a longer period than that agreed upon. The place of storage shall be designated by the Upper Arlington Chief of Police. When ordering a motor vehicle into storage pursuant to this section, any police officer shall, whenever possible, arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle by a private tow truck operator or towing company. 
Subject to C.O. § 371.15(C), the owner of a motor vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this section may recover the vehicle only in accordance with C.O. § 371.15(E). 
(1)  C.O. §§ 371.15(A)(1) and 371.15(A)(2) do not apply to any private residential or private agricultural property that is established as a private tow-away zone in accordance with C.O. § 371.15(B). 
(2)  As used in C.O. §§ 371.15(A)(1) and 371.15(A)(2), private residential property means private property on which is located one (1) or more structures that are used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one (1) or more persons, if no more than three (3) separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. Private residential property does not include any private property on which is located one (1) or more structures that are used as a home, residence or sleeping place by two (2) or more persons, if more than three (3) separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. 
(B)  The owner of private property may establish a private tow-away zone only if all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The owner posts on his property a sign, that is at least eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches in size, that is visible from all entrances to the property, and that contains at least all of the following information: 
(a)  A notice that the property is a private tow-away zone and that vehicles not authorized to park on the property will be towed away. 
(b)  The telephone number of the person from whom a towed-away vehicle can be recovered, and the address of the place to which the vehicle will be taken and the place from which it may be recovered. 
(c)  A statement that the vehicle may be recovered at any time during the day or night upon the submission of proof of ownership and the payment of a towing charge and a storage charge. 
(2)  The place to which the towed vehicle is taken and from which it may be recovered is conveniently located, is well lighted and is on or within a reasonable distance of a regularly scheduled route of one (1) or more modes of public transportation, if any public transportation is available in the municipal corporation or township in which the private tow-away zone is located. 
(3)  If a vehicle is parked on private property that is established as a private tow-away zone in accordance with C.O. § 371.15(B)(1), without the consent of the owner of the property or in violation of any posted parking condition or regulation, the owner or the owner's agent may remove, or cause the removal of, the vehicle, the owner and the operator of the vehicle shall be deemed to have consented to the removal and storage of the vehicle and to the payment of the towing and storage charges specified in C.O. § 371.15(B)(1)(c), and the owner, subject to C.O. § 371.15(C), may recover a vehicle that has been so removed only in accordance with C.O. § 371.15(E). 
(4)  If the city requires tow trucks and tow truck operators to be licensed, no owner of private property shall remove, or shall cause the removal and storage of, any vehicle pursuant to C.O. § 371.15(B)(2) by an unlicensed tow truck or unlicensed tow truck operator. 
(5)  C.O. §§ 371.15(B)(1) through 371.15(B)(4) do not affect or limit the operation of C.O. § 371.15(A) or ORC §§ 4513.61 to 4513.65 as they relate to property other than private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under C.O. § 371.15(B)(1) 
(C)  If the owner or operator of a motor vehicle has been ordered into storage pursuant to C.O. § 371.15(A)(1) or a vehicle is being removed under authority of C.O. § 371.15(B)(1) arrives after the motor vehicle or vehicle has been prepared for removal but prior to its actual removal from the property, the owner or operator shall be given the opportunity to pay a fee of not more than one-half (1/2) of the charge for the removal of motor vehicles under C.O. § 371.15(A)(1) or of vehicles under C.O. § 371.15(B)(1), whichever is applicable, that normally is assessed by the person who has prepared the motor vehicle or vehicle for removal, in order to obtain release of the motor vehicle or vehicle. Upon payment of that fee, the motor vehicle or vehicle shall be released to the owner or operator, and upon its release, the owner or operator immediately shall move it so that: 
(1)  If the motor vehicle was ordered into storage pursuant to C.O. § 371.15(A)(1), it is not on the private residential or private agricultural property without the permission of the person having the right to possession of the property, or is not at the garage or place of storage without the permission of the owner, whichever is applicable. 
(2)  If the vehicle was being moved under authority of C.O. § 371.15(B)(3), it is not parked on the private property established as a private tow-away zone without the consent of the owner or in violation of any posted parking condition or regulation. 
(D)  If an owner of private property that is established as a private tow-away zone in accordance with C.O. § 371.15(B)(1) or the authorized agent of such an owner removes or causes the removal of a vehicle from that property under authority of C.O. § 371.15(B)(3), the owner or agent promptly shall notify the Upper Arlington Police Department of the removal; the vehicle's license number, make, model and color; the location from which it was removed; the date and time of its removal; the telephone number of the person from whom it may be recovered and the address of the place to which it has been taken and from which it may be recovered. 
(1)  The Upper Arlington Chief of Police shall maintain a record of motor vehicles that are in storage pursuant to C.O. § 371.15(A)(1) and of vehicles removed from private property that is established as a private tow-away zone of which the chief has received notice under C.O. § 371.15(D). The record shall include an entry for each motor vehicle or vehicle that identifies the motor vehicle's or vehicle's license number; make, model and color; the location from which it was removed; the date and time of its removal; the telephone number of the person from whom it may be recovered and the address of the place to which it has been taken and from which it may be recovered. Any information in the record that pertains to a particular motor vehicle or vehicle shall be provided to any person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies themselves as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle or vehicle and requests information pertaining to its location. 
(2)  Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of a law enforcement officer's order for the removal and storage of a motor vehicle under C.O. § 371.15(A)(1) shall provide the identity of the law enforcement agency with which the complaint was registered to any person who identifies themselves as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information to its location. 
(E)  The owner of a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to C.O. § 371.15(A)(1) or of a vehicle that is removed under authority of C.O. § 371.15(B)(2) may reclaim it upon payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal and upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of title to the motor vehicle or vehicle. If a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to C.O. § 371.15(A)(1), remains unclaimed by the owner for thirty (30) days, the procedures established by C.O. § 551.03 and the Ohio Revised Code shall apply. 
(F)  No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vehicle from private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under C.O. § 371.15(B)(1) other than in accordance with C.O. § 371.15(B)(2), and no person shall remove, or cause the removal of any motor vehicle from any other private property other than in accordance with C.O. § 371.15(A)(1) or C.O. § 371.02(C) or C.O. § 537.10. 
This section does not constitute a limitation on any other regulation relative to parking of vehicles or the impoundment thereof now in effect or that may hereafter become effective, but shall be construed as an additional limitation on the parking or abandonment of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009) 
§ 371.16 - LEAVING VEHICLE UNATTENDED, GRADE PARKING. 
No person having control or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand on any street unattended without first setting the brakes thereon, stopping the motor of the vehicle, locking the ignition, and removing the key, and when standing upon any perceptible grade turning the front wheels of the vehicle to the curb or side of the street. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009) 
§ 371.17 - ANGLE PARKING. 
Head-out angle parking is prohibited on all streets in this city. Head-in parking is prohibited on all streets except the streets designated by the city manager or designee. 
( Ord. No. 8-2016, § 9, 2-22-2016 ) 
§ 371.18 - MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING RESTRICTIONS. 
(A)  Specifications. 
(1)  No person who is the owner, operator or person in charge of a commercial car, commercial tractor, bus, or trailer shall park, store or allow this vehicle to remain for more than two (2) hours in any twenty-four-hour period on any street within any zoning district where residences are permitted. No vehicle excepted from the definition of motor vehicle, excluding motorized bicycles, no matter how many tires, shall be parked, stored or allowed to remain for more than two (2) hours in any twenty-four-hour period on any public or private street within any zoning district where residences are permitted. 
(2)  Other provisions of this section notwithstanding, any person who is the owner, operator or person in charge of a motor vehicle with no more than four (4) tires may park, store or allow it to remain on a public or private street, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Only one (1) such vehicle may be parked on a public or private street, and may not be parked in addition to a recreational vehicle, trailer or boat parked outside of an enclosed structure in compliance with Section 6.09(D)(6) and (7) of the Unified Development Ordinance; or in addition to a vehicle parked in compliance with Section 6.09(D)(5) of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(b)  Any equipment and/or load attached to, or supported by, the vehicle must be totally enclosed within this vehicle to conceal it from external observation. 
(c)  Graphics are permitted on the sides of the vehicles only, subject to the following conditions: 
Graphics are limited to the front passenger doors or to ten percent (10%) of the total area of each side of the vehicle, whichever is less. Said area shall be measured behind the cab or behind the front passenger door on a pick-up truck or van. Graphics are computed for and permitted on each side of the vehicle. Graphic area is defined as that area within a perimeter drawn to encompass all graphic symbols and text. 
No more than three (3) colors, exclusive of vehicle color, may be used. For the purposes of this ordinance, black and white are considered colors. 
(3)  Passenger cars which qualify as non-commercial motor vehicles are exempt from the requirements of this ordinance. 
(4)  This ordinance shall not apply: 
(a)  To vehicles used for conveying the necessary tools and materials to premises where labor, using tools and materials, is to be performed, during the time of parking the vehicles or to the time during which the vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer is being loaded or unloaded or used to deliver or hoist property or merchandise for completion of delivery, if the loading, unloading or other activities referred to in this provision are conducted diligently and without unnecessary delay. 
(b)  To taxis, limousines, or buses conveying passengers to any public meeting, assembly, school, church, convention or entertainment during the actual session of the public meeting, assembly, school, church, convention or entertainment. 
(Ord. No. 92-2009; Ord. No. 10-2012) 
§ 371.19 - OWNER RESPONSIBILITY. 
The registered owner of a motor vehicle is primarily responsible for the illegal parking set forth in this chapter. 
CHAPTER 381. - PEDESTRIANS 

§ 381.01 - PEDESTRIAN ON CROSSWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY. 
(A)  When traffic control signals are not in place, or not in operation, or are clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield or if required by C.O. § 351.28 to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
(B)  No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle, which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(C)  C.O. § 381.01(A) does not apply under the conditions stated in C.O. § 381.03(B). 
(D)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the operator of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
§ 381.02 - BLIND PERSON HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY. 
(A)  As used in this section blind person or blind pedestrian means a person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with correcting lenses or visual acuity greater than 20/200 but with a limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20°. 
(B)  The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying in a raised or extended position a white cane or white cane with a red tip. 
(C)  No person, other than a blind person, while on any public street or highway, alley or other public thoroughfare shall carry in a raised or extended position a white cane or a white cane with a red tip. 
§ 381.03 - RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN. 
(A)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic operating lawfully upon the roadway. 
(B)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or over-head pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic upon the roadway. 
(C)  This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway. 
§ 381.04 - DUTIES OF PEDESTRIANS. 
(A)  Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of the crosswalk. 
(B)  Pedestrians shall not step into or upon a public street or highway without looking both directions to see what is approaching. 
§ 381.05 - WALKING IN STREET. 
(A)  Where useable walks or paths parallel the street or highway, pedestrians shall not walk in, along or upon the vehicular traveled portion of such street or highway. 
(B)  Where useable walks or paths are not provided parallel to the street or highway, pedestrians may walk along or upon the traveled portion of such street or highway, and when practicable, they shall face the approaching traffic and shall exercise due care to avoid approaching traffic. 
(C)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway in a business or urban district at a place other than a crosswalk except when crosswalks are an unreasonable distance apart. 
§ 381.06 - SOLICITING RIDES OR HITCHHIKING. 
No person while on a roadway shall solicit a ride from the driver of any vehicle. 
§ 381.07 - PEDESTRIAN UNDER THE INFLUENCE. 
A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse, or any combination thereof, to a degree which renders himself a hazard shall not walk or be upon a street or highway. 
§ 381.08 - BOARDING OR LEAVING FROM VEHICLES; OPENING DOORS. 
(A)  No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(B)  No operator or passenger of any motor vehicle shall leave or exit such vehicle or open any door of the same on the side next to a moving lane of traffic, unless such movement can be made in such manner as to yield the right-of-way to all vehicular traffic in the lawful use of the street. 
CHAPTER 383. - BICYCLES, MOTORIZED BICYCLES, AND MOTORCYCLES 

§ 383.01 - APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC CODE TO BICYCLES. 
(A)  Except as provided in subsection (C), all sections of this traffic code which are applicable to bicycles apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(B)  A bicycle operator who violates any section of this traffic code as described in subsection (A) of this section that is applicable to bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation, or summons by a law enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of a motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. 
(C)  The following sections of the traffic code shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street, highway, any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking: 
(1)  C.O. § 315.02; 
(2)  C.O. § 315.03; 
(3)  C.O. § 351.25; 
(4)  C.O. § 353.01; 
(5)  C.O. § 353.02; 
(6)  C.O. § 353.03; 
(7)  C.O. § 357.01; 
(8)  C.O. § 357.02; or 
(9)  C.O. § 357.03. 
(Ord. No. 71-2010) 
§ 383.02 - RULES FOR BICYCLES, MOTORIZED BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES. 
(A)  (1)  No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, or carry any other person upon the bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat. 
(2)  No person operating a motorized bicycle or motorcycle shall ride other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any other person upon the motorized bicycle or motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride as a passenger upon a motorized bicycle or motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle. 
(3)  No bicycle, motorized bicycle or motorcycle shall be used to carry more persons at one (1) time than the number for which it is designed and equipped, nor shall any motorcycle or motorized bicycle be operated on a street or highway when the handle bars or grips are more than fifteen (15) inches higher than the seat or saddle for the operator. 
(4)  No person shall ride upon a bicycle, motorized bicycle or motorcycle that is equipped with a saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one (1) leg on each side of the bicycle, motorized bicycle or motorcycle. 
(B)  No person operating a bicycle, motorized bicycle or motorcycle shall carry any package, bundle or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one (1) hand upon the handle bars. 
(C)  No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a street or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking, unless both of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The person, is fourteen (14) years of age or older and holds either a valid operator's license issued under ORC ch. 4507. 
(2)  A valid motorized bicycle license is issued after the person has passed the test provided for in ORC § 4511.521. 
(D)  No person shall operate or be a passenger on a motorcycle without using safety glasses or other protective eye device. 
(E)  When required, a signal of intention to move right or left shall be made not less than once but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle operator is not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and a signal shall not be given when the operator's hands are needed for safe operation of the bicycle or motorized bicycle. 
(F)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is firmly attached to the bicycle or motorized bicycle. 
(Ord. No. 48-2010; Ord. No. 72-2018 , § 5, 10-8-2018) 
§ 383.03 - ATTACHING BICYCLES AND SLEDS TO VEHICLES. 
(A)  No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, motorized bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(B)  No operator of a vehicle shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any motorcycle, motorized bicycle, bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle to attach the same or self to the operator's vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway. This section does not apply to the towing of a disabled vehicle. 
(C)  (1)  Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(Ord. No. 48-2010) 
§ 383.04 - RIDING ABREAST. 
Persons riding bicycles, motorized bicycles or motorcycles upon a roadway shall ride not more than two (2) abreast in a single lane, except on paths or parts of roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, motorized bicycles or motorcycles. 
(Ord. No. 48-2010) 
§ 383.05 - SIGNAL DEVICE ON BICYCLE. 
A bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of giving an audible signal, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle. 
§ 383.06 - RECKLESS OPERATION; CONTROL, COURSE AND SPEED. 
(A)  No person shall operate a bicycle or motorized bicycle: 
(1)  Without due regard for the safety and rights of pedestrians and drivers and occupants of all other vehicles, and so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person while in the lawful use of the streets or sidewalks or any other public or private property; 
(2)  Without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over a bicycle or motorized bicycle; 
(3)  In a weaving or zigzag course unless the irregular course is necessary for safe operation in compliance with the law; 
(4)  At a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(Ord. No. 48-2010) 
§ 383.07 - RIDING BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC RULES. 
(A)  Every person operating a bicycle or motorized bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one (1) proceeding in the same direction. 
(B)  This section does not require a person operating a bicycle or motorized bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle or motorized bicycle and an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane. 
(Ord. No. 48-2010) 
§ 383.08 - PARKING OF BICYCLES OR MOTORIZED BICYCLES. 
    No person shall park a bicycle or motorized bicycle upon a sidewalk in a manner so as to unduly interfere with pedestrian traffic or upon a roadway so as to unduly interfere with vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 48-2010) 
§ 383.09 - RIDING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALK. 
(A)  No person shall ride a bicycle or motorized bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. 
(B)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk or in a public park, that person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian. 
(C)  No person shall ride any motorcycle or motorized bicycle, on any sidewalk or in any public park path used for pedestrian use in this city. No person shall ride any of the aforementioned vehicles in or upon any school ground in this city, except as permitted by regulation adopted by the school authority in charge of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 48-2010) 
§ 383.10 - LIGHTS AND REFLECTOR ON BICYCLES. 
    Every bicycle when in use at the times specified in section 4513.03 of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be equipped with the following: 
(A)  A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or the operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front and three hundred (300) feet to the sides. A generator-powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle is moving may be used to meet this requirement. 
(B)  A red reflector on the rear which shall be visible from all distances from one hundred (100) feet to six hundred (600) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. 
(C)  A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as specified in this section, the red lamp may serve as the reflector and a separate reflector is not required. 
(D)  Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those required under this section, except that red lamps and red reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle and white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the bicycle. 
(Ord. No. 48-2010) 
§ 383.11 - BRAKES ON BICYCLES. 
    Every bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate brake when used on a path, sidewalk, street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 48-2010) 
§ 383.12 - PARENT PROHIBITED FROM PERMITTING VIOLATION-PARENT RESPONSIBILITY. 
(A)  The parent or legal guardian of any child shall not authorize or recklessly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  No parent, legal guardian or person having the care and control of a child under the age of (6) shall recklessly permit the child to ride a bicycle upon any street in this city unaccompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or person (16) years or older. 
(Ord. No. 48-2010) 
§ 383.13 - SKATEBOARDS. 
(A)  As used in this section the term skateboard shall, without limitation, include any vehicle or device consisting basically of a board or platform mounted on wheels or rollers, whether powered by gravity, muscle power or mechanical or motorized means, which is not equipped with a positive, mechanical means of steering such vehicle or device. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or propel a skateboard on any roadway in this city. 
(C)  No person shall ride or propel a skateboard upon a sidewalk within a business district. 
(D)  No person shall operate a skateboard at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
§ 383.14 - MOTORIZED BICYCLES. 
    Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped in accordance with the rules concerning the equipment of motorized bicycles promulgated by the Ohio Director of Public Safety and shall be operated pursuant to ORC § 4511.521. 
(Ord. No. 72-2018 , § 6, 10-8-2018) 
§ 383.15 - IN-LINE SKATES AND ROLLER SKATES. 
(A)  Skates and skate: mean, respectively, in-line skates and roller skates, and the use of such devices on the feet as a means of propelling oneself by human power or gravity. The terms do not include skateboards as defined in C.O. § 383.13. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to skate on the following roadways except to cross these streets at intersections or crosswalks: Arlington Avenue, Arlington Centre Boulevard, Cambridge Boulevard, Coach Road, Dierker Road, Fifth Avenue, Fishinger Road, Henderson Road, Highland Drive, Kenny Road, King Avenue, Lane Avenue, Lane Road, MacKenzie Drive, McCoy Road, North Broadway, North Mallway, North Star Road, Northwest Boulevard, Nugent Drive, Redding Road, Reed Road, Riverside Drive, South Mallway, Trabue Road, Tremont Road, Waltham Road and Zollinger Road. 
(C)  No person shall skate upon a sidewalk within a business district or within a shopping center. 
(D)  No person shall skate on a street or roadway during the time from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise; 
(E)  No person shall skate upon public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The person shall wear a protective helmet with the chin strap properly fastened and wrist guards (wrap-around or pull-on-device with high impact splints along the top and bottom); 
(2)  A person skating on a street or roadway shall skate as near to the right-hand side of the street or roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction, and shall obey all other traffic rules applicable to vehicles; 
(3)  When two (2) or more persons are skating together they shall skate in single file; 
(4)  When a person skating is approached by a public safety vehicle signaling in compliance with C.O. § 351.25, the person shall immediately pull to the side of the street or roadway and stop until the vehicle has passed; 
(5)  No person shall skate recklessly, skate backwards, skate while wearing headphones, or skate without exercising ordinary care; 
(6)  No person shall skate by being propelled by a vehicle, nor shall any person knowingly propel a person who is skating by use of a vehicle or other means. 
§ 383.16 - APPLICATION OF THE TRAFFIC CODE TO ELECTRONIC SCOOTERS. 
(A)  The following sections of the traffic code shall apply whenever an electronic scooter is operated upon any street, highway, any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or electronic scooters, or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking: 
(1)  C.O. § 315.02; 
(2)  C.O. § 315.03; 
(3)  C.O. § 351.25; 
(4)  C.O. § 353.01; 
(5)  C.O. § 353.02; 
(6)  C.O. § 353.03; 
(7)  C.O. § 357.01; 
(8)  C.O. § 357.02; or 
(9)  C.O. § 357.03. 
(B)  An electronic scooter operator who violates any section of this traffic code as described in subsection (A) of this section may be issued a ticket, citation, or summons by a law enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of a motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. 
(C)  The following sections of this chapter shall apply to the use of electronic scooters: 
(1)  C.O. § 383.03; 
(2)  C.O. § 383.06; 
(3)  C.O. § 383.08. 
(Ord. No. 72-2018 , § 7, 10-8-2018) 
CHAPTER 385. - BICYCLE REGISTRATION AND IMPOUNDING 

§ 385.01 - REGISTRATION AND DECAL REQUIRED. 
No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon any of the streets or highways of the city unless such bicycle shall have been registered by the owner thereof, or in the case of minors, by his or her parents, guardian or legal custodian, and shall have an official decal indicating such registration, securely attached to the rear of such bicycle in such position that it shall be plainly visible and readable at all times. For the purposes of this chapter only, motorized bicycles are considered to be bicycles, and subject to the same requirements and penalties. 
§ 385.02 - ISSUANCE OF LICENSE. 
Application for bicycle registration shall be made to the finance director, upon forms provided by the finance director. The application shall contain the name, age and address of the owner and the applicant, and make, type, serial number or other identifying mark of such bicycle, and such other information as the finance director shall require. 
The finance director may appoint such number of deputy registrars as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. If, in the opinion of the finance director it is advisable, the finance director may require any such deputy registrar to give bond in such amount and with such security as the director requires. 
§ 385.03 - REGISTRATION FEE. 
A fee of one dollar ($1.00) for each registration shall be charged and collected. Monies collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be credited to the general fund of the city. 
§ 385.04 - ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE AND DECAL. 
The finance director or deputy registrar, after issuing registration certificates as provided herein, shall transmit to the police division a record of all such registration certificates, the number and date of issuance thereof, the name and address of the person to whom issued and all applications for such certificates. Such record shall be kept by the police division in a manner which will afford and facilitate prompt identification of any bicycle so registered. 
§ 385.05 - RECORD OF CERTIFICATE. 
The finance director, after issuing registration certificates as provided in C.O. § 385.04, shall transmit to the police division a record of all such registration certificates, the number and date of issuance thereof, the name and address of the person to whom issued, and all applications for such certificates. Such record shall be kept by the police division in a manner which will afford and facilitate prompt identification of any bicycle so registered. 
§ 385.06 - TERM OF REGISTRATION. 
All bicycle registration certificates issued under this chapter shall be effective from the date of issuance for the life of the bicycle, except as provided in C.O. § 385.08. 
§ 385.07 - TAMPERING WITH SERIAL NUMBER, CERTIFICATE OR DECAL. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously to remove, mutilate or alter the name or serial number or other identifying mark of any bicycle registered under this chapter or any registration certificate or decal issued hereunder. 
§ 385.08 - SALE OR TRANSFER REPORT. 
It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle, other than to a member of his immediate family, to report such sale or transfer within seventy-two (72) hours to the finance director, giving the name and address of the person to whom such bicycle is sold or transferred, together with a description of the bicycle and its serial number or other identifying mark. The registration certificate issued for such bicycle shall be returned with such report to the finance director. Upon such sale or transfer, such registration shall terminate and it shall be the duty of the new owner to comply with the provisions of this chapter relative to registration. 
§ 385.09 - EXCEPTION. 
The provisions of the preceding sections of this chapter shall not apply to any bicycle owned by a person not a resident of this city; which is duly licensed under the ordinances of any other municipality of Ohio, and which is operated only occasionally in this city. 
§ 385.10 - IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLES. 
Whenever any bicycle shall be operated by any person in violation of the provisions of this chapter, such bicycle may be seized by any member of the police division and impounded until such time as the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. Whenever any bicycle shall be operated by a minor in violation of any provision of C.O. ch. 383, such bicycle may be seized by any member of the police division and impounded. Such bicycle shall be surrendered to the parent or guardian of such minor after full explanation of the reason for such impounding. In the event that the owner fails to repossess the bicycle within ten (10) days after its seizure, an impounding fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be charged. If such impounding fee is not paid, the bicycle shall be subject to sale, after being held for ninety (90) days, under the statutory provisions relative to the sale of unclaimed property. Prompt notice of impounding shall be given the owner by the police division. 
Such impounding fee shall not be charged, if it appears to the satisfaction of the responsible enforcing officer that the operation of the bicycle was without the consent, either express or implied, of the owner thereof. 
§ 385.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
Part 4 - SCHEDULE OF FEES 
CHAPTER 401. - SCHEDULE OF FEES 

§ 401.01 - SCHEDULE OF FEES. 
(A)  The city manager shall annually review the fees contained in the schedule of fees and shall recommend to city council any changes that the city manager may deem reasonable and appropriate. 
(B)  The schedule of fees shall be reviewed and any changes approved by legislative action of city council as part of the annual budget process. All fees remain unchanged until such time as increased, decreased or repealed by city council. However, no provision in this chapter shall prevent or prohibit city council, prior to the next annual review, from enacting legislation adjusting fees, terminating fees, or creating additional fees. 
(C)  Any fee required by state law to be collected by the city, now or in the future, shall automatically become a fee chargeable by the city and listed in the schedule of fees and shall automatically increase, decrease, or terminate as mandated by state law. 
(D)  In the event of a conflict between any fee contained in the schedule of fees adopted pursuant to this section and the same fee found in any other section of the city's Codified Ordinances regarding the imposition of a fee and/or the fee amount, the fee contained in the schedule of fees shall prevail. Provisions of the Codified Ordinances requiring the imposition of a fee not contained in the schedule of fees, and which fee is addressed in another or other sections of the city's Codified Ordinances, shall continue to apply. 
(E)  The schedule of fees shall be available on the city's website and during normal business hours in the Finance and Administrative Services Department. 
(Ord. No. 63-2016 , § 1, 11-28-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 63-2016 , § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 2016, changed the title of § 401.01 from "fees" to "Schedule of fees." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
§ 401.02 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT-MASTER LIST OF FEES. 
(A)  The master list of fees for the community development department shall be those fees set forth in the most recent schedule of fees adopted pursuant to C.O. § 401.01. 
(B)  Any references found in other sections of the Codified Ordinances to a fee contained in C.O. § 401.02 shall mean the fees found in the most recent schedule of fees adopted pursuant to C.O. § 401.01. 
(Ord. No. 80-2013; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 63-2016 , §§ 2, 5, 11-28-2016) 
§ 401.03 - FEE PROVISIONS. 
(A)  Doubled fees. Where work, activities, or conditions for which a permit issued by the city is required under state law or any section of the Codified Ordinances is started or proceeded with, prior to obtaining a permit, the fees as calculated for said permit shall be doubled. Payment of such doubled fee shall not: 
(1)  Relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of state law or the applicable sections of the Codified Ordinances in the execution of the work; or 
(2)  Limit the imposition of any penalties or sanctions provided for violations of state law or the applicable sections of the Codified Ordinances. 
(B)  If fees are not collected at the time of application, or by the time a service has been provided, the city has the right to pursue collection of any of the fees charged by the city, including certification of amounts owing to the county auditor to be placed as a lien on real property, remittance to a collection service, or any other appropriate and legal pursuit of payment. 
(C)  The city manager may decrease or waive fees contained in the schedule of fees for the purposes of economic development as provided in an economic incentive agreement approved by city council or for other matters that the city manager determines are in the best interest of the city. The waiver of any fees must be in compliance with the Constitution and the laws of the State of Ohio. 
(Ord. No. 63-2016 , § 3, 11-28-2016) 
§ 401.04 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 63-2016 , § 4, adopted Nov. 28, 2016, repealed § 401.04, which pertained to city manager-master list of fees. 
§ 401.05 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 63-2016 , § 4, adopted Nov. 28, 2016, repealed § 401.05, which pertained to fire division-master list of fees. 
§ 401.06 - RIGHTS-OF-WAY-MASTER LIST OF FEES. 
(A)  Registration maintenance fee. The annual registration maintenance fee (per mile) required by C.O. § 933.05(A) shall be based upon the miles of right-of-way which the permittee occupies or desires to occupy in said calendar year. The fee shall be as follows: 
 Less than 1 mile ..... $10,000.00 
 From 1 to 15 miles ..... $20,000.00 
 From 16 to 50 miles ..... $30,000.00 
 Over 50 miles ..... $40,000.00 
(B)  Right-of-way permit fees. 
(1)  The right-of-way permit for residential purposes fees for shall be as follows: 
(a)  Sidewalk installations or replacement ..... $50.00 
(b)  Repair or replacement of existing curb and gutter sections outside of the driveway entrance ..... $50.00 
(c)  All other ..... $50.00 
(2)  The right-of-way permit fee required by C.O. § 933.15(I) for all other construction in the rights-of-way shall be as follows: 
(a)  Pavement disturbance right-of-way permit ..... $500.00 
(b)  Special right-of-way permit ..... $500.00 
(c)  Right-of-way minor maintenance permit ..... $50.00 
(C)  Special right-of-way permit registration maintenance fee. The annual registration maintenance fee (per mile) required by C.O. § 933.15 shall be two dollars ($2.00) per lineal foot of right-of-way used or occupied, but not less than one dollar ($1.00.) 
(D)  Micro wireless permit fee. The fee for a micro wireless permit required by C.O. § 933.24 shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each small cell facility and/or wireless support structure contained in the permit application. 
(E)  Colocation of small cell facility on city owned support structure annual fee. There shall be a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) annually, for each small cell facility collocated on a city-owned wireless support structure in the right-of-way in accordance with C.O. § 933.24. 
(Ord. No. 23-2013; Ord. No. 30-2015, § 1, 5-27-2015 ; Ord. No. 64-2016 , § 1, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 48-2018 , § 32, 6-25-2018) 
Part 5 - GENERAL OFFENSES CODE 
CHAPTER 501. - GENERAL PROVISIONS, DEFINITIONS AND PENALTIES 

§ 501.01 - OFFENSES DEFINED. 
(A)  No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the city unless it is defined as an offense in the Upper Arlington City Code (e.g., The Codified Ordinances of the City of Upper Arlington). 
(B)  An offense is defined when one (1) or more sections of the Upper Arlington City Code state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and provide a penalty for violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such duty. 
§ 501.02 - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. 
Sections of the Upper Arlington City Code defining offenses or penalties shall be strictly construed against the city, and liberally construed in favor of the accused. 
§ 501.03 - CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES. 
As used in the Upper Arlington City Codes: 
(A)  All offenses are misdemeanors and include misdemeanors of the first, second, third and fourth degree, minor misdemeanors and misdemeanors not specifically classified. 
(B)  Any misdemeanor not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor, if the only penalty, which may be imposed, is a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004 and a fine not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004. 
§ 501.04 - LIMITATION OF CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS. 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, a prosecution shall be barred unless it is commenced within the following periods after an offense is committed: 
(1)  For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two (2) years; 
(2)  For a minor misdemeanor, six (6) months. 
(B)  If the period of limitation provided in division (A) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an element is fraud or breach of a fiduciary duty, within one (1) year after discovery of the offense either by an aggrieved person, or by the aggrieved person's legal representative who is not a party to the offense. 
(C)  If the period of limitation provided in division (A) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense involving misconduct in office by a public servant as defined in ORC § 2921.01, at any time while the accused remains a public servant or within two (2) years thereafter. 
(D)  An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct, the period of limitation does not begin to run until such course of conduct or the accused's accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first. 
(E)  A prosecution is commenced on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or on the date a warrant, summons, citation, or other process is issued, whichever occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance of a warrant, summons, citation, or other process, unless reasonable diligence is exercised to execute the same. 
(F)  The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus delicti remains undiscovered. 
(G)  The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused departed this State or concealed the accused's identity or whereabouts is prima-facie evidence of the accused's purpose to avoid prosecution. 
(H)  The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this state, even though the process which commenced the prosecution is quashed or the proceedings thereon are set aside or reversed on appeal. 
(I)  This section shall not apply to prosecution commenced within the period of limitations set forth in ORC § 718.06(B) for violations of the municipal tax law. 
§ 501.05 - REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY. 
(A)  Except as provided in division (B) of this section, a person is not guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply: 
(1)  The person's liability is based on conduct, that includes either a voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is capable of performing; 
(2)  The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the section defining the offense. 
(B)  When the section defining an offense does not specify any degree of culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not required for a person to be guilty of the offense. When the section neither specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability, recklessness is sufficient culpability to commit the offense. 
(C)  Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal offense. Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged. 
(D)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Possession is a voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor's control of the thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession. 
(2)  Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product of the actor's volition, are involuntary acts. 
(3)  Culpability: means purpose, knowledge, recklessness or negligence, as defined in C.O. § 501.06 or ORC § 2901.22. 
(4)  Intoxication includes, but is not limited to, intoxication resulting from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug. 
§ 501.06 - CULPABLE MENTAL STATES. 
(A)  A person acts purposely when it is the person's specific intention to cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a prohibition against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to accomplish thereby, it is the person's specific intention to engage in conduct of that nature. 
(B)  A person acts knowingly, regardless of the person's purpose, when the person is aware that the conduct will probably cause a certain result or will probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge or circumstances when the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. 
(C)  A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the consequences, the person perversely disregards a known risk that the person's conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with heedless indifference to the consequences, the person perversely disregards a known risk that such circumstances are likely to exist. 
(D)  A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person's conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such circumstances may exist. 
(E)  When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge, or purpose is also sufficient culpability for such element. When recklessness suffices to establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also sufficient culpability for such element. When knowledge suffices to establish an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for such element. 
§ 501.07 - ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY. 
(A)  An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent, or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of the officer, agent, or employee's office or employment, except that if the section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or employees for whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable, such provisions shall apply. 
(2)  A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer, agent, or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of the officer, agent, or employee's office or employment, except that if the section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or employees for whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable, such provisions shall apply. 
(3)  The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty imposed by law on the organization. 
(4)  If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded, tolerated or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners or by a high managerial officer, agent, or employee acting in behalf of the organization and within the scope of the officer, agent, or employee's office or employment. 
(B)  When strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the contrary plainly appears. 
(C)  In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial officer, agent, or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission. This defense is not available, if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of the section defining the offense. 
(D)  As used in this section, organization means a corporation for profit or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, unincorporated association, estate, trust or other commercial or legal entity. Organization does not include an entity organized as or by a governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program. 
§ 501.08 - PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT. 
(A)  An officer, agent, or employee of an organization as defined in C.O. § 501.07 or ORC § 2901.23 may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization, if the officer, agent, or employee acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of the offense, and any of the following apply: 
(1)  In the name of the organization or in its behalf, the officer, agent, or employee engages in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in such conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which the officer, agent, or employee has direct responsibility; 
(2)  The officer, agent, or employee has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged. 
(B)  When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, the person is subject to the same penalty as if the person had acted in their own behalf. 
§ 501.09 - CODE PENALTIES. 
(A)  Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of the Upper Arlington City Code shall be imprisoned for a definite term or fined, or both, which term of imprisonment and fine shall be fixed by the court as provided in this section. 
(B)  Terms of imprisonment for violations of the Upper Arlington City Code shall be imposed, as follows: 
(1)  For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(2)  For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than ninety (90) days. 
(3)  For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than sixty (60) days. 
(4)  For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than thirty (30) days. 
(C)  A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under this section may permit the offender to serve the sentence in intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as provided in ORC § 2929.26(B). 
(D)  If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this section and the court assigns the offender to a county jail that has established a county jail industry program pursuant to ORC § 5147.30, the court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be considered for participation in the program. During the offender's term in the county jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification regarding the offender's participation in the county jail industry program. 
(E)  If a person is sentenced to a jail term pursuant to this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to ORC § 2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to ORC § 307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56, or 2947.19 and ORC § 2929.37, both of the following apply: 
(1)  The court shall specify both of the following as part of the sentence: 
(a)  If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to ORC § 2929.37 or C.O. § 552.01 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is required to pay the bill in accordance with that section. 
(b)  If the person does not dispute the bill described in division (B)(4)(a)(i) of this section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in ORC § 2929.37 or C.O. § 552.05, the clerk of court may issue a certificate of judgment against the person as described in that section. 
(2)  The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment issued as described in division (E)(1)(b) of this section. 
(3)  If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of C.O. § 353.01(d) is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a specification of the type described in ORC § 2941.1414 and if the court imposes a jail term on the offender for the underlying offense, the court shall impose upon the offender an additional definite jail term of not more than six (6) months. The additional jail term shall not be reduced pursuant to any provision of the Ohio Revised Code. The offender shall serve the additional jail term consecutively to and prior to the jail term imposed for the underlying offense and consecutively to any other mandatory term imposed in relation to the offense. 
(F)  In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to ORC § 2947.23, the court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a minor misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or combination of financial sanctions authorized under this section. Financial sanctions that may be imposed pursuant to this section include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Restitution by the offender to the victim of the offender's crime or any survivor of the victim, in an amount based on the victim's economic loss. The court shall order that the restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of the victim. The order may include a requirement that reimbursement be made to third parties, other than the offender's insurer, for amounts paid to the victim or any survivor of the victim for economic loss resulting from the offense. If reimbursement to third parties is required, the offender shall make the reimbursement to any governmental agency to repay any amounts paid by the agency to the victim or survivor before the offender makes any reimbursement to any other person. 
The court shall determine, or order to be determined, the amount of restitution to be paid by the offender. The court may base the amount of restitution it orders on an amount recommended by the victim, the offender, a pre-sentence investigation report, estimates or receipts indicating the cost of repairing or replacing property, and other information. The court shall hold a hearing on restitution if the offender, victim, or survivor disputes the amount of restitution. 
All restitution payments shall be credited against any recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or any survivor of the victim against the offender. 
The court may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not more than five percent (5%) of the amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity responsible for collecting and processing restitution payments. 
The victim or survivor may request that the prosecuting attorney file a motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment terms of any restitution ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify the payment terms as it determines appropriate. 
(G)  Fines for violations of the Upper Arlington City Code shall be imposed, as follows: 
(1)  For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(2)  For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
(3)  For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(4)  For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(H)  Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a minor misdemeanor shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004 and not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004. 
(I)  Whoever violates any provision of this general offenses code for which another penalty is not provided, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(J)  Whoever commits an offense not specifically classified under any provision of the Upper Arlington City Codes shall be fined or imprisoned or both according to the penalty provided for violation of that section. 
§ 501.10 - ORGANIZATIONAL PENALTIES. 
(A)  Regardless of the penalty ordinarily provided for an offense, an organization convicted of a violation of the Upper Arlington City Code shall be fined in accordance with this section. The court shall fix the fine as follows: 
(1)  For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(2)  For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00). 
(3)  For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). 
(4)  For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(5)  For a minor misdemeanor, not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(B)  This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to C.O. § 501.07 or ORC § 2901.23, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this section. 
(C)  When an organization is convicted of an offense that is not specifically classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then the penalty so provided shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this section. 
(D)  When an organization is convicted of an offense that is not specifically classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than the fine that is provided in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty provided for the violation of the section defining the offense. 
§ 501.11 - ATTEMPT. 
(A)  No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense. 
(B)  It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect, commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the actor believed them to be. 
(C)  No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of complicity in the commission of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an offense shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in violation of this section. 
(D)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the actor abandoned the actor's effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary renunciation of the actor's criminal purpose. 
(E)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an offense. An attempt to commit any other offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the offense attempted. In the case of an attempt to commit an offense that is not specifically classified, an attempt is a misdemeanor of the first degree. An attempt to commit a third degree, fourth degree or minor misdemeanor is not an offense under this section. 
§ 501.12 - COMPLICITY. 
(A)  No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the commission of an offense, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Solicit or procure another to commit the offense; 
(2)  Aid or abet another in committing the offense; 
(3)  Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense. 
(B)  It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender. 
(C)  No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of C.O. § 501.11 or ORC § 2923.02. 
(D)  If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an offense, or an offense, the court, when it charges the jury, shall state substantially the following: 
"The testimony of an accomplice does not become inadmissible because of the accomplices complicity, moral turpitude, or self-interest, but the admitted or claimed complicity of a witness may affect the credibility and make the testimony subject to grave suspicion, and require that it be weighed with great caution. It is for you, as jurors, in the light of all the facts presented to you from the witness stand, to evaluate the testimony and to determine its quality and worth or its lack of quality and worth." 
(E)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that, prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor terminated the actor's complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary renunciation of the actor's criminal purpose. 
(F)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if the actor were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of this section or in terms of the principal offense. 
§ 501.13 - PROSECUTION UNDER STATE CODE. 
If an offense which is defined and made punishable under this general offenses code, constitutes a felony under the Ohio Revised Code, either because it is a second or subsequent offense or for some other reason, the offender shall be prosecuted under the applicable provision of the Ohio Revised Code instead of under the Upper Arlington City Code. 
§ 501.14 - GENERAL DEFINITIONS. 
As used in any section of the Upper Arlington City Code dealing with misdemeanors or other criminal matters: 
    Continuous alcohol monitoring: means the ability to automatically test and periodically transmit alcohol consumption levels and tamper attempts at least every hour, regardless of the location of the person who is being monitored. 
    Force: means any violence, compulsion or constraint physically exerted by any means upon or against a person or thing. 
(1)  The offender is required to remain in the offender's home or other specified premises for the specified period of confinement, except for periods of time during which the offender is at the offender's place of employment or at other premises as authorized by the sentencing court or by the parole board. 
(2)  The offender is required to report periodically to a person designated by the court or parole board. 
(3)  The offender is subject to any other restrictions and requirements that may be imposed by the sentencing court or by the parole board. 
    Law enforcement officer: means any of the following: 
(1)  A sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of a township or joint township police district, marshal, deputy marshal, municipal police officer, member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under ORC § 3735.31(D), or state highway patrol trooper; 
(2)  An officer, agent or employee of the state or any of its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of that statutory duty and authority, to include state university law enforcement officers appointed under ORC § 3345.04; 
(3)  A mayor, in the mayor's capacity as chief conservator of the peace within the mayor's municipality or a city manager or village manager acting in that capacity; 
(4)  A member of an auxiliary police force organized by county, township or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the member's appointment or commission; 
(5)  A person lawfully called pursuant to ORC § 311.07 to aid a sheriff in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the person is called; 
(6)  A person appointed by a mayor pursuant to ORC § 737.01 as a special patrolling officer during riot or emergency for the purposes and during the time when the person is appointed or a person so appointed by a city manager or village manager; 
(7)  A member of the organized militia of this state or the armed forces of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence; 
(8)  A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret service officer, or municipal prosecutor. 
    Offense of violence: means any of the following: 
(1)  A violation of C.O. § 503.01, 503.03, 503.04, 517.10, or 517.12; 
(2)  A violation of any section listed in ORC § 2901.01(A)(9)(a); 
(3)  A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States, substantially equivalent to any section listed in divisions (1) or (2) of this definition; 
(4)  An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to persons or risk of serious physical harm to persons; 
(5)  An attempt to commit or complicity in committing any offense under divisions (1), (2), (3) or (4) of this definition. 
    Person: means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, and association and as further defined in ORC § 2901.01(B)(1). 
    Physical harm to persons: means any injury, illness, or other physiological impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration. 
    Physical harm to property: means any tangible or intangible damage to property, that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with its use or enjoyment. Physical harm to property does not include wear and tear occasioned by normal use. 
    Privilege: means an immunity, license, or right conferred by law, bestowed by express or implied grant, arising out of status, position, office, or relationship, or growing out of necessity. 
    Property: means any property, real or personal tangible or intangible, and any interest or license in that property. Property includes, but is not limited to, cable television service, other telecommunications service, telecommunications devices, information service, computers, data, computer software, financial instruments associated with computers, other documents associated with computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or human readable form. Financial instruments associated with computers include, but are not limited to, checks, drafts, warrants, money orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit, bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms, marketable securities, or any computer system representations of any of them. 
    Risk: means a significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist. 
    School: means any school chartered under ORC § 3301.16 and any non-chartered school that during the preceding year filed with the Ohio Department of Education in compliance with rule 3301-35-08 of the Ohio Administrative Code, a copy of the school's report for the parents of the pupil certifying that the school meets Ohio minimum standards for non-chartered, non-tax supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to the city from which it is requesting the establishment of a school zone and as further defined in ORC § 2925.01. 
An offense is "committed in the vicinity of a school" if the offender commits the offense on school premises, in a school building, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the boundaries of any school premises. 
    School building: means any building in which any of the instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by a school is conducted, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a criminal offense is committed. 
    School premises: means either of the following: 
(1)  The parcel of real property on which any school is situated, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a criminal offense is committed; 
(2)  Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a board of education of a school or the governing body of a school for which the state board of education prescribes minimum standards under ORC § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction, extracurricular activities, or training of the school is conducted, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal offense is committed. 
    Serious physical harm to persons: means any of the following: 
(1)  Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment; 
(2)  Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death; 
(3)  Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity; 
(4)  Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement; 
(5)  Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or intractable pain. 
    Serious physical harm to property: means any physical harm to property, that does either of the following: 
(1)  Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or requires a substantial amount of time, effort, or money to repair or replace; 
(2)  Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of time. 
    Substantial risk: means a strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote or significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist. 
§ 501.15 - MISDEMEANOR INVESTIGATION; EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES. 
(A)  After a misdemeanor offense has been committed, and before a criminal complaint has been filed or an arrest has been made, the city attorney, or the city attorney's assistant, or any judge of the Franklin County Municipal Court, may cause a subpoena to issue returnable before the court, for any person to give information concerning the misdemeanor offense, including designated books, records, or other documents. The subpoena shall require the witness to appear forthwith at a time designated in the subpoena. 
(B)  Before a witness is required to give information or produce documents under this section, the witness must be informed of the purpose of the inquiry, and that he/she is required to tell the truth concerning same. The witness shall then be sworn and be examined under oath by the city attorney, or the city attorney's assistant, or by the court, subject to the constitutional right against self-incrimination. 
(C)  If after being sworn, or during the inquiry, a witness subpoenaed under this section asserts the constitutional right against self-incrimination, the city attorney, the city attorney's assistant, or the court shall cease the inquiry until the validity of such claim is determined by the court. If the court determines that the witness possesses a valid claim that the information sought is protected by the constitutional privilege against self-incrimination, the inquiry shall cease until a determination is made whether to continue the inquiry under paragraph (D) of this section. 
(D)  If the court determines that a witness possesses a valid claim that the information sought under this section is protected by the privilege against self-incrimination, then the city attorney, or the city attorney's assistant, shall advise the court whether the inquiry shall continue. If the inquiry continues, then no testimony, or the fruits derived from the testimony or an act of record production, shall be used against the witness in a criminal prosecution. 
Prior to continuing the inquiry, the city attorney, or the city attorney's assistant, shall certify the existence of any independent evidence tending to establish the existence of a crime by the witness. Independent evidence that is not contained in that certification shall not be used against the witness in a subsequent criminal prosecution unless the court finds that it is not based upon or derived from such testimony or record production. 
(E)  Prior to the date specified in the subpoena, a witness may comply with a subpoena issued under this section for books, records, or other documents by voluntarily producing the items to the party who issued the subpoena. 
(F)  No person shall fail to appear, or fail to be sworn, at the designated time and place in response to a subpoena issued under this section. A witness who has been subpoenaed and intends to assert the constitutional right against self-incrimination is not excused from appearing or being sworn in response to a subpoena issued under this section, but may assert the privilege after appearing and being sworn and at the time the parties shall proceed in accordance with paragraphs (C) and (D) of this section. 
(G)  Any person who violates paragraph (F) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor upon first offense, and is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree upon second and subsequent offenses. 
(H)  That if any provisions of this Code or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the Code which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions are severable. 
CHAPTER 503. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS 

§ 503.01 - ASSAULT. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to another or to another's unborn. 
(B)  No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another or to another's unborn. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of assault, and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in this division. Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of ORC § 2903.13, assault is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(1)  If the offense occurred on city-owned property, in a school building, on school premises, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the boundaries of school premises, then the court shall impose a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least ten (10) days, which shall not be suspended. 
(2)  If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification of the type described in ORC § 2941.1423 that charges the victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at the time of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory jail term that is a definite term of at least thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 93-2009) 
§ 503.02 - NEGLIGENT ASSAULT. 
(A)  No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance as defined in ORC § 2923.11, cause physical harm to another or to another's unborn. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
§ 503.03 - AGGRAVATED MENACING. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediate family. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated menacing. Except as otherwise provided in ORC § 2903.21(B), aggravated menacing is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 503.04 - MENACING. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediate family. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as otherwise provided in ORC § 2903.22(B), menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 503.05 - FAILING TO PROVIDE FOR A FUNCTIONALLY IMPAIRED PERSON. 
(A)  No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a functionally impaired person under the caretaker's care with any treatment, care, goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the functionally impaired person when this failure results in physical harm or serious physical harm to the functionally impaired person. 
(B)  No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a functionally impaired person under the caretaker's care with any treatment, care, goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the functionally impaired person when this failure results in serious physical harm to the functionally impaired person. 
(C)  (1)  Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of knowingly failing to provide for a functionally impaired person, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the functionally impaired person under the offender's care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the violation of this section, a violation of division (A) of this section is a felony and is to be prosecuted under the applicable state law. 
(2)  Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of recklessly failing to provide for a functionally impaired person, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the functionally impaired person under the offender's care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the violation of this section, a violation of division (B) of this section is a felony and is to be prosecuted under the applicable state law. 
(D)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Functionally impaired person: means any person who has a physical or mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for their own care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the person from providing for their own care or protection. 
(2)  Caretaker: means a person who assumes the duty to provide for the care and protection of a functionally impaired person on a voluntary basis, by contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of a family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. Caretaker does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an agent or employee of a care facility, as defined in ORC § 2903.33. 
§ 503.06 - VEHICULAR HOMICIDE, VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER. 
(A)  No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft, or aircraft shall cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of another's pregnancy in any of the following ways: 
(1)  Negligently; 
(2)  As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision of any section contained in ORC Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or of a municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for the violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section contained in ORC Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor. 
(B)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of vehicular homicide, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
If at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a suspension imposed under ORC ch. 4507 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense, vehicular homicide is a felony to be prosecuted under applicable state law. 
(a)  In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four (4) suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in C.O. §315.99(F)(4) or division (A)(4) of section 4510.02 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates (A)(2) of this section is guilty of vehicular manslaughter, a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a suspension imposed under ORC ch. 4510, or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense. 
(a)  In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall impose upon the offender a class six (6) suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(6) or ORC § 4510.02(A)(6) or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense, a class four (4) suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(4) or ORC § 4510.02(A)(4). 
(C)  (1)  As used in this section, traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense means a violation of ORC § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D) of that section applies, a violation of ORC § 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a violation of ORC § 2903.06, 2903.07, or 2903.08 as they existed prior to March 23, 2000. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former law of another state or the United States. 
§ 503.07 - NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE. 
(A)  No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of another's pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance as defined in ORC § 2923.11. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 503.08 - HAZING. 
(A)  As used in this section, hazing means doing any act or coercing another, including the victim, to do any act of initiation into any student or other organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing mental or physical harm to any person. 
(B)  (1)  No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another. 
(2)  No administrator, employee, or faculty member of any primary, secondary, or post-secondary school or of any other educational institution, public or private, shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of hazing, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 503.09 - UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT. 
(A)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain another of the other person's liberty. 
(B)  No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation, shall knowingly restrain another of the other person's liberty. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(D)  As used in this section, "sexual motivation" has the same meaning as in ORC § 2971.01. 
(Ord. No. 10-2011) 
CHAPTER 505. - HABITATION AND PROPERTY OFFENSES 

§ 505.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in C.O. Title 5, ch. 505: 
    Coin machine: means any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both of the following: 
(1)  Receive a coin, bill, or token made for that purpose; 
(2)  In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill, or token automatically dispense property, provide a service, or grant a license. 
    Deception: means knowingly deceiving another or causing another to be deceived by any false or misleading representation, by withholding information, by preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act, or omission that creates, confirms or perpetuates a false impression in another, including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind, or other objective or subjective fact. 
    Defraud: means to knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself or another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another. 
    Deprive: means to do any of the following: 
(1)  Withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration; 
(2)  Dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner will recover it; 
(3)  Accept, use, or appropriate money, property, or services, with the purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property, or services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper consideration. 
    Forge: means to fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means, any spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce, or otherwise purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not authenticated by that conduct. 
    Graffiti: means any inscription, design, word, figure, or mark of any type drawn, marked, painted, tagged, or written upon any building, bridge, fence, gate, rock, structure, tree, wall, or other property visible to the public that defaces, damages, or destroys any public or private, real or personal property, without the privilege to do so. 
    Graffitism: means the act of defacing, damaging, or destroying any public or private, real or personal property, without the privilege to do so, by drawing, marking, painting, tagging, or writing any inscription, design, word, figure, or mark of any type on any building, bridge, fence, gate, rock, structure, tree, wall, or other property visible to the public. 
    Owner: means, unless the context requires a different meaning, any person, other than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of, or who has any license or interest in property or services, even though the ownership, possession, control, license, or interest is unlawful. 
    Services: include labor, personal services, professional services, public utility services, common carrier services, food, drink, transportation and entertainment. 
    Slug: means an object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition, or other quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as an improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill or token made for that purpose. 
    Spray paint: means any paint packaged in an aerosol container. 
    Theft offense: means any of the following: 
(1)  A violation of Upper Arlington Codified Ordinance 505.04 to 505.11, both inclusive, 505.13, 509.05 or 515.04. 
(2)  A violation of any section listed in ORC § 2913.01(K)(1); 
(3)  A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state, or the United States, substantially equivalent to any section listed in (1) or (2) of this definition; 
(4)  An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state, or of the United States, involving robbery, burglary, breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery, counterfeiting, deceit or fraud; 
(5)  An attempt to commit, or complicity in committing any offense under (1), (2), (3) or (4) of this definition. 
    Utter: means to issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into circulation, deliver, or display. 
    Wide-tipped marker: means any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is a quarter inch or greater. 
    Writing: means any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note, paper, plate, data, film, or other thing having in or upon it any written, typewritten, or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card, badge, trademark, label, or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license or identification. 
§ 505.02 - CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING. 
(A)  No person shall cause, or create a substantial risk of physical harm to any property of another without the other person's consent: 
(1)  Knowingly, by any means; 
(2)  Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas, poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other inherently dangerous agency or substance. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal damaging or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of this section was committed with the purpose to commit a theft offense, criminal damaging or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(C)  (1)  If the offense occurred on city-owned property, in a school building, on school premises, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the boundaries of school premises, then the court shall impose a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least three (3) days, which shall not be suspended. 
(2)  Except as provided in division (C)(3), if the offense was committed with the purpose to commit a theft offense, then the court shall impose a mandatory forty (40) hours term of community service and a mandatory fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), which shall not be suspended. 
(3)  If the offender has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a theft offense, then the court shall impose a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least three (3) days, which shall not be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 71-2012) 
§ 505.03 - CRIMINAL MISCHIEF. 
(A)  No person shall: 
(1)  Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the property of another; 
(2)  With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator, or other device releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that tends to cause public alarm; 
(3)  Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with a benchmark, triangulation station, boundary marker, or other survey station, monument or marker; 
(4)  Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of another, or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for its intended purpose; 
(5)  With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is outside and apart from any building, other structure, or personal property that is on that land. 
(B)  As used in this section, safety device means any fire extinguisher, fire hose, or fire axe, or any fire escape, emergency exit, or emergency escape equipment, or any life line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or raft, or any alarm, light, flare, signal, sign or notice intended to warn of danger or emergency, or intended for other safety purposes or any guard railing or safety barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign, signal or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or any other device, apparatus or equipment intended for protecting or preserving the safety of persons or property. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief, a misdemeanor of the third degree. If a violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal mischief is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of this section was committed with the purpose to commit a theft offense, criminal mischief is a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(D)  (1)  If the offense was committed with the purpose to commit a theft offense, then the court shall impose a mandatory forty (40) hours term of community service and a mandatory fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), which shall not be suspended. 
(2)  If the offender has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a theft offense, then the court shall impose a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least three (3) days, which shall not be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 71-2012) 
§ 505.04 - CRIMINAL TRESPASS. 
(A)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another; 
(2)  Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes, or hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such restriction or is reckless in that regard; 
(3)  Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict access; 
(4)  Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or servant of either. 
(B)  It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency. 
(C)  It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when such authorization was secured by deception. 
(D)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal trespass, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(2)  If the offense occurred on city-owned property, in a school building, on school premises, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the boundaries of school premises, then the court shall impose a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least three (3) days, which shall not be suspended. 
(3)  If the offender has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a theft offense, then the court shall impose a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least three (3) days, which shall not be suspended. 
(E)  As used in this section, land or premises includes any land, building, structure, or place belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate enclosure or room, or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 71-2012) 
§ 505.05 - PETTY THEFT. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services, shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in any of the following ways: 
(1)  Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent; 
(2)  Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent; 
(3)  By deception; 
(4)  By threat; 
(5)  By intimidation. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of petty theft, a misdemeanor of the first degree if the value of the property is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or is not alleged in the complaint. 
(C)  (1)  Except as provided in divisions (C)(2) or (C)(3), the court shall impose a mandatory forty (40) hours term of community service and a mandatory fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), which shall not be suspended. 
(2)  Except as provided in division (C)(3), if the offender has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) theft offense, then the court shall impose a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least three (3) days, which shall not be suspended. 
(3)  If the offender has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) or more theft offense, then the Court shall impose a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least thirty (30) days, which shall not be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 71-2012) 
§ 505.06 - UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent. 
(B)  The affirmative defenses contained in C.O. § 505.07(B) of the Upper Arlington City Codes or ORC § 2913.03(C) are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of property. Except as otherwise provided in this division, unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the third degree if the value of the property is less than one thousand dollars or is not alleged in the complaint. 
If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services, unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the value of the property or services or the loss to the victim is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or is not alleged in the complaint. 
(D)  (1)  Except as provided in divisions (D)(2) or (D)(3), the court shall impose a mandatory twenty (20) hours term of community service and a mandatory fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), which shall not be suspended. 
(2)  Except as provided in division (D)(3), if the offender has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) theft offense, then the court shall impose a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least three (3) days, which shall not be suspended. 
(3)  If the offender has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) or more theft offense, then the Court shall impose a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least thirty (30) days, which shall not be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 71-2012) 
§ 505.07 - UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat or other motor propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent. 
(B)  The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section: 
(1)  At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken, reasonably believed that the actor was authorized to use or operate the property. 
(2)  At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to use or operate the property. 
(C)  This section shall not apply, if the offender removes the vehicle from this State or retains possession of the vehicle for more than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a vehicle, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 505.08 - PASSING BAD CHECKS. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument. 
(B)  For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored, if either of the following occurs: 
(1)  The drawer had no account with the drawee at the time of issue or the stated date, whichever is later; 
(2)  The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within thirty (30) days after issue or the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, endorser/indorser, or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or satisfaction within ten (10) days after receiving notice of dishonor. 
(C)  For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check, bill of exchange, or other draft is presumed to have the purpose to defraud, if the drawer fails to comply with ORC § 1349.16 by doing any of the following when opening a checking account intended for personal, family or household purposes at a financial institution: 
(1)  Falsely stating that the drawer has not been issued a valid driver's or commercial driver's license, or identification card issued under ORC § 4507.50; 
(2)  Furnishing such license or card, or another identification document that contains false information; 
(3)  Making a false statement with respect to the drawer's current address or any additional relevant information reasonably required by the financial institution. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks, a misdemeanor of the first degree if the check or other negotiable instrument is for the payment of less than one thousand dollars or the amount is not alleged in the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 71-2011) 
§ 505.09 - MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS. 
(A)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon; 
(2)  Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than the issuer. 
(B)  No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt; 
(2)  Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one (1) or more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained, or is being used in violation of law; 
(3)  Furnish property or services, valued at less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), upon presentation of a credit card, knowing that the card is being used in violation of the law; 
(4)  Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card that property or services, valued at less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),have been furnished, knowing that the representation is false. 
(C)  No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive, possess, control, or dispose of a credit card. 
(D)  This section shall not apply, if the cumulative retail value of the property and services involved in one (1) or more violations of Divisions (B)(2), (3) or (4) of this section, which violations involve one (1) or more credit card accounts and occur within a period of ninety (90) consecutive days commencing on the date of the first violation is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more. 
(E)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(Ord. No. 71-2011) 
§ 505.10 - DEFRAUDING A LIVERY OR HOSTELRY. 
In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person was facilitating a fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, kept or operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground, or other hostelry, it is prima-facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the following: 
(A)  Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations; 
(B)  Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or engaged accommodations, knowing the person was without sufficient means to pay the hire or rental; 
(C)  Absconded without paying the hire or rental; 
(D)  Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for such failure; 
(E)  Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure. 
(F)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding a livery or hostelry, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 505.11 - RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY. 
(A)  No person shall receive, retain, or dispose of property of another knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been obtained through commission of a theft offense. 
(B)  It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a theft offense. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property, a misdemeanor of the first degree if the value of the property is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or is not alleged in the complaint. 
(D)  (1)  Except as provided in divisions (D)(2) or (D)(3), the court shall impose a mandatory twenty (20) hours term of community service and a mandatory fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), which shall not be suspended. 
(2)  Except as provided in division (D)(3), if the offender has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) theft offense, then the court shall impose a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least three (3) days, which shall not be suspended. 
(3)  If the offender has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) or more theft offense, then the Court shall impose a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least thirty (30) days, which shall not be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 71-2011; Ord. No. 46-2013) 
§ 505.12 - SALE OR POSSESSION OF MASTER VEHICLE KEYS. 
(A)  No person shall sell or otherwise dispose of a master key designed to fit more than one (1) motor vehicle, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe such key is intended to be used to commit a crime. 
(B)  No person shall knowingly buy, receive or have in possession a master key designed to fit more than one (1) motor vehicle, for the purpose of using such key to commit a crime. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal sale or possession of master vehicle keys, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
§ 505.13 - MAKING OR USING SLUGS. 
(A)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to defraud; 
(2)  Make, possess, or dispose of a slug, with the purpose of enabling another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
§ 505.14 - TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly enter, force an entrance into, tamper with or insert any part of an instrument into any coin machine. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin machines, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
§ 505.16 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Repealed by Ord. No. 10-2006, passed 02-27-06. 
§ 505.17 - GRAFFITISM. 
(A)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall commit graffitism upon any public or private, real or personal property. 
(B)  Whoever violates division (A) of this section, is guilty of graffitism, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(C)  In addition to any other punishment imposed, the court may, as a separate and independent penalty for an offense, order any person convicted of graffitism to make restitution by monetary payment for the loss or damage incurred, or restoration by physical labor to the property's former condition; and to perform one hundred (100) hours of community service work removing graffiti from public or private, real or personal property. 
(D)  Any person who violates division (A), on application to, and approval by, the judge, mayor or magistrate hearing the complaint, in lieu of paying the fine, restitution or restoration imposed, may remove graffiti other than that at that location identifiably linked to the violator for which he or she is to make restitution or restoration under division (C) of this section, and the judge, mayor or magistrate may require; and upon completion of such public work, the fine, restitution or restoration, shall be reduced by an amount equal to the federal minimum hourly wage then in effect for each hour of service to the extent of the fine, restitution or restoration. 
(E)  Possession of all rights to any paint, brush, spray paint, wide-tipped marker or other material or tool used in the commission of the offense of graffitism, shall be forfeited and disposed. 
§ 505.18 - AGGRAVATED TRESPASS. 
(A)  No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor, the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or causing another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to that person. 
(B)  No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor theft offense. 
(C)  Whoever violates subsection (A) is guilty of aggravated trespass to commit physical harm, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(D)  (1)  Whoever violates subsection (B) is guilty of aggravated trespass to commit a theft offense and except as provided in divisions (D)(2) or (D)(3), the Court shall impose a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least three (3) days, which shall not be suspended. 
(2)  Except as provided in division (D)(3), if the offender has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) theft offense, then the Court shall impose a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least ten (10) days, which shall not be suspended. 
(3)  If the offender has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) or more theft offense, then the court shall impose a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least thirty (30) days, which shall not be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 71-2012) 
§ 505.19 - CRIMINAL SIMULATION. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source, or authorship, which it in fact does not possess; 
(2)  Practice deception in making, retouching, editing, or reproducing any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record, or recording tape; 
(3)  Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter, or counterfeit any wrapper, label, stamp, cork, or cap prescribed by the liquor control commission under ORC chs. 4301 and 4303, falsely or fraudulently cause to be made, simulated, forged, altered, or counterfeited any wrapper, label, stamp, cork, or cap prescribed by the liquor control commission under ORC chs. 4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp, cork, or cap prescribed by the liquor control commission under ORC chs. 4301 and 4303. 
(4)  Utter, or possess with purpose to utter, any object that the person knows to have been simulated as provided in division (A)(1), (2), or (3) of this section. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation, a misdemeanor of the first degree if the loss to the victim is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or is not alleged in the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 93-2009; Ord. No. 71-2011) 
§ 505.20 - INSURANCE FRAUD. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Data" has the same meaning as in ORC § 2913.01 and additionally includes any other representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts, or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner. 
(2)  "Deceptive" means that a statement, in whole or in part, would cause another to be deceived because it contains a misleading representation, withholds information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any other conduct, act, or omission creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression, including, but not limited to, a false impression as to law, value, state of mind, or other objective or subjective fact. 
(3)  "Insurer" means any person that is authorized to engage in the business of insurance in this state under ORC Title XXXIX, fair plan underwriting association created under ORC § 3929.43, any health insuring corporation, and any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits to its employees or members. 
(4)  "Policy" means a policy, certificate, contract, or plan that is issued by an insurer. 
(5)  "Statement" includes, but is not limited to, any notice, letter, or memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice, account, or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical, or dental chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape, or movie film; test result; other evidence of loss, injury, or expense; computer-generated document; and data in any form. 
(B)  No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written or oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement, is false or deceptive; 
(2)  Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure, or conspire with another to prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement, is false or deceptive. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of insurance fraud, a misdemeanor of the first degree if the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or is not alleged in the complaint. 
(D)  This section shall not be construed to abrogate, waive, or modify ORC § 2317.02(A). 
(Ord. No. 71-2011) 
CHAPTER 507. - PUBLIC MORALITY 

§ 507.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in C.O. Title 5, ch. 507 of the Upper Arlington City Code: 
    Child-Victim oriented offender: means any person who has committed a child-victim oriented offense as defined in ORC § 2950.01(D). 
    Child-Victim oriented offense: has the same meaning as ORC § 2950.01(S)(1). 
    Daycare or child day-care center: has the same meaning as ORC § 5104.01. 
    Employed: means to work, to contract work, or to be permitted to work and to be physically present within the geographical limits of the City of Upper Arlington by an employer regardless of the location of the principal place of business. 
    Employment: includes volunteer service. 
    Harmful to juveniles: means that quality of any material or performance describing or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-masochistic abuse in any form to which all of the following apply: 
(1)  The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest in sex of juveniles. 
(2)  The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable for juveniles. 
(3)  The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value for juveniles. 
    Juvenile: means an unmarried person under the age of eighteen (18). 
    Library: means any public library. 
    Material: means any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, phonographic record, or tape, or other tangible thing capable of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and includes an image or text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid crystal display, or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a computer hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape, or similar data storage device. 
    Mental health client or patient: has the same meaning as in ORC § 2305.51. 
    Mental health professional: has the same meaning as in ORC § 2305.115. 
    Minor: means a person under the age of eighteen (18). 
    Multi-unit building: has the same meaning as ORC § 2950.01(V). 
    Nudity: means the showing, representation, or depiction of human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering, or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state. 
    Obscene: When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to ordinary adults, or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially susceptible group, judged with reference to that group, any material or performance is obscene if any of the following apply: 
(1)  Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest; 
(2)  Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, or nudity in a way, that tends to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite; 
(3)  Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality; 
(4)  Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or artistic purpose; 
(5)  It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality, or human bodily functions of elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or artistic purpose. 
    Parkette: has the same meaning as playground or public park. 
    Performance: means any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance, or other exhibition performed before an audience. 
    Playground or public park: means any open, improved or unimproved lands owned, leased or controlled by the City of Upper Arlington or any other city, which are used or designated as a playground, park, parkland or waterway and that are open to the general public, or those areas of private property used or designated as a playground or park area that are open to the general public. 
    Preschool: means any public or private institution or center that provides early childhood instructional or educational services to children who are at least three (3) years of age but less than six (6) years of age and who are not enrolled in or are not eligible to be enrolled in kindergarten, whether or not those services are provided in a child day-care setting. "Preschool" does not include any place that is the permanent residence of the person who is providing the early childhood instructional or educational services to the children described in this division. 
    Prostitute: means a male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual activity for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or to another. 
    Public swimming pool: means any indoor or outdoor structure, chamber or tank containing a body of water for swimming, diving or bathing that is intended to be used collectively for swimming, diving or bathing and is operated by any person whether as the owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire, regardless of whether or not a fee is charged for use, but does not mean any public bathing area or private residential swimming pool. 
    Residential premises: has the same meaning as ORC § 2950.01(T). 
    Residential unit: has the same meaning as ORC § 2950.01(U). 
    Sado-masochistic abuse: means flagellation or torture by or upon a person or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained. 
    School: means any of the following: 
(1)  Any school chartered under ORC § 3301.16 and any non chartered school that during the preceding year filed with the Ohio Department of Education in compliance with rule 3301-35-08 of the Ohio Administrative Code, a copy of the school's report for the parents of the pupil certifying that the school meets Ohio minimum standards for non-chartered, nontax-supported schools; or 
(2)  The same meaning as ORC § 2925.01(Q). 
    School building: means any building in which any of the instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided by a school is conducted, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a criminal offense is committed. 
    School premises: means either of the following: 
(1)  The parcel of real property on which any school is situated, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a criminal offense is committed; 
(2)  Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a board of education of a school or the governing body of a school for which the state board of education prescribes minimum standards under ORC § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction, extracurricular activities, or training of the school is conducted, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal offense is committed; or 
(3)  The same meaning as ORC § 2925.01(R). 
    Sex offender: has the same meaning as ORC § 2950.01(B). 
    Sexual activity: means sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both. 
    Sexual conduct: means vaginal intercourse between a male and a female; anal intercourse, fellatio and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and, without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal or anal cavity of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete vaginal or anal intercourse. 
    Sexual contact: means any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if the person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying either person. 
    Sexual excitement: means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
    Sexually oriented offense: has the same meaning as ORC § 2950.01(A). 
    Specified geographical notification area: has the same meaning as ORC § 2950.11(L). 
    Spouse: means a person married to an offender at the time of an alleged offense, except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any of the following apply: 
(1)  When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement authorized by ORC § 3103.06; 
(2)  During the pendency of an action between the parties for annulment, divorce, dissolution of marriage, or legal separation; 
(3)  In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective date of the judgment for legal separation. 
    Tier I sex offender/child-victim offender: has the same meaning as ORC § 2950.01(E). 
    Tier II sex offender/child-victim offender: has the same meaning as ORC § 2950.01(F). 
    Tier III sex offender/child-victim offender: has the same meaning as ORC § 2950.01(G). 
    Waterway: means any city controlled water including, but not limited to, reservoirs, reservoir lands, rivers, lakes, creeks, streams, ponds, fountains, and water filled quarries. 
(Ord. No. 60-2008) 
§ 507.02 - UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR. 
(A)  No person who is eighteen (18) years of age or older shall engage in sexual conduct with another, who is not the spouse of the offender, when the offender knows the other person is thirteen (13) years of age or older but less than sixteen (16) years of age, or the offender is reckless in that regard. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct with a minor. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in ORC § 2907.04(B)(1), (3), or (4), if the offender is less than four (4) years older than the other person, unlawful sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 507.03 - SEXUAL IMPOSITION. 
(A)  No person shall have sexual contact with another, not the spouse of the offender; cause another, not the spouse of the offender, to have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two (2) or more persons to have sexual contact when any of the following applies: 
(1)  The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive to the other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in that regard. 
(2)  The offender knows that the other person's, or one of the other person's, ability to appraise the nature of or control the offender's or touching person's conduct is substantially impaired. 
(3)  The offender knows that the other person, or one of the other person's, submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact. 
(4)  The other person, or one of the other persons, is thirteen (13) years of age or older but less than sixteen (16) years of age, whether or not the offender knows the age of the person, and the offender is at least eighteen (18) years of age and four (4) or more years older than the other person. 
(5)  The offender is a mental health professional, the other person or one of the other persons is a mental health client or patient of the offender, and the offender induces the other person who is the client or patient to submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the client or patient that the sexual contact is necessary for mental health treatment purposes. 
(B)  No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely upon the victim's testimony unsupported by other evidence. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or of ORC § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, or 2907.12, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 507.05 - VOYEURISM. 
(A)  No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying the person's self, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another. 
(B)  No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying the person's self, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the privacy of another to photograph, videotape, film, or otherwise record the other person in a state of nudity. 
(C)  No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, or otherwise record another person under or through the clothing being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body of, or the undergarments worn by, that other person. 
(D)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism. 
(2)  A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(3)  A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(4)  A violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 507.06 - PUBLIC INDECENCY. 
(A)  No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under circumstances in which his or her conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront others who are in the person's physical proximity and who are not members of his or her household: 
(1)  Expose his or her private parts; 
(2)  Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation; 
(3)  Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be sexual conduct or masturbation. 
(B)  No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances in which the person's conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another person who is a minor, who is not the spouse of the offender, and who resides in the person's household; 
(1)  Engage in masturbation; 
(2)  Engage in sexual conduct; 
(3)  Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be sexual conduct or masturbation; 
(4)  Expose the person's private parts with the purpose of personal sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity. 
(C)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and shall be punished as provided in divisions (C)(2), (3), (4), and (5) of this section. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) violation of this section or a substantially similar offense, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) violations of this section or a substantially similar offense, a violation of division (A)(1) is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three (3) or more violations of this section or a substantially similar offense, and no person who was likely to view and to be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) violation of this section or a substantially similar offense, a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) or more violations of this section or a substantially similar offense, and no person who was likely to view and to be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4) of this section, a violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one (1) violation of this section or a substantially similar offense, a violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(5)  Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(5) of this section, a violation of division (B)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(Ord. No. 65-2013) 
§ 507.07 - PROCURING. 
(A)  No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel; 
(2)  Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct another at his or her request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a prostitute. 
(B)  No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of premises, shall knowingly permit such premises to be used for the purpose of engaging in sexual activity for hire. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of procuring, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 507.08 - SOLICITING. 
(A)  No person shall solicit another to engage with such other person in sexual activity for hire. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
§ 507.09 - PROSTITUTION. 
(A)  No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of prostitution, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
§ 507.10 - DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. 
(A)  No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall recklessly do any of the following: 
(1)  Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles; 
(2)  Directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles; 
(3)  While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live performance that is harmful to juveniles. 
(B)  The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not obscene: 
(1)  The defendant is the parent, guardian or spouse of the juvenile involved. 
(2)  The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was accompanied by the juvenile's parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or presented to the juvenile. 
(3)  The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or to the defendant's agent or employee a draft card, driver's license, birth record, marriage license, or other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the juvenile was eighteen (18) years of age or over or married, and the person to whom that document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that the juvenile was under the age of eighteen (18) and unmarried. 
(C)  (1)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section, involving material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles, that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial, or other proper purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge or other proper person. 
(2)  Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under this section. 
(D)  (1)  A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates, provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present material or a performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons receiving the information are juveniles. 
(2)  A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the material or performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies: 
(a)  The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile. 
(b)  The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information. 
(E)  If any provision of this section, or the application of any provision of this section to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this section or related sections that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. To this end, the provisions are severable. 
(F)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is harmful to juveniles, except as otherwise provided in ORC § 2907.31, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the material or performance involved is obscene, except as otherwise provided in ORC § 2907.31, a violation of this section is a felony and is to be prosecuted under the applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 93-2009) 
§ 507.11 - LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN SOLICITATION. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Beckon to, stop, or attempt to stop another; 
(2)  Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation; 
(3)  Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a stationary vehicle; 
(4)  If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle, stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which the offender is the passenger; 
(5)  Interfere with the free passage of another. 
(B)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Vehicle has the same meaning as in ORC § 4501.01. 
(2)  Public place means any of the following: 
(a)  A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway, sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot, or transportation facility; 
(b)  A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place described in division (B)(2)(a) of this section; 
(c)  A place not described in division (B)(2)(a) or (b) of this section that is open to the public. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of loitering to engage in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
§ 507.12 - DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. 
(A)  No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any material or gain admission to any performance, which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian or spouse of the juvenile. 
(2)  Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting to show that the juvenile is eighteen (18) years of age or over or married. 
(B)  No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Falsely represent that he or she is eighteen (18) years of age or over or married. 
(2)  Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he or she is eighteen (18) years of age or over or married. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
§ 507.13 - PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS. 
(A)  If a person is charged with a violation of C.O. §§ 507.02, 507.08, 507.09 or 507.11, the arresting authorities or a court shall cause the accused to be examined by a physician to determine if the accused is suffering from a venereal disease. 
(B)  If the accused is found to be suffering from a venereal disease in an infectious state, he or she shall be required to submit to medical treatment for that disease. If the accused is convicted of or pleads guilty to the offense with which he or she is charged and is placed on probation, a condition of probation shall be that the offender submit to and faithfully follow a course of medical treatment for such venereal disease. 
(C)  The fact that the accused was given a medical examination for venereal disease or the results of such examination shall not be admitted in evidence over the objection of the accused, in a prosecution for any offense listed in division (A) of this section. 
§ 507.14 - CRIMINAL CHILD ENTICEMENT. 
(A)  No person, by any means shall, with a sexual motivation or for an unlawful purpose, knowingly solicit, coax, entice, or lure any child under fourteen (14) years of age to accompany the person in any manner, including entering into any vehicle as defined in ORC § 4501.01, whether or not the offender knows the age of the child. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal child enticement, a misdemeanor of the first degree. This section shall not apply if the offender has been previously convicted of a violation of ORC §§ 2905.05, 2907.02, 2907.03, former § 2907.12, or ORC §§ 2905.01 or 2907.05 when the victim of that prior offense was under seventeen years of age at the time of the offense. 
(C)  In determining whether an individual has a sexual motivation or other unlawful purpose as described in division (A), a court or law enforcement officer should consider, in addition to other relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Any statement by the individual concerning his or her motivation or purpose for engaging in the conduct described in division (A); 
(2)  Any prior crime, wrong, or other act of the individual tending to prove sexual motivation or other unlawful purpose, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, absence of mistake, or lack of accident; 
(3)  The proximity of any drug paraphernalia or controlled substance within the actual or constructive possession of the individual; 
(4)  Other direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the individual. 
(D)  As used in this section, "sexual motivation" has the same meaning as in ORC § 2971.01. 
( Ord. No. 8-2015, § 1, 3-9-2015 ) 
§ 507.15 - POSSESSION OF CHILD PORNOGRAPHY. 
(A)  No person, with knowledge of the character of the material or performance involved, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Possess or control any obscene material that has a minor as one (1) of its participants. 
(2)  Possess or control any material that shows a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation or bestiality. 
(B)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Possess or view any material or performance that shows a minor who is not the person's child or ward in a state of nudity, unless one (1) of the following applies: 
(a)  The material or performance is sold, disseminated, displayed, possessed, controlled, brought or caused to be brought into this state or presented for a bona fide artistic, medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial or other proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge or other person having a proper interest in the material or performance. 
(b)  The person knows that the parents, guardian or custodian has consented in writing to the photographing or use of the minor in a state of nudity and to the manner in which the material or performance is used or transferred. 
(C)  Whoever violates C.O. § 507.15(A)(1) is guilty of possessing obscenity involving a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates C.O. § 507.15(A)(2) of this ordinance is guilty of possessing sexually oriented material involving a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates C.O. § 507.15 (B) of this ordinance is guilty of illegal possession of nudity oriented material involving a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender has been previously convicted of C.O. § 507.15(A)(1), C.O. § 507.15(A)(2) or C.O. § 507.15(B) or any of substantially similar State statute or municipal ordinance, then prosecution shall proceed under State Law as a felony. 
(Ord. No. 93-2009) 
§ 507.16 - DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. 
(A)  No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general public. 
(B)  It is not a violation of division (A) of this section if the material in question is displayed by placing it behind blinder racks or similar devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the material, if the material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which the offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense. 
§ 507.17 - DUTY TO REGISTER. 
(A)  In addition to the registration requirements set forth in ORC §§ 2950.04 and 2950.041, any offender who has been convicted of, is convicted of, has pleaded guilty to, or pleads guilty to any sexually oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense as a Tier I, II, or III offender, or who has a duty to register pursuant to ORC ch. 2950 shall register personally with the Upper Arlington Chief of Police within three (3) days of the offender's coming into the city, if the offender is domiciled, whether permanently or temporarily for more than three (3) consecutive days, if the offender is employed, whether permanently or temporarily for more than three (3) consecutive days or for an aggregate period of fourteen (14) or more days in that calendar year. 
(B)  Nothing herein shall be construed to create any liability on the part of the employer, unless the employer is the offender, in any civil action to recover damages for injury, death or loss to person or property allegedly caused by any act or omission relating to this section. 
(C)  If an offender is required to register pursuant to division (A) of this section or ORC §§ 2950.04 and 2950.041, the offender, at least twenty (20) days prior to changing the offender's residence address and not later than three (3) days after changing the address of the offender's place of employment, during the period which the offender is required to register, shall provide written notice of the residence or place of employment address change, as applicable, to the Upper Arlington Chief of Police. 
(D)  If a person to whom division (A) of this section applies violates division (A) or (C) of this section by failing to register or failing to notify of a change of address with the Upper Arlington Chief of Police, that person is guilty of failing to register or failing to notify of a change of address, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(E)  The determinations and intent articulated in ORC § 2950.02 are hereby adopted. 
(F)  The provisions in ORC ch. 2950, which are now or hereafter in effect concerning the definition, determination, registration, or classification of a person who has been convicted of, is convicted of, has pleaded guilty to, or pleads guilty to either a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense as a Tier I, II or III offender are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2-2010) 
§ 507.18 - RESIDENTIAL AND EMPLOYMENT RESTRICTIONS FOR OFFENDERS; INJUNCTIVE RELIEF. 
(A)  No person who has been convicted of, is convicted of, has pleaded guilty to, or pleads guilty to either a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense; shall establish a residence, occupy residential premises or be employed within one thousand (1,000) feet of any school premises, licensed daycare facility, preschool, any public park, public swimming pool, library, or playground. 
(B)  Nothing herein shall be construed to create any liability on the part of the employer, unless the employer is the offender, in any civil action to recover damages for injury, death or loss to person or property allegedly caused by any act or omission relating to this section. 
(C)  If a person to whom division (A) of this section applies violates division (A) by establishing a residence, occupying residential premises or being employed within one thousand (1,000) feet of any school premises, licensed daycare facility, preschool, any public park, public swimming pool, library, or playground, the Upper Arlington City Attorney has a cause of action for injunctive relief against the person. The City of Upper Arlington shall not be required to prove irreparable harm in order to obtain relief. 
(D)  The determinations and intent articulated in ORC § 2950.02 are hereby adopted. 
(E)  The provisions in ORC ch. 2950, which are now or hereafter in effect concerning the definition, determination, registration, or classification of a person who has been convicted of, is convicted of, has pleaded guilty to, or pleads guilty to either a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense as a Tier I, II, or III offender, are hereby adopted. 
(F)  As used in this section, one thousand (1,000) feet of any school premises, licensed daycare facility, preschool, any public park, public swimming pool, library, or playground means one thousand (1,000) feet from property line to property line. 
(Ord. No. 60-2008) 
§ 507.19 - COMMUNITY NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS; MEGAN'S LAW. 
(A)  Within five (5) business days of receiving a registration or notice as described in C.O. § 507.17 or ORC § 2950.11, for an offender in any category specified in ORC § 2950.11(F)(1)(a), (b), or (c), the Upper Arlington Police Department shall provide written notice containing the information set forth in ORC § 2950.11(B) to all persons described in ORC § 2950.11(A)(1) to (10) of or the address where the offender is employed as defined in C.O. § 507.01 as the said address is set forth in the registration or notice. The delivery may be accomplished by hand carrying, mailing a copy, by conspicuously posting a copy at each dwelling, commercial or other unit or by electronic notification. 
(B)  A copy of any notice shall be maintained by the Upper Arlington Chief of Police and forwarded to the clerk of council for posting where the clerk of council posts ordinances for publication. 
(C)  Nothing herein shall be construed to create any liability on the part of the City of Upper Arlington, or its elected or appointed officers, employees, or agents in any civil action to recover damages for injury, death or loss to person or property allegedly caused by any act or omission relating to this section. 
(D)  The provisions in ORC ch. 2950, which are now or hereafter in effect concerning the definition, determination, registration, or classification of a person who has been convicted of, is convicted of, has pleaded guilty to, or pleads guilty to either a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense as a Tier I, II or III offender, are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 60-2008) 
CHAPTER 509. - GAMBLING OFFENSES 

§ 509.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in C.O. Title V, ch. 509 of the Codified Ordinances: 
(A)  Bookmaking: means the business of receiving or paying off bets. 
(B)  Bet: means the hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event, undertaking or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk. 
(C)  Scheme of chance: means a lottery, numbers game, pool or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize. 
(D)  Game of chance: means poker, craps, roulette, a slot machine, a punch board or other game in which a player gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined largely or wholly by chance. 
(E)  Scheme or game of chance conducted for profit: means any scheme or game of chance designed to produce income for its backer, promoter or operator, but does not include any scheme or game of chance designed to produce income solely for charitable purposes when the entire net income after deduction of necessary expenses is applied to such purposes. 
(F)  Gambling device: means 
(1)  A book, totalizer or other equipment for recording bets. 
(2)  A ticket, token or other device representing a chance, share or interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet. 
(3)  A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine, punch board or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance. 
(4)  Any equipment, device, apparatus or paraphernalia specially designed for gambling purposes. 
(G)  Gambling offense: means any of the following: 
(1)  A violation of C.O. §§ 509.02 to 509.05 inclusive of the Upper Arlington City Codes. 
(2)  A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States substantially equivalent to any section listed in C.O. § 509.01(G)(1). 
(3)  An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States, of which gambling is an element. 
(4)  An attempt to commit or complicity in committing, any offense under C.O. § 509.01(G)(1), (2) or (3). 
§ 509.02 - GAMBLING. 
(A)  No person shall: 
(1)  Engage in bookmaking or knowingly engage in conduct which facilitates bookmaking. 
(2)  Establish, promote or operate or knowingly engage in conduct, which facilitates any scheme or game of chance conducted for profit. 
(3)  Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange or engage in conduct, which facilitates the procurement, transmission or exchange of information for use in establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or with any scheme or game of chance conducted for profit. 
(4)  Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a substantial source of income or livelihood. 
(5)  With purpose to violate C.O. § 509.02(A)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of this section, acquire, possess, control or operate any gambling device. 
(B)  For purposes of C.O. § 509.02(A)(1), a person facilitates bookmaking if he in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking operation, including without limitation placing a bet with a person engaged in or facilitating illegal bookmaking for purposes of C.O. § 509.02(A)(2), a person facilitates a scheme or game of chance conducted for profit, if he in any way knowingly aids the conduct or operation of any such scheme or game, including without limitation playing any such scheme or game. 
(C)  This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling expressly permitted by law. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(E)  Any gambling device acquired, possessed, controlled or operated by any person while such person is acting in violation of this section is contraband subject to seizure by any police officer of the city, and no gambling device so seized shall be returned to the owner or person claiming the same except pursuant to court order. Any such gambling device seized and not ordered returned shall be demolished or destroyed under the direction of the mayor or the director of pubic safety, upon adjudication by the courts that the gambling device was acquired, possessed, controlled or operated by a person while acting in violation of this section. 
§ 509.03 - PUBLIC GAMING. 
(A)  No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort shall make a bet or play any game of chance. 
(B)  No person, being the owner or lessee or having custody, control or supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort shall recklessly permit such premises to be used or occupied in violation of C.O. § 509.03(A). 
(C)  This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling expressly permitted by law. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming, a minor misdemeanor. If the offender has previously been convicted of any gambling offense, public gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 509.04 - OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE. 
(A)  No person, being the owner or lessee or having custody, control or supervision of premises, shall: 
(1)  Use or occupy such premises for gambling in violation of C.O. § 509.02. 
(2)  Recklessly permit such premises to be used or occupied for gambling in violation of C.O. § 509.02. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 509.05 - CHEATING. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he is facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of: 
(1)  The subject of a bet. 
(2)  A contest of knowledge, skill, speed, strength or endurance. 
(3)  A scheme or game of chance. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of cheating, a misdemeanor of the first degree if the potential gain from cheating is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or is not alleged in the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 71-2011) 
§ 509.06 - GAMBLING MACHINES, DEVICES OR INSTRUMENTS. 
No person shall manufacture, assemble, repair or knowingly store, display or have in his possession for any commercial use, financial gain or compensation, any coin or token-operated gambling device. 
For the purpose of this section, gambling device shall mean and include: 
(1)  Any coin or token-operated device actually used for gambling purposes. 
(2)  Any device having an automatic pay-off or automatic free-play mechanism or which is convertible to automatic pay-off or free-play by slight changes or in addition to the mechanical structure. 
(3)  Any device through the operation of which the player stands a chance to gain an award or property of greater value than the consideration paid. 
§ 509.07 - COIN-IN-SLOT DEVICES. 
No person shall keep or exhibit for gain a coin-in-slot machine or device, where the merchandise, property or checks obtained by playing or operating such machine or device is not for each operation thereof substantially equal in value or where the number of units of property or checks is not, for each operation, equal in number and value. 
§ 509.08 - COIN GAMBLING MACHINES. 
No person shall exhibit, operate or permit the operation of any machine, device or instrument, whether or not it purports to vend or distribute merchandise or to furnish recreation or amusement, which is caused to operate by the insertion of any token, slug or disc. 
No person shall exhibit, operate or permit the operation of any machine, device or instrument which is caused to operate by the insertion of any coin, whether such device, machine or instrument purports to vend or distribute merchandise or to furnish recreation or amusement, which as a result of such operation discharges one (1) or more coins, tokens, slugs or discs or other memorandum or which registers odds or a score of the result of operation which makes it possible for one (1) user to receive more value than another user inserting a similar coin. 
§ 509.09 - GAMES OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES. 
(A)  No person shall conduct any scheme or game of chance, as defined in C.O. § 509.01, for charitable purposes without having first obtained a permit to do so as herein provided. Application for such permit shall be made to the city manager on a form prescribed by the city manager. Such application shall be sworn to and filed with the city manager at least thirty (30) days prior to the time of the contemplated use of the permit, unless, for good cause shown, the city manager shall waive said time requirement. Such permit shall be issued only if the city manager shall find the following facts to exist: 
(1)  That all relevant statements made in said application are true, insofar as he can reasonably ascertain. 
(2)  That the entire net income from such operation, after deduction of necessary and reasonable expenses, will be devoted to charitable purposes. 
(3)  That the applicant agrees to keep full and accurate financial records of such operation and the distribution of the net proceeds thereof and to make the same available for inspection, at all reasonable times, by the city manager or his delegate. 
(B)  Every person conducting any scheme or game of chance pursuant to such permit, shall maintain complete and accurate financial records of such operation, showing the source of all receipts and the distribution of the gross proceeds thereof, shall make the same available for examination, at all reasonable times, by the city manager or his delegate, and shall provide such further information as may be required to establish the reasonableness of the expenses charged to gross income. The person conducting such operation shall have the burden of establishing that such operation is conducted solely for charitable purposes as provided in C.O. § 509.01. 
(C)  The permit for such operation shall be revoked by the city manager for failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance or if it appears that the entire net income after deduction of necessary expenses has not been applied to charitable purposes. 
§ 509.10 - DEGREE OF OFFENSE. 
Whoever violates C.O. §§ 509.06, 509.07, 509.08 or 509.09 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
§ 509.11 - REPEAT OFFENDERS (GAMBLING). 
Any person having previously been convicted of a violation of C.O. §§ 509.02, 509.04 or 509.05 shall, upon the commission of a subsequent offense within the city, be prosecuted pursuant to the provisions of ORC Title 29. 
CHAPTER 511. - NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS 

§ 511.01 - SALE OF MEDICINAL PREPARATIONS CONTAINING NARCOTICS. 
(A)  No person shall sell, give, furnish or dispense to any person under eighteen (18) years of age any medicinal preparation that contains any narcotic, narcotic salt or any synthetic narcotic ingredient, except as authorized in C.O. § 511.03. 
(B)  No person shall sell, give, furnish or dispense to any person any such medicinal preparation, except upon sufficient proof of the identity of the person receiving the same, except as authorized in C.O. § 511.03. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 511.02 - PURCHASE BY MINORS OF MEDICINAL PREPARATION CONTAINING NARCOTICS. 
(A)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall purchase any medicinal preparation that contains any narcotic, narcotic salt or any synthetic narcotic ingredient, except on prescription from a practicing physician. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 511.03 - EXCEPTIONS TO FOREGOING PROVISIONS. 
A person may sell, give, furnish or dispense to a person under eighteen (18) years of age medicinal preparations containing a narcotic, narcotic salt or synthetic narcotic ingredient, provided that the person so selling, giving, furnishing or dispensing is one (1) of the following: 
(1)  A physician in the performance of his professional practice. 
(2)  A pharmacist, owner or employee of a pharmacy dispensing such preparation upon oral or written prescription given by a physician in the performance of his professional practice. 
(3)  A parent, legal guardian or adult person having custody of the minor receiving such medicinal preparation, who furnishes the same in good faith for medicinal purposes. 
§ 511.04 - POSSESSION OF DRUGS. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly obtain, possess or use a controlled substance. 
(B)  This section does not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with ORC chs. 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4731, and 4741; 
(2)  If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration; 
(3)  Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses, or administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the "Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act," 52 Stat. 1040 (1938), 21 U.S.C.A. 301, as amended, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed, or administered for that purpose in accordance with that act; 
(4)  Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of one of the following: 
(1)  If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture, preparation or substance included in ORC § 3719.41, Schedule III, IV or V, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of drugs. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows: Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2), (3) of this section, possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the third degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the drug involved in the violation is an anabolic steroid included in schedule III and if the offense is a misdemeanor of the third degree under this division, in lieu of sentencing the offender to a term of imprisonment in a detention facility, the court may place the offender under a community control sanction, as defined in ORC § 2929.01, that requires the offender to perform supervised community service work pursuant to ORC § 2951.02(B). 
(2)  If the drug involved in the violation is marijuana, or a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing marijuana other than hashish, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of marijuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows: If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds one hundred (100) grams but is less than two hundred (200) grams, possession of marijuana is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the amount of marijuana involved is less than one hundred (100) grams, the amount of marijuana resin or extraction or preparation of such resin, is less than five (5) grams, and the amount of such resin in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract or liquid distillate form, is less than one (1) gram, possession of marijuana is a minor misdemeanor. 
(3)  If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows: If the amount of the drug is less than five (5) grams, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor. If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five (5) grams but is less than ten (10) grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one (1) gram but is less than two (2) grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 511.05 - HARMFUL INTOXICANT. 
(A)  Except for lawful research, clinical or medical purposes, no person, with intent to induce intoxication or similar physiological effects, shall purchase, possess, have under his control, use or administer to another any harmful intoxicant. 
(B)  As used in this section, harmful intoxicant does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but means any compound, mixture, preparation or substance the gas, fumes or vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness, irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness, asphyxiation or other harmful physiological effects, and includes without limitation the following: 
(1)  Any volatile organic solvent or plastic cement, model cement, fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline or other preparation containing a volatile organic solvent. 
(2)  Any aerosol propellant. 
(3)  Any fluorocarbon refrigerant. 
(4)  Any anesthetic gas. 
(5)  Gamma Butyrolactone. 
(6)  1,4 Butanediol. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 511.06 - BURDEN OF PROOF. 
In any complaint or proceeding brought for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, it shall not be necessary to negate any exception, excuse, proviso or exemption contained in this chapter, and the burden of proof of any such exception, excuse, proviso or exemption shall be upon the defendant. 
§ 511.07 - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED. 
(A)  Drug paraphernalia: means any equipment, product or material of any kind, that is used by the offender, intended by the offender for use or designed for use, in propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body, a controlled substance, as defined in ORC ch. 3719. "Drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, any of the following equipment, product, or material that are used by the offender, intended by the offender for use, or designed by the offender for use, in any of the following manners: 
(1)  A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(2)  A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing a controlled substance; 
(3)  Any object, instrument, or device for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing methamphetamine or any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of methamphetamine; 
(4)  An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species of a plant, that is a controlled substance; 
(5)  Testing equipment for identifying or analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of, a controlled substance; 
(6)  A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled substance; 
(7)  A diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, for use in cutting a controlled substance; 
(8)  A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana; 
(9)  A blender, bowl, container, spoon or mixing for compounding a controlled substance; 
(10)  A capsule, balloon, envelope or container for packaging small quantities of a controlled substance; 
(11)  A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled substance; 
(12)  A hypodermic syringe, needle or instrument for parenterally injecting a controlled substance into the human body; 
(13)  An object, instrument, or device for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body, marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe; carburetor pipe; electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, or electronic pipe that has been altered or adopted for use or intended use to ingest or inhale any controlled substance or any solution containing a controlled substance; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or chiller. 
(B)  In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer should consider, in addition to other relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Any statement by the owner, or by any person in control of the equipment, product, or material concerning its use. 
(2)  The proximity in time or space, of the equipment, product, or material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product, or material, to a violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(3)  The proximity of the equipment, product, or material to any controlled substance. 
(4)  The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the equipment, product, or material. 
(5)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of any person in control, of the equipment, product, or material, to deliver it to any person whom the owner or person in control of the equipment, product, or material knows intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter. A finding that the owner, or anyone in control, of the equipment, product, or material is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter does not prevent a finding that the equipment, product, or material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(6)  Any oral or written instruction, provided with the equipment, product, or material concerning its use. 
(7)  Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product, or material, and explaining or depicting its use. 
(8)  National and local advertising concerning the use of the equipment, product, or material. 
(9)  The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product, or material is displayed for sale. 
(10)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the equipment, product, or material to the total sales of the business enterprise. 
(11)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment, product, or material in the community. 
(12)  Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product, or material. 
(Ord. No. 1-2014) 
§ 511.08 - POSSESSION AND SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug paraphernalia. 
(B)  No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if the person knows or reasonably should know that the equipment, product, or material will be used as drug paraphernalia. 
(C)  No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication that is published and printed and circulates primarily within this state, if the person knows that the purpose of the advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this state of the equipment, product, or material that the offender intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(D)  This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with ORC chs. 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4731 and 4741. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by ORC § 3719.172. 
(E)  Any drug paraphernalia that was used, possessed, sold or manufactured in violation of this section shall be seized after a conviction for that violation shall be forfeited to the municipality, and upon forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to ORC § 2933.41(D)(8). 
(F)  If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the section which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this section are severable. 
(G)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of C.O. §§ 511.08(A), (B) or (C) hereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. Whoever violates any of the provisions of C.O. §§ 511.08(A), (B), or (C) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the offense, the offender has previously been convicted of any of the following: 
(1)  Any violation of C.O. §§ 511.08(A), (B) or (C) hereof, or any substantially similar offense; 
(2)  Any violation of C.O. §§ 511.01, 511.04, 511.05, 511.09, or 511.10, or any substantially similar offense, or; 
(3)  Any violation of Ohio Revised Code §§ 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041, 2925.05, 2925.06, 2925.09, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.14, 2925.141, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31, 2925.32, 2925.36, 2925.37, 2925.55, 2925.56, or any offense substantially similar to these sections. 
(H)  Any person who violates C.O. § 511.08(B) hereof by delivering or selling drug paraphernalia to any person under eighteen (18) years of age is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(Ord. No. 64-2013) 
§ 511.09 - PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE. 
(A)  No person, being the owner, operator or person in charge of a locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicles as defined in ORC § 4501.01(A), shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for commission of a felony drug abuse offense. 
(B)  No person, being the owner, lessee or occupant, or who has custody, control or supervision of premises or real estate, including vacant land, shall knowingly permit the premises or real estate, including vacant land, to be used for commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another person. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse, a misdemeanor of the first degree, except as provided in ORC § 2925.13(C)(3). 
§ 511.10 - POSSESSING DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess, or use any instrument, article, or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marijuana, when the instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article, or thing involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a dangerous drug, other than marijuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other than marijuana, for unlawful administration or use. 
(B)  This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with ORC chs. 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4731, and 4741. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 511.11 - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in this chapter: 
    Cocaine: has the same meaning as in ORC § 2925.01. 
    Controlled substance: has the same meaning as in ORC § 3719.01. 
    Cultivate: includes planting, watering, fertilizing, or tilling. 
    Drug abuse offense: has the same meaning as in ORC § 2925.01. 
    Drug of abuse: has the same meaning as in ORC § 3719.011 and ORC § 4506.01. 
    Hashish: means the resin or a preparation of the resin contained in marijuana, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form. 
    L.S.D.: has the same meaning as in ORC § 2925.01. 
    Manufacture: means to plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare, or otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation, extraction, chemical synthesis, or compounding, or any combination of the same, and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and other activities incident to production. 
    Marijuana: has the same meaning as in ORC § 3719.01, except that it does not include hashish. 
    Possess or possession: means having control over a thing or substance, but may not be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through ownership or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is found. 
    Sample drug: means a drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be hazardous to the health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and that, at one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by a manufacturer. 
Any word or phrase not specifically defined in this chapter, has the same meaning as in ORC § 2925.01. 
CHAPTER 515. - LAW ENFORCEMENT 

§ 515.01 - RESISTING ARREST. 
(A)  No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a lawful arrest of the person or another. 
(B)  No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law enforcement officer. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 515.02 - OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for a crime or to assist another to benefit from the commission of a crime, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Harbor or conceal the other person; 
(2)  Provide the other person with money, transportation, a weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension; 
(3)  Warn the other person of impending discovery or apprehension; 
(4)  Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process summoning the person to testify or supply evidence; 
(5)  Communicate false information to any person. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(C)  This section shall not apply if the crime committed by the person is a felony. 
§ 515.03 - OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS. 
(A)  No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent, obstruct, or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act within the public official's official capacity, shall do any act that hampers or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official's lawful duties. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official business, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(C)  This section shall not apply if a violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person. 
§ 515.031 - VIOLATION OF TEMPORARY PROTECTION ORDER. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly violate any terms of a temporary protection order issued pursuant to ORC § 2919.26 or § 3113.31. 
(B)  No person being on the land or the premises subject to a temporary protection order issued pursuant to ORC § 2919.26 or § 3113.31, shall negligently fail or refuse to leave such premises upon being notified that the temporary protection order excludes such person from that land or premises. 
(C)  As used in this section, land or premises includes any land, real property, building, structure, home or apartment, and any separate enclosure or room or portion thereof. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of violating a temporary protection order, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 515.04 - IMPERSONATION OF CERTAIN OFFICERS. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Impersonate: means to act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member of that class of persons. 
(2)  Peace officer: means a sheriff, deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, member of the organized police department of a municipal corporation, or township constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this state, a member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under ORC § 3735.31(D), a state university law enforcement officer appointed under ORC § 3345.04, a veterans' home police officer appointed under ORC § 5907.02, or a state highway patrol trooper and whose primary duties are to preserve the peace, to protect life and property, and to enforce the laws, ordinances, or rules of the state or any of its political subdivisions. 
(3)  Private police officer: means any security guard, special police officer, private detective, or other person who is privately employed in a police capacity. 
(B)  No person shall impersonate a peace officer or a private police officer. 
(C)  No person, by impersonating a peace officer or a private police officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any person, or search the property of any person. 
(D)  No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, a private police officer, or an officer, agent, or employee of the state. 
(E)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) of this section that the impersonation of the peace officer was for a lawful purpose. 
(F)  Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(G)  This section shall not apply if: 
(1)  The purpose of a violation of division (D) of this section is to commit or facilitate the commission of a felony, or; 
(2)  If any person commits a felony while impersonating a peace officer, a private police officer, or an officer, agent, or employee of the state. 
§ 515.05 - FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. 
(A)  No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when such aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person giving it. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor. 
§ 515.06 - FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME OR KNOWLEDGE OF A DEATH OR BURN INJURY. 
(A)  No person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly fail to report such information to law enforcement authorities. 
(B)  Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (E) of this section, no physician, limited practitioner, nurse, or other person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab wound treated or observed by the physician, limited practitioner, nurse, or person, or any serious physical harm to persons, that the physician, limited practitioner, nurse, or person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from an offense of violence. 
(C)  No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician whom the person knows to be treating the deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected, or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad, or the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is obtained. 
(D)  No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a report required by division (C) of this section was made, or to any law enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within the person's knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death. 
(E)  (1)  As used in this division, burn injury means any of the following: 
(a)  Second or third degree burns; 
(b)  Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due to the inhalation of superheated air; 
(c)  Any burn injury or wound that may result in death; 
(d)  Any physical harm to persons caused by or as the result of the use of fireworks, novelties and trick noisemakers, and wire sparklers, as each is defined in ORC § 3743.01. 
(2)  No physician, nurse, or limited practitioner who, outside a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility, attends or treats a person who has sustained a burn injury that is inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary device or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious, or criminal manner shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the local arson, or fire and explosion investigation bureau, if there is a bureau of this type in the jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement authorities. 
(3)  No manager, superintendent, or other person in charge of a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility in which a person is attended or treated for any burn injury that is inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary device or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious, or criminal manner shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the local arson, or fire and explosion investigation bureau, if there is a bureau of this type in the jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement authorities. 
(4)  No person who is required to report any burn injury under division (E)(2) or (3) of this section shall fail to file, within three (3) working days after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury with the office of the state fire marshal. The report shall comply with the uniform standard developed by the state fire marshal pursuant to ORC § 3737.22(A)(15). 
(5)  Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (E) of this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding ORC § 4731.22, the physician-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a person's burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding resulting from a report submitted under division (E) of this section. 
(F)  (1)  Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern or resident, registered or licensed practical nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker, social work assistant, professional clinical counselor, or professional counselor who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in ORC § 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the patient's or client's records. 
(2)  Notwithstanding ORC § 4731.22, the doctor-patient privilege shall not be a ground for excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or belief noted under division (F)(1) of this section, and the information may be admitted as evidence in accordance with the rules of evidence. 
Divisions (A) and (D) of this section do not require disclosure of information, when any of the following applies: 
(1)  The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between attorney and client; doctor and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client; member of the clergy, rabbi, minister or priest and any person communicating information confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications relay service call. 
(2)  The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor's immediate family. 
(3)  Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news source, privileged under ORC § 2739.04 or § 2739.12. 
(4)  Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential communication made to that member of the clergy in that member's capacity as a member of the clergy by a person seeking the aid or counsel of that member of the clergy. 
(5)  Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the actor in the course of the actor's duties in connection with a bona fide program of treatment or services for drug dependent persons or persons in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a hospital, clinic, person, agency, or organization certified pursuant to ORC § 3793.06. 
(6)  Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the actor in the course of the actor's duties in connection with a bona fide program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are violations of ORC § 2907.02 or 2907.05. As used in this division, counseling services include services provided in an informal setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide those services. 
(H)  No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence. 
(I)  Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of failure to report a crime. Violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(J)  Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(K)  (1)  Whoever negligently violates division (E) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  Whoever knowingly violates division (E) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
§ 515.07 - COMPOUNDING A CRIME. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly demand, accept, or agree to accept, anything of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending criminal prosecution. 
(B)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both of the following apply: 
(1)  The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of C.O. §§ 505.05, 505.08 or § 505.09(B)(2) of the Upper Arlington Codified Ordinance or a violation of ORC § 2913.02 or 2913.11, ORC § 2913.21(B)(2), or ORC § 2913.47 or similar municipal ordinances of which the actor under this section was the victim. 
(2)  The thing of value demanded, accepted, or agreed to be accepted, in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due to the actor as restitution for the loss caused to the actor by the offense. 
(C)  When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution under division (B) of this section, the abandonment or agreement in no way binds the city to abandoning the prosecution. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 515.08 - FALSIFICATION. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly make a false statement or knowingly swear or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the following applies: 
(1)  The statement is made in any official proceeding. 
(2)  The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another. 
(3)  The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in performing the public official's official function. 
(4)  The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of unemployment compensation; Ohio works first; prevention, retention, and contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement benefits; economic development assistance, as defined in ORC § 9.66; or other benefits administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury. 
(5)  The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate, registration, release, or provider agreement. 
(6)  The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or another person empowered to administer oaths. 
(7)  The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or return that is required or authorized by law. 
(8)  The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce another to extend credit to or employ the offender, to confer any degree, diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence or honor on the offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed relies upon it to that person's detriment. 
(9)  The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a theft offense. 
(10)  The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection with any action, proceeding, or other matter within its jurisdiction, either orally or in a written document, including, but not limited to, an application, petition, complaint, or other pleading, or an inventory, account, or report. 
(11)  The statement is made on an application for a marriage license under ORC § 3101.05. 
(B)  It is no defense to a charge under division (A)(6) of this section, that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner. 
(C)  If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but only that one (1) or the other was false. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(E)  This section shall not apply if the statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a theft offense involving a motor vehicle; or the value of the property or services stolen is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more. 
(Ord. No. 71-2011) 
§ 515.09 - DUTY OF GARAGE KEEPERS, PARKING LOT ATTENDANTS, ETC. 
(A)  Keepers of garages, gasoline stations, parking lots or other places where motor vehicles of any kind are stored or left for repair or for any other purpose, and any employee of any such person, who knows or becomes aware of the fact that any motor vehicle so stored or left has upon it or in it, bullet marks, gunshot marks, blood stains or marks of evidence of any crime, shall immediately report the facts to the police division. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to report evidence of a crime, a minor misdemeanor. 
§ 515.10 - DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY. 
When there is a tumult, riot, mob or body of people acting together with the intent to commit a felony or to do or offer violence to person or property; or by force and violence to break or resist the law; or in the event of a flood, fire, snowstorm or any other disaster affecting life and property and which substantially impairs the functioning of the city government and its ability to protect the lives and property of the people; any of the following named officers, acting in the order herein designated when the previously named officer or officers are absent from the city or are unavailable or incapable of so doing, are authorized to proclaim the existence of a state of emergency in the City of Upper Arlington or within any prescribed area or areas thereof: the city manager, the assistant city manager, the police chief, the senior police officer on duty, the fire chief, the senior fire officer on duty. 
§ 515.11 - EMERGENCY ACTIONS. 
When a state of emergency has been proclaimed as provided in C.O. § 515.10, any of the officers named therein, acting in accordance therewith, are authorized to issue such proclamations as the officer deems necessary to protect life and property. Said proclamation may include, but is not limited to, the establishment of curfew; prohibiting the sale of beer or intoxicating liquor; prohibiting the sale of firearms; restricting or prohibiting movement into, out of or within the affected area or areas; or prohibiting or limiting the assemblage of persons. 
§ 515.12 - COMPLIANCE WITH EMERGENCY ORDERS. 
(A)  No person shall fail to obey the lawful order of any police officer, militia person or other law enforcement officer; and no person shall in any way intentionally interfere with any police officer, militia person or other law enforcement officer or firefighter, rescue personnel, medical personnel or other authorized person in the protection or preservation of life or property during the existence of a state of emergency as proclaimed, as provided in C.O. § 515.10. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to obey an emergency order, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 515.13 - LOCKING OF BUSINESS HOUSES AFTER BUSINESS HOURS. 
(A)  No person, being in charge of any store, shop, office or other business or professional establishment, shall leave the same unattended without having locked or otherwise secured all doors, windows and other means of entrance to the establishment to prevent the entrance of unauthorized persons. 
(B)  During the night season, after normal business hours, the person in charge of the establishment shall cause all entrances to be locked or secured, even though the person in charge or another person or persons may be in the establishment, except that if legitimate business activities are then being conducted therein, requiring one (1) or more entrances to be unlocked, this may be done provided that proper precautions are taken to prevent the entrance of unauthorized persons. 
(C)  In the case of a business establishment to which access is had through a hallway or other area used in common with other occupants of the building, the obligation of the person in charge of the establishment shall be limited to securing the doors, windows and other means of entrance to the portion of the building occupied by the establishment. 
(D)  If, in case of a violation of this section, the identity of the person in charge of the establishment at the time of the violation cannot be readily ascertained, the owner of the establishment and the owner's customary managing agent shall be held prima facie responsible for the violation. 
(E)  This section of the Codified Ordinances shall not be applicable to a business establishment or portion thereof, which is designed to be open for business, on a self-service basis, twenty-four (24) hours a day, if the owner shall first have entered into an agreement, satisfactory in form to the city manager and the city attorney, indemnifying and agreeing to hold harmless the city and its officers, employees and agents from all liability whatsoever in connection with the business establishment, except their willful or criminal misconduct. 
(F)  Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
§ 515.14 - FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH OFFICER'S ORDER OR SIGNAL. 
(A)  No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of any law enforcement officer invested with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic. 
(B)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude, flee or ignore a law enforcement officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a law enforcement officer to bring the person's motor vehicle to a stop. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply with an order or signal of a law enforcement officer. A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree, except when any of the following apply, then the violation is a felony and is to be prosecuted under the applicable state law: 
(1)  In committing the offense, the offender was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony; 
(2)  The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property; 
(3)  The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property, as set forth in ORC § 2921.331. 
(D)  In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court shall impose a class two (2) suspension from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(2) or ORC § 4510.02(A)(2). If the offender previously has been found guilty of an offense under this section, the court shall impose a class one (1) suspension as described in C.O. § 315.99(F)(1) or ORC § 4510.02(A)(1). The court shall not grant limited driving privileges to the offender. No judge, mayor or magistrate shall suspend the first three (3) years of the suspension under a class two (2) suspension of the offender's license, permit, or privilege required by this division or any portion of the suspension under a class one (1) suspension of the offender's license, permit, or privilege required by this division. 
(E)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Law enforcement officer has the same meaning as police officer in ORC § 4511.01. 
§ 515.15 - INTIMIDATION OF CRIME VICTIM OR WITNESS. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly attempt to intimidate or hinder the victim of a crime in the filing or prosecution of criminal charges or a witness involved in a criminal action or proceeding in the discharge of the duties of the witness. 
(B)  This section does not apply to any person who is attempting to resolve a dispute pertaining to the alleged commission of a criminal offense, either prior to or subsequent to the filing of a complaint, or who is attempting to arbitrate or assist in the conciliation of a dispute, either prior to or subsequent to the filing of a complaint. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of intimidation of a crime victim or witness, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(D)  This section shall not apply if any person, knowingly and by force or by unlawful threat of harm to any person or property, attempts to influence, intimidate, or hinder the victim of a crime in the filing or prosecution of criminal charges or an attorney or witness involved in a criminal action or proceeding in the discharge of the duties of the attorney or witness. 
§ 515.16 - MAKING OR CAUSING FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false report under ORC § 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an act or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child as defined in ORC § 2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in ORC § 2151.03. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 515.17 - FAILURE TO DISCLOSE ONE'S PERSONAL INFORMATION. 
(A)  No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the person's name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement officer who reasonably suspects either of the following: 
(1)  The person is committing, has committed, or is about to commit a criminal offense. 
(2)  The person witnessed any of the following: 
(a)  An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the laws of the State of Ohio; 
(b)  A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or to property; 
(c)  Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in committing, any offense identified in division (A)(2)(a) or (b) of this section; 
(d)  Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in division (A)(2)(a) or (b) of this section or any attempt, conspiracy, or complicity described in division (A)(2)(c) of this section has been, is being, or is about to be committed. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disclose one's personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(C)  Nothing in this section requires a person to answer any questions beyond that person's name, address, or date of birth. Nothing in this section authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a person for not providing any information beyond that person's name, address, or date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed. 
(D)  It is not a violation of this section to refuse to answer a question that would reveal a person's age or date of birth if age is an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing. 
CHAPTER 517. - PUBLIC ORDER; NUISANCES 

§ 517.01 - DISORDERLY CONDUCT. 
(A)  No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to another, by doing any of the following: 
(1)  Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property or in violent or turbulent behavior; 
(2)  Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance, gesture, or display or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language to any person; 
(3)  Insulting, taunting, or challenging another under circumstances in which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response; 
(4)  Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street, road, highway or right-of-way, or to, from, within, or upon public or private property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender; 
(5)  Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender. 
(B)  No person, while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the following: 
(1)  In a public place or in the presence of two (2) or more persons, engage in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if the offender were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have that effect on others; 
(2)  Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of physical harm to the offender or another, or to the property of another. 
(C)  Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse, is not a violation of division (B) of this section. 
(D)  When to an ordinary observer, a person appears to be intoxicated, it is probable cause to believe that person is voluntarily intoxicated for purposes of division (B) of this section. 
(E)  Whoever violates division (A)(1), (3), (4), or (5) of this section is guilty of disorderly conduct, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (A)(2) or division (B) of this section is guilty of disorderly conduct, a minor misdemeanor. If the offender of division (A)(2) or division (B) persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable warning or request to desist, disorderly conduct of division (A)(2) or division (B), is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(F)  If the offense under division (A)(1), (3), or (5) occurred on city owned property, in a school building, on school premises, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the boundaries of school premises, then the court shall impose a mandatory term of imprisonment of at least three (3) days which shall not be suspended, and shall be a period of consecutive imprisonment. 
§ 517.02 - THROWING AT MOTOR VEHICLE. 
(A)  No person shall throw or threaten to throw any article at, into or against any vehicle, passenger or driver thereof. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of throwing at a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 517.03 - FALSE CALLS TO TAXICABS. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly give a false order or make a false request of a taxicab or automobile company or of any person owning or operating a taxicab or automobile business, for the hire or rental of a vehicle, taxicab or automobile. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of false calls to taxicabs, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 517.06 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS HARASSMENT. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a telecommunication or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under the person's control, to another, if the caller does any of the following: 
(1)  Fails to identify the caller to the recipient of the telecommunication and makes the telecommunication with the purpose to harass, abuse or annoy any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made, whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a recipient; 
(2)  Describes, suggests, requests or proposes that the caller, the recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual activity as defined in C.O. § 507.01(C), and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made, has requested in a previous telecommunication or in the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made; 
(3)  During the telecommunication, violates C.O. §§ 503.03 or 503.04 or ORC § 2903.21. 
(4)  Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and the recipient, any member of the recipient's family, or any other person who resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases, resides, or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near or in, has responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will be destroyed or damaged; 
(5)  Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises. 
(B)  No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication, or permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under the person's control, with purpose to abuse, threaten, annoy or harass another person. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunications harassment, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(D)  This section shall not apply if the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of ORC § 2917.21. 
(E)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Caller: means the person described in division (A) of this section who makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that person's control. 
(2)  Sexual activity: has the same meaning as in ORC § 2907.01. 
(3)  Telecommunication: means the origination, emission, dissemination, transmission, or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other intelligence or equivalence of intelligence of any nature over any communications system by any method, including, but not limited to, a fiber optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital, or analog method. 
(4)  Telecommunications Device: means any instrument, equipment, machine, or other device that facilitates telecommunication, including, but not limited to, a computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner, telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device, transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a modem. 
§ 517.07 - DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING. 
(A)  No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, procession or gathering, shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Do any act, which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of such meeting, procession or gathering. 
(2)  Make any utterance, gesture or display, which outrages the sensibilities of the group. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful meeting, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 517.08 - MISCONDUCT AT AN ELECTION. 
(A)  On the day of an election held under the laws of this city or state, during the hours when the voting places are open, no person other than a voter about to vote shall knowingly do any of the following: 
(1)  Stand or loiter within one hundred (100) feet of any poll, stand or voting place. 
(2)  Within one hundred (100) feet from any poll or voting place, give or tender or exhibit any ballots or tickets to any person other than a duly authorized judge of elections. 
(3)  Within one hundred (100) feet from any poll or voting place, influence or attempt to influence an elector in casting the elector's vote at any such election held under the laws of this city or state. 
(B)  This section does not apply to any persons privileged or otherwise authorized by law to be or remain in or about a voting place. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an election, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
§ 517.09 - FAILURE TO DISPERSE. 
(A)  Where five (5) or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly conduct in violation of C.O. § 517.01, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public official may order the participants and such other persons to disperse. No person shall knowingly fail to obey such order. 
(B)  Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably assembled for a lawful purpose. 
(C)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3) of this section, failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor. 
(3)  Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the failure to obey the order described in division (A) of this section creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind. 
§ 517.10 - RIOT. 
(A)  No person shall participate with four (4) or more others in a course of disorderly conduct in violation of C.O. § 517.01: 
(1)  With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct. 
(2)  With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into taking or refraining from official action or with the purpose to hinder, impede or obstruct a function of government. 
(3)  With purpose to hinder, impede or obstruct the orderly process of administration or instruction at an educational institution or to interfere with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at such an institution. 
(B)  No person shall participate with four (4) or more others with purpose to do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though such act might otherwise be lawful. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 517.11 - MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly do any of the following: 
(1)  Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or other authorized person, engaged in the person's duties at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind; 
(2)  Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer engaged in the law enforcement officer's duties at the scene of or in connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind; 
(3)  Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who is engaged in the person's duties in an emergency facility; 
(B)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news media representative's duties. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency. Except as otherwise provided in this division, misconduct at an emergency is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an emergency is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(D)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Emergency facility has the same meaning as in ORC § 2909.04. 
(2)  Emergency facility person is the singular of emergency facility personnel as defined in ORC § 2909.04. 
(3)  Emergency medical services person is the singular of emergency medical services personnel as defined in ORC § 2133.21. 
§ 517.12 - INDUCING PANIC. 
(A)  No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place or otherwise cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following: 
(1)  Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that such report or warning is false. 
(2)  Threatening to commit any offense of violence. 
(3)  Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm. 
(B)  Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(D)  This section shall not apply if a violation of this section results in physical harm to any person. 
(E)  This section shall not apply if a violation of this section results in economic harm of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more. 
§ 517.13 - MAKING FALSE ALARMS. 
(A)  No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm. 
(2)  Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be transmitted to or within any organization public or private, for dealing with emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property. 
(3)  Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other incident within its concern, knowing that such offense did not occur. 
(B)  This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 517.14 - UNNECESSARY NOISE. 
(A)  No person shall make, continue or cause to be made by the use of any horn, bell, radio, television, loud speaker or by the operation of any instrument or device, any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises of such a character, intensity and duration as to disturb the peace and quiet of the community or to be detrimental to the life and health of any individual, and no person shall willfully conduct himself in a noisy, boisterous or other disorderly manner by either words or acts which disturb the good order and quiet of the community. 
The use of bells, horns, whistles, loud speakers, musical devices or other sound producing devices to advertise or call attention to the offering for sale of merchandise or services or for other commercial purposes, is hereby prohibited, provided that this prohibition shall not extend to the use of such devices within an enclosed building, if the sound emanating therefrom is not so loud as to disturb the peace and quiet of persons outside such building. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unnecessary noise, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 517.15 - HOURS OF WORK IN CITY: PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
(A)  These standards are intended to protect persons from excessive noise levels, which interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property and recreation because they can interfere with sleep, communication, relaxation and the full enjoyment of one's property. 
(B)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3 of the Unified Development Code and C.O. § 517.14, the following types of work conducted outside are considered to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises and shall not be performed in the City on Sunday or on other days between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. 
(1)  Commercial garbage collection: The servicing of private, commercial garbage dumpster by any person(s) using garbage collection vehicles and equipment within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any residential area. 
(2)  Pile drivers, hammers, etc: The operation of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(3)  Tools: The use of or operation of any power saw, poser planer or other powered tool or appliance. 
(4)  Construction: The erection, including construction, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair work, or the permitting or causing thereof, of any building or other structure, or the operation or the permitting or causing the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, excavation, drilling, demolition, alteration or repair work. 
(5)  Commercial parking lot sweeping. 
(C)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3 of the Unified Development Code and C.O. § 517.14, the loading or unloading of any commercial truck or van in a commercially zoned area which borders a residential area shall not be performed in the City between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday and 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Sunday. This section shall include the usage of any trash hydraulic compacting equipment. 
(D)  Special permits. Any person desiring relief from the provisions of C.O. ch. 517.15 shall apply for a special permit to cause or create noise which would otherwise be in violation of this article at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the date for which the relief is requested. Applications for a special permit shall be made in writing to the city manager on forms provided for that purpose. Payment of a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall accompany the application. The city manager or his designee shall grant a special permit upon a showing by the applicant of the following: 
(1)  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the activity in order to comply with the provisions of this article; or 
(2)  The activity, operation or noise source will be of a temporary duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with the provisions of this article; and 
(3)  No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
Any permit granted pursuant to this section shall obtain thereon all conditions upon which the permit has been granted, including but not limited to the effective date, time of day, location and equipment limitation. No special permit shall be issued for a period in excess of fifteen (15) consecutive days. Any special permit granted hereunder may be renewed upon application to the city manager's office upon a showing that the reasons for which the permit was granted still exist. 
(E)  The following types of work shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance if such work does not violate any provision of C.O. § 517.14: 
(1)  Use of any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency activities or emergency work or associated with work performed by private or public utilities in the maintenance or modification of its facilities. 
(2)  Noise sources resulting from emergency work, being work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
(3)  Lawn maintenance including the use of lawnmowers, blowers, edge trimmers, electric trimmers or tree trimming equipment may be conducted on Sunday but may not be conducted on any day between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. 
(4)  Work performed completely inside a house, building or other enclosed structure. 
(F)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of hours of work in the city, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 517.16 - LIGHTING EXTERIOR OF PREMISES. 
(A)  No person in charge or control of any premises in the city shall permit exterior lighting of such premises to shine, glare, reflect or be directed into or toward any other premises used for residence purposes, in such manner or with such degree of brightness as to be detrimental or disturbing to the comfort or repose of other persons. 
Lights of the type commonly used for lighting grounds around farm homes and barns, such as those which are currently being offered by Columbus Southern Power Company on a rental basis, designated private area lights, shall not be erected or operated in this city, except upon a finding by the board of zoning and planning, after notice and hearing as provided by C.O. § 1193.05, that the use of such lights is reasonable and will not be detrimental to nearby property or the occupants thereof. The Board may, in its discretion, require notice to neighboring residents in addition to those to whom notice is required by C.O. § 1193.05. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of lighting exterior of premises, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 517.18 - IMPROPER USE OF 9-1-1 TELEPHONE SYSTEM. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of the 9-1-1 system to report an emergency if the person knows that no emergency exists or for non-emergency calls. 
(B)  As used in this section, emergency is defined as any situation that requires an immediate response by police or fire personnel to preserve life or property. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of improper use of the 9-1-1 telephone system, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 517.19 - MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly give a false order or make a false request to any person, firm, company or corporation concerning the hire or rental of a motor vehicle. 
(B)  No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public transportation system. 
(C)  No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of defrauding the system. 
(D)  No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any property, vehicle, seats, or walls of a public transportation system. 
(E)  No person shall throw a rock, stone, bottle, missile, projectile, snowball or other hard substance at, within or from a public transportation system vehicle. 
(F)  No person shall knowingly strike, push, shove, assault, or unlawfully touch the driver or operator of a public transportation system vehicle. 
(G)  No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly tamper with any equipment, accessories, or operator's controls on a public transportation system vehicle. 
(H)  No person shall knowingly cause a passenger, driver, or operator of a public transportation system vehicle to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to such passenger, driver, or operator. 
(I)  No person, without privilege to do so, and while on a public transportation system vehicle, shall negligently fail or refuse to leave such vehicle upon being notified to do so by the operator, driver, or an authorized agent of the public transportation system. 
(J)  No person shall cause inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to an operator, driver, or passenger on a public transportation system vehicle, by doing any of the following: 
(1)  Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property, or in violent or turbulent behavior; 
(2)  Insulting, taunting, or challenging another under circumstances, in which such conduct is objectively likely to provoke a violent response; 
(3)  Purposely hindering or preventing the ingress, egress, or movement of an operator, driver or passenger. 
(K)  No person shall enter or remain inside a public transportation system vehicle while voluntarily intoxicated, or under the influence of alcohol or a drug of abuse, and engage in conduct likely to be offensive or cause inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to the driver, operator, or any passenger of such vehicle. 
(L)  No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on any vehicle of a public transportation system: 
(1)  Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone; 
(2)  Smoke, eat, or drink in any area where the activity is clearly marked as being prohibited; 
(3)  Expectorate upon a facility or vehicle. 
(M)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct involving a public transportation vehicle, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 517.20 - DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL CITY INFORMATION. 
(A)  No person shall disclose or use any confidential city information without prior authorization from the city council president, city manager, or city attorney. 
(B)  Confidential city information means information that is confidential under federal, state, or local law, or that has been clearly designated as confidential. Information obtained during an executive session shall be presumed to be confidential city information. 
(C)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this section: 
(1)  If the confidential designation is not warranted because of the status of the proceedings or the circumstances under which the information was received or preserving its confidentiality is not necessary to the proper conduct of the city's business; or 
(2)  If the disclosure or use is authorized under federal, state, or local law, or pursuant to a valid court order. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of improper disclosure or use of confidential city information, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(Ord. No. 61-2010) 
CHAPTER 519. - ANIMALS 

§ 519.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
The following words and phrases, as used in C.O. Title 5, ch. 519 of the Upper Arlington City Code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in the sections: 
    Board of health: means the Board of Health of the Upper Arlington City Health District. District board of health and board of health shall have the same meaning. In the event the city contracts with another city or general health district for public health services, the Upper Arlington Board of Health shall act in an advisory capacity to the contracted entity. 
    Court: means the Franklin County Municipal Court, Environmental Division. 
    Dangerous animal: means any animal, not including nuisance, dangerous or vicious dogs as defined in this section, which in the opinion of the health commissioner represents a danger to the health, welfare and safety of the public and presents a risk of serious physical harm to persons or property as measured by infectious disease status, viciousness or poisonous status, or presents a risk of serious physical harm to persons, animals or to property. 
    Dangerous dog: means: 
(A)  A dog that has caused physical harm to any person or domestic animal or, been the subject of three (3) or more violations of ORC § 955.22(C) and/or C.O. § 519.02. 
(B)  Dangerous dog does not include a police dog that has caused physical harm to any person or domestic animal while the police dog is being used to assist one (1) or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties. 
    Domestic animal: means animals that through long association with humans have been bred to a degree resulting in genetic changes affecting the temperament, color, conformation, or other attributes of the species to an extent that makes them different from nondomestic animals of their kind. 
    Dwelling: means the lot or parcel of land on which the house or building containing the suite is located, and also all out-buildings located on the lot or parcel. 
    Health commissioner: means the Health Commissioner of the City of Upper Arlington, or their authorized representative or designee. In the event the City of Upper Arlington contracts with a Board of Health for health services pursuant to ORC ch. 3709, the health commissioner of the contracted board of health shall serve as the health commissioner. 
    Menacing fashion: means that a dog would cause any person being chased or approached to reasonably believe that the dog will cause physical injury to that person. 
    Nuisance dog means: 
(A)  A dog that without provocation and while off the premises of its owner, keeper, or harborer has chased or approached in either a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of attack, or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person. 
(B)  Nuisance dog does not include a police dog that has chased or approached in either a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of attack, or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person while the police dog is being used to assist one (1) or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties. 
    Owner: means any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring, maintaining or having the care, custody or control of an animal or dog. 
    Physical harm (as to a dog or domestic animal): means any injury, illness or other physiological impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration. 
    Physical harm (as to a person): means any injury, illness, or other physiological impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration. 
    Provoke: means to tease, torment, or abuse an animal, including a domestic dog or cat. 
    Serious physical harm (as to a dog or domestic animal) means any of the following: 
(A)  Any illness or condition of such gravity as would normally require hospitalization or prolonged treatment. 
(B)  Any physical harm, which carries a substantial risk of death. 
(C)  Any physical harm which involves some permanent incapacity, whether partial or total or which involves some temporary, substantial incapacity. 
(D)  Any physical harm which involves some permanent disfigurement or which involves some temporary, serious disfigurement. 
    Serious physical harm (as to a person) means any of the following: 
(A)  Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment; 
(B)  Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death; 
(C)  Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity; 
(D)  Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement or that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement; 
(E)  Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to result in substantial suffering or that involves any degree of prolonged or intractable pain. 
    Vicious dog: means any dog, which represents a danger to any person(s) or to any other domestic animal for any of the following reasons: 
(A)  Any dog that kills or causes serious physical harm to any person or domestic animal. 
(B)  Any dog that inflicts puncture wounds or lacerations from multiple bites during the course of an attack against any person. 
(C)  Any dog that causes physical harm to any person or domestic animal while off the premises of the owner on more than one (1) occasion. 
(D)  Any dog that belongs to a breed that is commonly known as a Pit Bull or a Pit Bull mixed breed dog. The ownership, keeping, or harboring of such a breed of dog shall be prima-facie evidence of the ownership, keeping, or harboring of a vicious dog. 
(E)  Vicious dog does not include a police dog that has inflicted any harm specified in this division while such police dog is being used to assist one (1) or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 49-2012; Ord. No. 6-2017 , § 1, 2-13-2017) 
§ 519.02 - ANIMALS AT LARGE AND ANIMALS CAUSING PHYSICAL HARM. 
(A)  No person who is the owner, keeper or harborer of any animal shall permit it to run at large upon any public property, or private property open to use by the public in this city, including without limitations, sidewalks, streets, shopping centers and or upon the premises of another without their consent. 
(B)  No person who is the owner, keeper or harborer of any animal shall permit it to cause physical harm or serious physical harm to any other domestic animal, or to any person: while upon any public property; while upon the premises of another without their consent; or upon private property open to use by the public in this city, including, without limitations, sidewalks, streets, shopping centers, or parks. 
(C)  Except as found in division (D), no person who is the owner, keeper or harborer of any dog that is not a dangerous or vicious dog shall permit it to go upon any public property, or private property open to use by the public in this city, including without limitation, sidewalks, streets, and shopping centers, or upon the premises of another without their consent, unless the dog is on a leash, cord or tether of not more than thirty (30) feet in length. 
(D)  No person who is the owner, keeper or harborer of any dog that is not a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall permit it to go upon any public park between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. during Daylight Savings hours, and the time period shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. during Eastern Standard hours, unless the dog is on a leash, cord or tether of not more than thirty (30) feet in length. During the period outside the stated hours in this section, the dog must still be under control by the owner, keeper or harborer of the animal even though the dog is not leashed. 
(E)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of division (A), (C), or (D) that involves an animal that is not a dangerous dog or vicious dog that the animal was: 
(1)  Securely confined in an automobile or cage, which was adequately ventilated; 
(2)  Being exhibited at a public show, parade or public institution; 
(3)  Engaged in any activity expressly approved by the laws of this state. 
(F)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of division (B) that the animal, immediately prior to the incident, was provoked by the domestic animal that was harmed; by the owner, keeper, or harborer of the domestic animal that was harmed; or by the person to whom the animal caused physical harm or serious physical harm. 
(G)  Strict liability is intended to be imposed for a violation of this section. 
(H)  (1)  Whoever violates division (A), (C), or (D) of this section that involves an animal that is not a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog is guilty of animals at large, a minor misdemeanor. If the offender within five (5) years of the offense, previously has been convicted of, pleaded guilty to, or forfeited bond to division (A), (C), or (D) of this section or a substantially equivalent offense, the offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(2)  Whoever violates division (A), (C), or (D) of this section that involves a nuisance dog is guilty of nuisance dog at large, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender within five (5) years of the offense previously has been convicted of, pleaded guilty to, or forfeited bond to division (A), (C), or (D) of this section or a substantially equivalent offense, the offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the dog, to cause the dog to complete dog obedience training, or to do both, and the court may order the offender to obtain the liability insurance pursuant to ORC § 955.22(E)(1) in an amount, exclusive of interest and costs, that equals or exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(3)  (a)  Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of animal causing physical harm, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender within five (5) years of the offense previously has been convicted of, pleaded guilty to, or forfeited bond to a violation of this section or a substantially equivalent offense, the offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(b)  Whoever violates division (B) of this section, where the violation resulted in physical harm to a person, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender within five (5) years of the offense previously has been convicted of, pleaded guilty to, or forfeited bond to a violation of this section or a substantially equivalent offense, the offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(c)  Whoever violates division (B) of this section, where the violation resulted in serious physical harm to a person, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender within five (5) years of the offense previously has been convicted of, pleaded guilty to, or forfeited bond to a violation of this section or a substantially equivalent offense, the offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(d)  For any violation of division (B) of this section, in addition to other penalties permitted by law, the court may order any or all of the following: that the dog or other animal be confined as provided for C.O. § 519.10(A); that the dog or other animal complete obedience training; that the offender obtain the liability insurance pursuant to ORC § 955.22(E)(1) in an amount, exclusive of interest and costs, that equals or exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(e)  In addition to the penalties provided in division (H)(3)(d), for any violation of division (B) of this section under the circumstances described in division (H)(3)(b), where such violation is a first offense in five (5) years, the court may order that the dog or other animal be forfeited to the Franklin County Humane Society, or other animal welfare organization as determined by the court. For any violation of division (B) of this section under the circumstances described in division (H)(3)(b), where the violation is not a first offense in five (5) years, and for any violation of division (B) of this section under the circumstances described in division (H)(3)(c), the court may order that the dog or other animal be humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 49-2012; Ord. No. 6-2017 , § 2, 2-13-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6-2017 , § 2, adopted Feb. 13, 2017, changed the title of § 519.03 from "Animals at large" to "Animals at large and animals causing physical harm." 
§ 519.03 - IMPOUNDMENT. 
(A)  An animal found running at large or that has caused physical harm or serious physical harm to another domestic animal or a person may be impounded by any law enforcement officer, animal control officer, or other person designated by the city manager so finding the animal. The city or its agent shall provide notice of such impoundment if the owner is known and can be reasonably notified. No animal impounded shall be released from the impoundment facilities except upon payment by the owner, keeper or harborer of the animal for all storage, service and transportation charges. Such payment does not relieve the owner, keeper or harborer from any penalties, which may be imposed for violations of any ordinance or statute. 
(B)  The health commissioner, any law enforcement officer, animal control officer, or other person authorized to enforce this chapter may impound a dog that has been declared to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to C.O. § 519.09(A). The dog may remain impounded pending a determination hearing pursuant to ORC § 955.222. The dog shall not be released from the impoundment facilities until authorized by the health commissioner or ordered by the court. 
(C)  No animal impounded pursuant to subsections (A) or (B) shall be released from the impoundment facilities except upon payment by the owner, keeper or harborer of the animal for all storage, service and transportation charges. Such payment does not relieve the owner, keeper or harborer from any penalties, which may be imposed for violations of any ordinance or statute. 
(Ord. No. 49-2012; Ord. No. 6-2017 , § 3, 2-13-2017) 
§ 519.04 - NUISANCE. 
(A)  No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl, which howls or barks or emits audible sounds which are unreasonably loud or disturbing and which are of such a character, intensity and duration as to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or to be detrimental to the life and health of any individual. 
(B)  No person being the owner, keeper or person having control of any animal shall permit such animal to dig or defecate on any public or private property in the city, other than the property of the owner or person in control of such animal or allow any animal to damage any part of a lawn, tree, shrub, plant, building or other property, other than the property of the owner or person in control of such animal, by means of urination. The foregoing prohibition as to defecation shall not apply when the person in control of such animal immediately removes all feces deposited by it and disposes of the same in a sanitary manner approved by regulation of the health commissioner of the board of health. 
(C)  Strict liability is intended to be imposed for a violation of this section. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of nuisance, a minor misdemeanor. If the offender within five (5) years of the offense, previously has been convicted of, pleaded guilty to, or forfeited bond to this section or a substantially equivalent offense, the offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 519.05 - OFFENSIVE ODORS. 
(A)  No person shall permit a place where any animal or fowl is kept to become noisy, filthy or offensive or in any manner injurious to the health or comfort of persons living or employed in the vicinity of such place. No person shall transport, unload or collect such animals or fowls in such a manner that the stench therefrom or noise caused thereby, shall be annoying or offensive to any persons. 
(B)  Strict liability is intended to be imposed for a violation of this section. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of offensive odors, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 519.06 - MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS PERMITTED. 
(A)  Except as set forth in (B) or (C) below, not more than four (4) dogs or cats or any combination thereof, may be kept in any single-family dwelling or in any separate suite in a dwelling for two (2) or more families within this city. 
(B)  Puppies and kittens under four (4) months old shall not be included toward the total of the maximum number of dogs and cats permitted. 
(C)  No person, organization or corporation shall own, keep, harbor or provide sustenance for more than one (1) vicious dog, with the exception of puppies commonly known as Pit Bull or Pit Bull mixed breed dog. The ownership of these puppies must conform to law and such puppies shall be transferred according to ORC § 955.11 before the puppies are three (3) months of age. This section shall not apply to a veterinary hospital, veterinary office or animal shelter. 
(D)  Strict liability is intended to be imposed for a violation of this section. 
(E)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of maximum number of dogs and cats permitted, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 519.07 - CRUELTY TO ANIMALS. 
No person shall: 
(A)  Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance, unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill an animal. No person shall impound or confine an animal without supplying it during such confinement with a sufficient quantity of good wholesome food and water. 
(B)  Impound or confine an animal without affording it during such confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow or excessive direct sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise become sick or in some other way suffer. 
For the purpose of this section, shelter means a man-made enclosure, windbreak or sunshade or natural windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth's contour, tree development or vegetation. 
(C)  Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner. 
(D)  Keep animal in an enclosure without providing wholesome exercise, change of air or regular attention to the reasonable cleanliness of the enclosure. 
(E)  Strict liability is intended to be imposed for a violation of this section. 
(F)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of cruelty to animals, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
§ 519.08 - POISONING ANIMALS. 
(A)  No person shall maliciously or willfully and without the consent of the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in such capacity, to any animal that is the property of another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner, place any poisoned food where it may easily be found and eaten by children or domestic animals, either upon his own lands or the lands of another. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of poisoning animals, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
§ 519.09 - NOTIFICATION AND HEARING PROCEDURES FOR NUISANCE DOGS, DANGEROUS DOGS, VICIOUS DOGS AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS. 
(A)  The health commissioner, any law enforcement officer, animal control officer, or other person authorized to enforce this chapter may, upon reasonable cause, declare any dog to be a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, which qualifies as defined in C.O. § 519.01. The health commissioner, law enforcement officer, animal control officer, or authorized person shall notify the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog, by certified mail or in person, all of the following: 
(1)  That the person has designated the dog a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, as applicable; 
(2)  That the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog may request a hearing regarding the designation by filing a written request with the court in accordance with ORC § 955.222; 
(3)  That the owner, keeper, or harborer may not sell or permanently transfer ownership of the dog without first notifying the health commissioner of their intention and providing the prospective new owner a copy of the designation notification; and 
(4)  That the dog has been impounded pursuant to C.O. § 519.03, if applicable. 
(B)  If the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog timely and properly requests a hearing, then the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with ORC § 955.222, provided that the court shall utilize the definitions contained in C.O. § 519.01 in making its determination. 
(C)  The court may issue any of the orders or impose any of the requirements as provided in ORC § 955.222. 
(D)  Unless authorized by the court, no person shall sell or permanently transfer an animal determined to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog without first notifying the health commissioner of their intent and providing the prospective new owner a copy of the designation notification. 
(E)  No person shall violate an order issued by the court pursuant to this section. 
(F)  Each and every provision of this section shall also apply to a dangerous animal as defined in C.O. § 519.01. 
(G)  Whoever violates subsection (D) is guilty of improper sale or transfer of a dangerous dog or vicious dog, a minor misdemeanor. Whoever violates subsection (E) is guilty of violating a court order involving a dangerous dog or vicious dog, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(Ord. No. 49-2012) 
§ 519.10 - CONFINEMENT OF DANGEROUS DOGS OR VICIOUS DOGS. 
(A)  No person that is the owner, keeper or harborer of a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall fail to do either of the following: 
(1)  While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer, securely confine the dog at all times in a locked pen that has a top, locked fenced yard, or other locked enclosure that has a top; 
(2)  While the dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer, keep the dog on a chain-link leash or tether that is not more than six (6) feet in length and additionally shall do at least one of the following: 
(a)  Keep the dog in a locked pen that has a top, locked fenced yard, or other locked enclosure that has a top; 
(b)  Have the leash or tether controlled by a person who is of suitable age and discretion or securely attach, tie, or affix the leash or tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture so that the dog is adequately restrained and station such a person in close enough proximity to the dog so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person; 
(c)  Muzzle the dog. 
(B)  Strict liability is intended to be imposed for a violation of this section. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section that involves a dangerous dog is guilty of failing to confine a dangerous dog, a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender within five (5) years of the offense, previously has been convicted of, pleaded guilty to, or forfeited bond to this section or a substantially equivalent offense, the offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(1)  Whoever violates this section that involves a vicious dog is guilty of failing to confine a vicious dog, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the dog kills a person, then the offender shall be charged with the felony offense provided under state law. 
(D)  In addition to the penalties provided above, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the dog, to cause the dog to complete dog obedience training, or to do both, and the court may order the offender to obtain the liability insurance pursuant to ORC § 955.22(E)(1) in an amount, exclusive of interest and costs, that equals or exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). Additionally, the court may order that the dog be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the county humane society at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 49-2012) 
§ 519.11 - RIGHT TO APPEAL. 
The owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog or the person who designated the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog may appeal the court's final determination as in any other case filed in the Court. 
(Ord. No. 49-2012) 
§ 519.12 - REGISTRATION OF DOGS. 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided for guide or service dogs registered under ORC § 955.011, and law enforcement dogs registered under ORC § 955.012, and dogs kept by an institution or organization for teaching and research purposes under ORC § 955.16, every person who owns, keeps, or harbors a dog more than three (3) months of age, shall annually file with the county auditor, an application for registration. Proof of registration shall be presented upon request of law enforcement officials. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of registration of dogs, a minor misdemeanor. If the offender within five (5) years of the offense, previously has been convicted of, pleaded guilty to, or forfeited bond to this section or a substantially equivalent offense, the offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 519.13 - TAGS TO BE WORN. 
(A)  No owner of a dog, except a dog constantly confined to a registered kennel, shall fail to require the dog to wear, at all times, a valid tag issued in connection with a certificate of registration. A dog's failure at any time to wear a valid tag shall be prima-facie evidence of lack of registration and shall subject any dog found not wearing such tag to impounding, sale, or destruction, as provided by ORC § 955.16. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of tags to be worn, a minor misdemeanor. If the offender within five (5) years of the offense, previously has been convicted of, pleaded guilty to, or forfeited bond to this section or a substantially equivalent offense, the offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 519.14 - DANGEROUS DOG OR VICIOUS DOG INSURANCE. 
(A)  No owner, keeper or harborer of a vicious dog shall fail to obtain liability insurance with an insurer authorized to write liability insurance in this state providing coverage in each occurrence, subject to a limit, exclusive of interest and costs, of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) because of damage or bodily injury to or death of a person caused by the vicious dog and to provide proof of that liability insurance upon request to any law enforcement officer, county dog warden, or public health official charged with enforcing this section. 
(B)  No owner, keeper or harborer of a dangerous dog shall fail to obtain liability insurance with an insurer authorized to write liability insurance in this state providing coverage in each occurrence, subject to a limit, exclusive of interest and costs, of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) because of damage or bodily injury to or death of a person caused by the dangerous dog if so ordered by a court and to provide proof of that liability insurance upon request to any law enforcement officer, county dog warden, or public health official charged with enforcing this section. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of vicious dog insurance, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(Ord. No. 49-2012) 
§ 519.15 - UNLAWFUL CONFINEMENT IN A MOTOR VEHICLE. 
(A)  No person shall leave or confine an animal in any unattended motor vehicle under conditions that endanger the safety, health, or well-being of that animal due to heat, cold, lack of adequate ventilation, or lack of food or water, or other circumstances that could reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability, or death to the animal. 
(B)  After a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person responsible, the health commissioner, any law enforcement officer, animal control officer, or other person authorized to enforce this chapter, referred to in this section as "authorized persons," may take all steps that are reasonably necessary to remove an animal from a motor vehicle if the animal's confinement could reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability, or death to the animal or to otherwise endanger the animal's safety, health, or well-being as provided in subsection (A) of this section. An authorized person's failure to make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person responsible shall not be a defense to prosecution for violation of subsection (A) of this section. 
(C)  For the purpose of this section, "animal" means any vertebrate animal. 
(D)  Any authorized person who removes an animal shall, in a secure and conspicuous location on or within the motor vehicle, leave written notice bearing the individual's name and office and the address of the location where the animal may be claimed. An authorized person shall be presumed to have satisfied this requirement by affixing the notice between the motor vehicle's windshield and windshield-wiper. The animal's owner may claim the animal only after payment of all charges that have accrued for the removal, maintenance, care, medical treatment, and impoundment of the animal. 
(E)  An authorized person who removes an animal from a motor vehicle pursuant to subsection (B) is immune from criminal or civil liability that might otherwise result from the removal. 
(F)  Whoever violates C.O. § 519.15(A) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded guilty to, or forfeited bond to an offense under C.O. § 519.15(A); C.O. § 519.07; C.O. § 519.08; or a substantially equivalent offense, the offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(G)  Strict liability is intended to be imposed for a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 77-2013) 
CHAPTER 521. - ADVERTISING, BILL POSTING AND HANDBILLS 

§ 521.01 - ADVERTISING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. 
No person shall stick or post any advertisement, poster, sign or handbill or placard of any description upon any building, vehicle or upon any tree, post, fence, billboard or any other structure or thing whatever, the private property of another, without permission of the occupant or owner of the same or paint, mark, write, print or impress or in any manner attach any notice or advertisement or the name of any commodity or thing or any trade mark, symbol or figure of any kind upon anything whatever, the property of another, without first obtaining permission of the owner of such thing on which he desires to place such notice, advertisement, name, mark or figure. 
§ 521.02 - ADVERTISING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. 
No person shall stick, post or attach any advertisement, poster, sign, handbill or placard of any kind or description upon any telegraph, telephone, railway or electric light pole within the corporate limits or upon any public building, vehicle, voting booth, flagging, curb, tree, lawn, walk, step, stone or sidewalk or write, print or impress or in any manner attach any notice or advertisement of any kind upon any public building, voting booth, flagging, curb, tree, step, stone or sidewalk, the property of the municipality or within the street lines of the municipality or over which the municipality or the council thereof has the care, custody or control, except such as may be required by the laws of the state or upon written permission of the city manager. 
§ 521.03 - FRAUDULENT ADVERTISING. 
No person shall directly or indirectly make, publish, disseminate, circulate or place before the public in a newspaper, magazine or other publication or in the form of a book, notice, handbill, poster, bill, circular, letter, pamphlet, sign, placard, card, label or over any radio or television station, or in any other way, an advertisement of any sort regarding merchandise, securities, service, employment, real estate or anything of value offered by him for use, purchase or sale, and which advertisement or announcement contains any assertion, representation or statement which is untrue or fraudulent. 
§ 521.04 - DEGREE OF OFFENSE. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
CHAPTER 523. - FIREARMS, DANGEROUS ORDNANCE AND OTHER WEAPONS 

§ 523.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in C.O. Title 1, ch. 523 of the Upper Arlington City Codes: 
    Automatic firearm: means any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger. Automatic Firearm also means any semi-automatic firearm designed or specially adapted to fire more than thirty-one (31) cartridges without reloading, other than a firearm chambering only .22 caliber short, long, long-rifle magnum cartridges. 
    Ballistic knife: means a knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a spring-operated mechanism. 
    Booby trap: means a small tube that has a string protruding from both ends, that has a friction-sensitive composition, and that is ignited by pulling the ends of the string. 
    Cigarette load: means a small wooden peg that is coated with a small quantity of explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette. 
    Dangerous ordnance: means any of the following, except as provided in C.O. § 523.01. 
(1)  Any automatic or sawed-off firearm or zip-gun, or ballistic knife; 
(2)  Any explosive device or incendiary device. 
(3)  Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, petn, cyclonite, TNT, picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol, pentolite, pecretol, cyclotol, and other high explosive compositions; plastic explosives; dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate, liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder, and other blasting agents; and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power to be particularly suitable for use as a military explosive or for use in mining, quarrying, excavating or demolitions. 
(4)  Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade, mine, bomb, torpedo or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon. 
(5)  Any firearm muffler or silencer; 
(6)  Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use in converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance. 
    Dangerous ordnance does not include any of the following: 
(1)  Any firearm, including, a military weapon and the ammunition for that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or other obsolete ignition system or that is designed and safe for use only with black powder. 
(2)  Any pistol, rifle or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off firearm. 
(3)  Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for use only with black powder. 
(4)  Black powder, priming quills, and percussion caps possessed and lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in subsection (3) in this definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots and target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers and percussion caps possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or small-arms ammunition. 
(5)  Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot readily be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy, souvenir, curio or museum piece. 
(6)  Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a destructive device pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, 82 STAT. 1213, 18 U.S. C. 921 A(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that act. 
    Deadly weapon: means any instrument, device or thing capable of inflicting death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon or possessed, carried or used as a weapon. 
    Explosive: means any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. "Explosive" includes all materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division 1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of Transportation in its regulations and includes, but is not limited to, dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. "Explosive" does not include "fireworks," as defined in ORC § 3743.01, or any substance or material otherwise meeting the definition of explosive set forth in this section that is manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used in any activity described in ORC § 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations, including, but not limited to, the provisions of ORC § 3743.80 and the rules of the fire marshal adopted pursuant to ORC § 3737.82. 
    Explosive device: means any device designed or specially adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting of an explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. Explosive device includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device, any blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any pressure vessel, which has been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode. 
    Firearm: means any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one (1) or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant. Firearm includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm which is inoperable but which can readily be rendered operable. 
When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or propelling one (1) or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including, but not limited to, the representations and actions of the individual exercising control over the firearm. 
    Fireworks: means any composition or device prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, except ordinary matches and except as provided in ORC § 3743.80. 
    Handgun: means any of the following: 
(1)  Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and fired by the use of a single hand; 
(2)  Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described in (1) above can be assembled. 
    Incendiary device: means any firebomb, and any device designed or specially adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and consisting of an incendiary substance or agency and a means to ignite it. 
    Novelties and trick noisemakers: include the following items: 
(1)  Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the user, including, but not limited to, booby traps, cigarette loads, party poppers, and snappers; 
(2)  Snakes or glow worms; 
(3)  Smoke devices; 
(4)  Trick matches. 
    Party popper: means a small plastic or paper item that contains not more than sixteen (16) milligrams of friction-sensitive explosive composition, that is ignited by pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper streamers are expelled when the item is ignited. 
    Sawed-off firearm: means a shotgun with a barrel less than eighteen (18) inches long or a rifle with a barrel less than sixteen (16) inches long or a shotgun or rifle less than twenty-six (26) inches long overall. 
    Semi-automatic firearm: means any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge ready to fire, with a single function of the trigger. 
    Smoke device: means a tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic composition that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect. 
    Snake or glow worm: means a device that consists of a pressed pellet of pyrotechnic composition that produces a large, snake-like ash upon burning, which ash expands in length as the pellet burns. 
    Snapper: means a small, paper-wrapped item that contains a minute quantity of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand, and that, when dropped, implodes. 
    Trick match: means a kitchen or book match that is coated with a small quantity of explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a small report or a shower of sparks. 
    Wire sparkler: means a sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated with a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition and that contains no more than one hundred (100) grams of this mixture. 
    Zip-gun: means any of the following: 
(1)  Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture. 
(2)  Any device, including without limitation a starter's pistol, that is not designed as a firearm, but which is specially adapted for use as a firearm. 
(3)  Any industrial tool, signaling device or safety device, not designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when possessed, carried or used as a firearm. 
(Ord. No. 71-2011) 
§ 523.02 - CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person's person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following: 
(1)  A deadly weapon other than a handgun; 
(2)  A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance; 
(3)  A dangerous ordnance. 
(B)  No person who has been issued a license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun under ORC § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun that was issued by another state with which the attorney general has entered into a reciprocity agreement under ORC § 109.69 shall do any of the following: 
(1)  If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is carrying a concealed handgun, fail to promptly inform any law enforcement officer who approaches the person after the person has been stopped that the person has been issued a license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun and that the person then is carrying a concealed handgun; 
(2)  If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person's hands in plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer; 
(3)  If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is approached by any law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or attempt to remove the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket, or other place in which the person is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person's hands or fingers at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes, attempts to remove, grasps, holds, or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer; 
(4)  If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped, including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to keep the person's hands in plain sight. 
(C)  (1)  This section does not apply to any of the following: 
(a)  An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and is acting within the scope of the officer's, agent's, or employee's duties; 
(b)  Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of ORC § 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in division (C)(1)(b) of this section does not apply to the person; 
(c)  A person's transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a firearm described in ORC § 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor's person; 
(d)  A person's storage or possession of a firearm, other than a firearm described in ORC § 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor's own home for any lawful purpose. 
(2)  Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who, at the time of the alleged carrying or possession of a handgun, is carrying a valid license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued to the person under ORC § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun that was issued by another state with which the attorney general has entered into a reciprocity agreement under ORC § 109.69, unless the person knowingly is in a place described in ORC § 2923.126(B). 
(D)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1) of this section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies: 
(1)  The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the actor's lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, as would justify a prudent person in going armed. 
(2)  The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity, and had reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the actor's family, or the actor's home, as would justify a prudent person in going armed. 
(3)  The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any lawful purpose and while in the actor's own home. 
(E)  No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall be required to obtain a license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun under ORC § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 as a condition for the dismissal of the charge. 
(F)  If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop or if the officer reasonably believes additional time is needed to obtain information for public safety purposes. 
(G)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed weapons. Except as otherwise provided in ORC § 2923.12, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  If a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) of this section promptly produces a valid license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under ORC § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun that was issued by another state with which the attorney general has entered into a reciprocity agreement under ORC § 109.69, and if at the time of the violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in ORC § 2923.126(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division. If the person is not able to promptly produce any of those types of license and if the person is not in a place described in that section, the officer may arrest the person for a violation of that division, and the offender shall be punished as follows: 
(a)  The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of the following apply: 
(i)  Within ten (10) days after the arrest, the offender presents a license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under ORC § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun that was issued by another state with which the attorney general has entered into a reciprocity agreement under ORC § 109.69, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer. 
(ii)  At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a place described in ORC § 2923.126(B). 
(b)  The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00) if all of the following apply: 
(i)  The offender previously had been issued a license to carry a concealed handgun under ORC § 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed handgun that was issued by another state with which the attorney general has entered into a reciprocity agreement under ORC § 109.69 and that was similar in nature to a license issued under ORC § 2923.125, and that license expired within the two (2) years immediately preceding the arrest. 
(ii)  Within forty-five (45) days after the arrest, the offender presents any type of license identified in division (G)(2)(a)(i) of this section to the law enforcement agency that employed the arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the offender's right to a speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in ORC § 2945.71. 
(iii)  At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was not knowingly in a place described in ORC § 2923.126(B). 
(Ord. No. 71-2011) 
§ 523.03 - DISCHARGING WEAPONS. 
(A)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, any firearm, cannon, rifle, revolver, pistol, devils-head, flobert or airgun or other instrument used to explode any cartridge or thing filled with any explosive substance or material without a written permit from the chief of police. 
(B)  This section shall not be construed to include toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper caps containing twenty-five hundredths (.25) grains or less of explosive compound are used, providing they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and toy pistol paper caps which contain less than twenty hundredths (.20) grains of explosive mixture, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. 
(C)  This section shall not apply to a law enforcement officer in the lawful performance of their duties; or when the offender discharges the weapon when acting in self-defense of oneself or another person which is justified under state law, which the offender must show by a preponderance of the evidence; or the firearm which is discharged was used or was on or about the person or under the control of a person in the commission of a felony for which the Ohio Revised Code requires a term of actual incarceration of three (3) years and an indefinite term of imprisonment pursuant to ORC § 2929.71(B). 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of discharging weapons, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(E)  Strict liability is intended to be imposed for a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 71-2011) 
§ 523.04 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 71-2011. 
§ 523.05 - POSSESSION OF KNIVES. 
(A)  No person shall possess or carry on or about their person any knife with a blade fitted with a mechanical device for automatic release of the blade, opening the knife and locking the knife in the open position, commonly known as a switch or automatic spring knife or any knife that is possessed for use as a weapon. 
(B)  The affirmative defenses contained in C.O. § 523.02 (D)(1), (2) and (3) are affirmative defenses to a charge under C.O. § 523.05 (A) hereof. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of knives, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 523.06 - POINTING FIREARMS. 
No person shall intentionally, and without malice, point a firearm at or toward another person. 
§ 523.07 - CARRYING DANGEROUS WEAPONS. 
(A)  No person shall carry on or about their person any weapon known or designated as a slingshot, slung shot, brass knuckles, billy, blackjack or other weapon of similar character. This section shall not apply to any such weapons when designated for use by officers of the law, or officers while on duty. 
(B)  The affirmative defenses contained in C.O. § 523.02 (D)(1), (2) and (3) are affirmative defenses to a charge under C.O. § 523.07 (A) hereof. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying a dangerous weapon, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 523.08 - SLINGSHOT; BOW AND ARROW; AIR GUN. 
No person shall throw, shoot, cast or sling by hand or by slingshot, bow, airgun or other device, any stone, arrow, pellet, missile or other object capable of causing injury, on or across any street or other public property or on or across private property in a way as to endanger any person or property; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the playing of baseball, football and similar games on public property on which the playing of those games has been authorized by proper authority. 
(Ord. No. 71-2011) 
§ 523.09 - DISCHARGING FIREWORKS. 
(A)  No person shall, without written permit of the fire chief, discharge any fireworks within the city. 
(B)  No person shall, without written permit of the fire chief, discharge, ignite, explode, or otherwise use any novelties and trick noisemakers, model rockets, black powder special effects, or wire sparklers within the city. 
(C)  The fire official or any law enforcement personnel may seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all fireworks, novelties and trick noisemakers, model rockets, black powder special effects, and wire sparklers used or possessed with intent to be used in violation of this section. 
§ 523.10 - POSSESSION OR SALE OF FIREWORKS. 
(A)  No person shall sell, offer for sale or give away, or have in their possession, custody or control for the purpose of selling or giving away in the city, any firecracker, roman candle or other combustible fireworks or any article for the making of a pyrotechnic display. 
(B)  No person shall sell, offer for sale or give away, or have in their possession, custody or control for the purpose of selling or giving away in the city, any novelties and trick noisemakers, model rockets, black powder special effects, or wire sparklers. 
(C)  The fire official or any law enforcement personnel may seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks, novelties and trick noisemakers, model rockets, black powder special effects, and wire sparklers offered or exposed for display or sale or stored or held in violation of this section. 
§ 523.11 - USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED. 
(A)  No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse, shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 523.12 - IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable law of this state or the Unite States, the firearm is unloaded, and the firearm is carried in one (1) of the following ways: 
(1)  In a closed package, box or case. 
(2)  In a compartment which can be reached only by leaving the vehicle. 
(3)  In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the purpose. 
(4)  If the firearm is at least twenty-four (24) inches in overall length as measured from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the barrel is at least eighteen (18) inches in length, either in plain sight with the action open or the weapon stripped, or; if the firearm is of a type on which the action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight. 
(B)  No person who has been issued a license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun under ORC § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun that was issued to the person by another state with which the attorney general has entered into a reciprocity agreement under ORC § 109.69, who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit for the purposes defined in ORC § 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Fail to promptly inform any law enforcement officer who approaches the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun and that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle; 
(2)  Fail to promptly inform the employee of the unit who approaches the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun and that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor vehicle; 
(3)  Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped or knowingly fail to keep the person's hands in plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer; 
(4)  Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to keep the person's hands in plain sight. 
(C)  Divisions (A) and (B) of this section do not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the United States or to law enforcement officers, authorized to carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and acting within the scope of the officer's, agent's, or employee's duties; 
(2)  Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of ORC § 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in this section does not apply to the person. 
(D)  (1)  The affirmative defenses authorized in C.O. § 523.02(D)(1) and (2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under C.O. § 523.12(A) of this section that involves a firearm other than a handgun. 
(2)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A) of this section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor's own property, provided that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately prior to arriving at the actor's own property, did not transport or possess the firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (A) of this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway, or other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic. 
(E)  No person who is charged with a violation of division (A) of this section shall be required to obtain a license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun under ORC § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 as a condition for the dismissal of the charge. 
(F)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle. A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of division (B)(1), (2), (3), and (4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(G)  As used in this section, unloaded means, with respect to firearm employing a percussion cap, flintlock or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the pan. 
(Ord. No. 71-2011) 
§ 523.13 - FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE. 
(A)  No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying or using any dangerous ordnance shall negligently fail to take proper precautions. 
(1)  To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft or against its acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person. 
(2)  To insure the safety of persons and property. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to secure dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
§ 523.14 - UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS. 
(A)  No person shall: 
(1)  Manufacture, possess for sale, sell or furnish to any person other than a law enforcement agency for authorized use in police work, any brass knuckles, cestus, billy, blackjack, sandbag, switchblade knife, springblade knife, gravity knife or similar weapon. 
(2)  When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently fail to require the transferee to exhibit identification, license or permit showing the transferee to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance pursuant to ORC § 2923.17 or negligently fail to take a complete record of the transaction and forthwith forward a copy of that record to the sheriff of the county or safety director or police chief of the municipality where the transaction takes place; 
(3)  Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person's possession or under the person's control. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in weapons. A violation of division (A)(1) or (2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(Ord. No. 71-2011) 
§ 523.15 - UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF FIREARM OR HANDGUN. 
(A)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase a handgun, provided that this division does not apply to the purchase or attempted purchase of a handgun by a person eighteen (18) years of age or older and under twenty-one (21) years of age if either of the following apply: 
(1)  The person is a law enforcement officer who is properly appointed or employed as a law enforcement officer and has received firearms training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent firearms training. 
(2)  The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of underage purchase of a handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(Ord. No. 71-2011) 
§ 523.16 - POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS. 
(A)  No person shall possess or have under the person's control any substance, device, instrument, or article, with purpose to use it criminally. 
(B)  Each of the following constitutes prima-facie evidence of criminal purpose: 
(1)  Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials or parts for making dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials, or parts are intended for legitimate use; 
(2)  Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or article designed or specially adapted for criminal use; 
(3)  Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the item is intended for criminal use. 
(C)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools. Except as otherwise provided in this section, possessing criminal tools is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the circumstances indicate that the substance, device, instrument, or article involved in the offense was intended for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony and is to be prosecuted under the appropriate state law. 
§ 523.17 - POSSESSING A DEFACED FIREARM. 
(A)  No person shall do either of the following: 
(1)  Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer's serial number, or other mark of identification on a firearm. 
(2)  Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the name of the manufacturer, model , manufacturer's serial number, or other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed, or obliterated. 
(B)  (1)  Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of defacing identification marks of a firearm, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)(1) of this section, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a felony and is to be prosecuted under the appropriate state law. 
(2)  Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of possessing a defaced firearm, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony and is to be prosecuted under the appropriate state law. 
(Ord. No. 71-2011) 
CHAPTER 525. - UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES 

§ 525.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in this chapter: 
(A)  Person: includes one (1) or more individuals, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and other organized groups of persons. It also includes, but is not limited to, any employee, lending institution; and the State, and all political subdivisions, authorities, agencies, boards and commissions thereof. 
(B)  Employer: includes the State or any political or civil subdivision thereof, any person employing four (4) or more persons within the state, and any person acting in the interest of an employer, directly or indirectly. 
(C)  Employee: does not include any individual employed in the domestic service of any person. 
(D)  Labor organization: includes any organization which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment or for other mutual aid or protection in relation to employment. 
(E)  Employment agency: includes any person regularly undertaking with or without compensation to procure opportunities to work or to procure, recruit, refer or place employees. 
(F)  Discriminate: includes segregate or separate. 
(G)  Unlawful discriminatory practice: means any act prohibited by this ORC § 4112.02. 
(H)  Place of public accommodation: means any inn, restaurant, eating house, barbershop, public conveyance by air, land or water, theater, store or other place for the sale of merchandise or any other place of public accommodation or amusement where the accommodation, advantages, facilities or privileges thereof are available to the public. 
(I)  Housing accommodations: include any building or structure or portion thereof which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as the home residence or sleeping place of one (1) or more individuals, groups or families whether or not living independently of each other; and any vacant land offered for sale or lease. 
It also includes any housing accommodations held or offered for sale or rent by a real estate broker, salesman or agent, or by any other person pursuant to authorization of the owner, by the owner himself or by his legal representative. 
(J)  Restrictive covenant: means any specification limiting the transfer, rental, lease or other use of any housing because of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, or any limitation based upon affiliation with or approval by any person, directly or indirectly, employing race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry as a condition of affiliation or approval. 
(K)  Burial lot: means any lot for the burial of deceased persons within any public burial ground or cemetery, including but not limited to, cemeteries owned and operated by municipal corporations, townships or companies or associations incorporated for cemetery purposes. 
§ 525.02 - UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES. 
It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice: 
(A)  For any employer, because of the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry of any person, to refuse to hire or otherwise to discriminate against him with respect to hire, tenure, terms, conditions or privileges of employment or any matter directly or indirectly related to employment. 
(B)  For an employment agency, because of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry to: 
(1)  Refuse or fail to accept, register, classify properly or refer for employment, or otherwise to discriminate against any person. 
(2)  Comply with a request from an employer for referral of applicants for employment, if the request indicates directly or indirectly that the employer fails to comply with the provisions of ORC §§ 4112.01 to 4112.07, inclusive or of this chapter. 
(C)  For any labor organization to: 
(1)  Limit or classify its membership on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry. 
(2)  Discriminate against any person or limit his employment opportunities, or otherwise adversely affect his status as an employee or his wages, hours or employment conditions, because of his race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry. 
(D)  For any employer, labor organization or joint labor-management committee controlling apprentice training programs to discriminate against any person because of his race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry in admission to or employment in any program established to provide apprentice training. 
(E)  Except where based on a bona fide occupational qualification certified in advance by the Ohio Civil Rights Commission, for any employer, employment agency or labor organization prior to employment or admission to membership, to: 
(1)  Elicit or attempt to elicit any information concerning the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry of an applicant for employment or membership. 
(2)  Make or keep a record of the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry of any applicant for employment or membership. 
(3)  Use any form of application for employment or personnel or membership blank seeking to elicit information regarding race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry; but an employer holding a contract containing a non-discrimination clause with the government of the United States or any department or agency thereof, may require an employee or applicant for employment to furnish documentary proof of United States citizenship and may retain such proof in his personnel records and may use photographic or fingerprint identification for security purposes. 
(4)  Print or publish or cause to be printed or published any notice or advertisement relating to employment or membership indicating any preference, limitation, specification or discrimination, based upon race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry. 
(5)  Announce or follow a policy of denying or limiting, through a quota system or otherwise, employment or membership opportunities of any group because of the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry of such group. 
(6)  Utilize in the recruitment or hiring of persons any employment agency, placement service, training school or center, labor organization or any other employee-referring source known to such employer to discriminate against persons because of their race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry. 
(F)  For any person seeking employment to publish or cause to be published any advertisement which specifies or in any manner indicates his race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry or expresses a limitation or preference as to the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry of any prospective employer. 
(G)  For any proprietor or his employee, keeper or manager of a place of public accommodation to deny to any person, except for reasons applicable alike to all persons regardless of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, the full enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities or privileges thereof. 
(H)  For any person to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell, transfer, assign, rent, lease, sublease, finance or otherwise deny or withhold housing accommodation from any person because of the race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin of any prospective owner, occupant or user of such housing. 
(2)  Represent to any person that housing is not available for inspection when in fact it is so available. 
(3)  Refuse to lend money, whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise, for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of housing or otherwise withhold financing of housing from any person because of the race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin of any present or prospective owner, occupant or user of such housing, provided such person, whether an individual, corporation or association of any type, lends money as one (1) of the principal aspects of his business or incidental to his principal business and not only as a part of the purchase price of an owner-occupied residence he is selling nor merely casually or occasionally to a relative or friend. 
(4)  Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of selling, transferring, assigning, renting, leasing or subleasing any housing or in furnishing facilities, services or privileges in connection with the ownership, occupancy or use of any housing because of the race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin of any present or prospective owner, occupant or user of such housing. 
(5)  Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of any loan of money, whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise, for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of housing because of the race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin of any present or prospective owner, occupant or user of such housing. 
(6)  Print, publish or circulate any statement or advertisement relating to the sale, transfer, assignment, rental, lease, sublease or acquisition of any housing or the loan of money, whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise, for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of housing which indicates any preference, limitation, specification or discrimination based upon race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin. 
(7)  Make any inquiry, elicit any information, make or keep any record or use any form of application containing questions or entries concerning race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin in connection with the sale or lease of any housing or the loan of any money, whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise, for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of housing. 
(8)  Include in any transfer, rental or lease of housing any restrictive covenant or honor or exercise or attempt to honor or exercise, any such restrictive covenant, provided that the prior inclusion of a restrictive covenant in the chain of title shall not be deemed a violation of this provision. 
(9)  Induce or solicit or attempt to induce or solicit a housing listing, sale or transaction by representing that a change has occurred or may occur with respect to the racial, religious or ethnic composition of the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located or induce or solicit or attempt to induce or solicit such sale or listing by representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin, in the area will or may have results such as the following: 
(a)  The lowering of property values. 
(b)  A change in the racial, religious or ethnic composition of the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located. 
(c)  An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area. 
(d)  A decline in the quality of the schools serving the area. 
(10)  Deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting housing accommodations or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry. 
(11)  Coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected in C.O. § 525.02(H). 
(12)  Whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of force willfully injure, intimidate, or interfere with, or attempt to injure, intimidate or interfere with: 
(a)  Any person because of his race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry and because he is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling or applying for or participating in any service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting housing accommodations. 
(b)  Any person because he is or has been or in order to intimidate such person or any other person or any class of persons from: 
(1)  Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in C.O. § 525.02(H)(1)(a). 
(2)  Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection so to participate. 
(c)  Any person because he is or has been, or in order to discourage such person or any other person from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in C.O. § 525.02(H)(12)(a), or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to so participate. 
(13)  Refuse to sell, transfer, assign, rent, lease, sublease, finance, or otherwise deny or withhold a burial lot from any person because of the race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin of any prospective owner or user of such lot. 
(I)  For any person to discriminate in any manner against any other person because he has opposed any unlawful practice defined in this section, or because he has made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding, or hearing under Ohio Revised Code §§ 4112.01 to 4112.07, inclusive, or under this chapter. 
(J)  For any person to aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any act declared by this section to be an unlawful discriminatory practice or to obstruct or prevent any person from complying with ORC §§ 4112.01 to 4112.11, inclusive, or the provisions of this chapter; or any order issued thereunder, or to attempt directly or indirectly to commit any act declared by this section to be an unlawful discriminatory practice. 
§ 525.03 - EXCEPTIONS. 
(A)  Provided, however, that nothing in C.O. § 525.02(H) of the preceding section shall bar any religious or denominational institution or organization or any charitable or educational organization, which is operated, supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious organization or any bona fide private or fraternal organization, from giving preference to persons of the same religion or denomination or to members of such private or fraternal organization or from making such selection as is calculated by such organization to promote the religious principles or the aims, purposes or fraternal principles for which it is established or maintained. 
(B)  Provided further that the prohibitions contained in C.O. § 525.02(H) of the preceding section shall not apply to the rental of a portion of the housing accommodation by the occupant thereof, or by the owner of the housing accommodation, if he or a member of his family resides therein. Family as used in this paragraph shall include spouse, child, parent, grandparent, brother or sister, mother-in-law or father-in-law. 
(C)  The prohibitions contained in C.O. § 525.02(H)(1) of the preceding section shall not apply to the sale of a single-family residential housing accommodation by the owner thereof, if he or a member of his family resides therein or has resided therein immediately prior to the sale, provided that the sale is not advertised by means of the media or by signs, and provided further that the solicitation for the sale and the sale are handled entirely by the owner. 
§ 525.04 - FALSE OR MISLEADING RECORDS. 
No person shall, with intent to mislead any public official, board or commission, authorized by statute or ordinance to investigate unlawful discriminatory practices, make or cause to be made any false entry or statement of fact in any report, account, record or other document submitted to such public official, board or commission. No person shall willfully neglect or fail to make or cause to be made full, true and correct entries in such reports, accounts, records or other documents submitted to such public official, board or commission. 
§ 525.05 - PENALTIES. 
The remedies for violations of this chapter shall be civil in nature as provided for in ORC ch. 4112. 
CHAPTER 531. - OFFENSES RELATING TO MINORS 

§ 531.01 - CURFEW FOR MINORS TWELVE YEARS OF AGE OR YOUNGER. 
No minor twelve (12) years of age or younger shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play, or be in or on any vehicle, in or upon the public streets, other public places, places of amusement, entertainment or public accommodation, vacant lots or land or, without the consent of the owners or occupants, on private property, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m., official city time; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a minor accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or to a minor who is engaged in an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by the minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. 
§ 531.02 - CURFEW FOR MINORS THIRTEEN (13) YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER. 
No minor thirteen (13) years of age or older shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play, or be in or on any vehicle, in or upon the public streets, other public places, places of amusement, entertainment or public accommodation, vacant lots or land or, without the consent of the owners or occupants, on private property, between the hours of midnight and 5:30 a.m., official city time; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a minor accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor or to a minor who is engaged in an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by the minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. 
§ 531.03 - PARENTAL NEGLECT. 
(A)  No person being the parent, guardian, or person having the legal custody and control of any minor, shall negligently allow the minor to violate C.O. § 531.01 or C.O. § 531.02. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of parental neglect, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
§ 531.04 - WRONGFUL INFLUENCE OF MINOR. 
(A)  No person shall aid, abet, influence or encourage any child under the age of eighteen (18) years of age to: 
(1)  Violate C.O. § 531.01 entitled, curfew for minors under twelve (12) years of age or younger. 
(2)  Violate C.O. § 531.02 entitled, curfew for minors thirteen (13) years of age or older. 
(3)  Be truant from home when the child has been reported as being truant from home to the police or juvenile authorities. 
(4)  Be truant from school when the laws of this state require the child's attendance in school. 
(5)  Be in violation of any law of this state, states or any ordinance or regulation of a subdivision of the state or commit any act which would cause the child to be designated a delinquent child, juvenile traffic offender or unruly child as defined in ORC §§ 2151.02, 2151.021, 2151.022, and 2152.02, respectively. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful influence of a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 531.05 - ENDANGERING CHILDREN. 
(A)  No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under eighteen (18) years of age or a mentally or physically handicapped child under twenty-one (21) years of age, shall create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child, by violating a duty of care, protection, or support. It is not a violation of a duty of care, protection, or support under this division when the parent, guardian, custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical or mental illness or defect of the child by spiritual means through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body. 
(B)  No person shall abuse a child under eighteen (18) years of age or a mentally or physically handicapped child under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(C)  (1)  No person shall operate a vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley within this city in violation of C.O. § 353.01(A) or (B) or division (A) of ORC § 4511.19 when one (1) or more children under eighteen (18) years of age are in the vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of this division and a violation of C.O. § 353.01(A) or (B) or ORC § 4511.19(A) that constitutes the basis of the charge of the violation of this division. For purposes of ORC §§ 4511.191 to 4511.197 [4511.19.7] and all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this division shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or for operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine. 
(2)  As used in division (C)(1) of this section: 
(a)  "Controlled substance" has the same meaning as in ORC § 3719.01. 
(b)  "Vehicle," "streetcar," and "trackless trolley" have the same meanings as in ORC § 4511.01. 
(D)  (1)  Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of endangering children, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child involved, or if the offender has been previously convicted of an offense under this section, under ORC § 2919.22 or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, contributing to the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, or if the violation is otherwise cognizable as a felony under ORC § 2919.22, then prosecution shall proceed under that statute as a felony. 
(2)  Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of endangering children, a misdemeanor of the first degree and the offender shall be punished as follows: 
(a)  In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other sentence, penalty, or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to division (D)(2) of this section or pursuant to any other provision of law and in addition to any suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under ORC ch. 4506, 4509, 4510, or 4511 or under any other provision of law, the court also may impose upon the offender a class seven (7) suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in C.O. § 315.99(F)(7) or ORC § 4510.02(A)(7). 
(b)  In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other sentence, penalty, or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to division (D)(2) of this section or pursuant to any other provision of law for the violation of division (C) of this section, if as part of the same trial or proceeding the offender also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of C.O. § 353.01(A) or (B) or ORC § 4511.19(A) that was the basis of the charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, the offender also shall be sentenced in accordance with C.O. § 353.01 or ORC § 4511.19 for that violation of C.O. § 353.01(A) or (B) or ORC § 4511.19(A). 
(E)  (1)  If a court suspends an offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under division (D)(2)(a) of this section, the period of the suspension shall be consecutive to, and commence after, the period of suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege that is imposed under ORC ch. 4506, 4509, 4510, or 4511 or under any other provision of law in relation to the violation of division (C) of this section that is the basis of the suspension under division (D)(2)(a) of this section or in relation to the violation of C.O. § 353.01(A) or (B) or ORC § 4511.19(A) that is the basis for that violation of division (C) of this section. 
(2)  An offender is not entitled to request, and the court shall not grant to the offender, limited driving privileges if the offender's license, permit, or privilege has been suspended under division (D)(2)(a) of this section and the offender, within the proceeding six (6) years, has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three (3) or more violations of one (1) or more of the following: 
(a)  Division (C) of this section; 
(b)  Any equivalent offense, as defined in ORC § 4511.181 [4511.18.1]. 
(F)  (1)  If a person violates division (C) of this section and if, at the time of the violation, there were two (2) or more children under eighteen (18) years of age in the vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a violation of division (C) of this section for each of the children, but the court may sentence the offender for only one of the violations. 
(2)  (a)  If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (C) of this section but the person is not also convicted of and does not also plead guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of C.O. § 353.01(A) or (B) or ORC § 4511.19(A) that was the basis of the charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, both of the following apply: 
(i)  For purposes of the provisions of C.O. § 353.01 or ORC § 4511.19 that set forth the penalties and sanctions for a violation of C.O. § 353.01(A) or (B) or ORC § 4511.19(A), the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of division (C) of this section shall not constitute a violation of C.O. § 353.01(A) or (B) or ORC § 4511.19(A); 
(ii)  For purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of C.O. § 353.01(A) or (B) or ORC § 4511.19(A) and that is not described in division (F)(2)(a)(i) of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of division (C) of this section shall constitute a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of C.O. § 353.01(A) or (B) or ORC § 4511.19(A). 
(b)  If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (C) of this section and the person also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of C.O. § 353.01(A) or (B) or ORC § 4511.19(A) that was the basis of the charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of division (C) of this section shall not constitute, for purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of C.O. § 353.01(A) or (B) or ORC § 4511.19(A), a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of C.O. § 353.01(A) or (B) or ORC § 4511.19(A). 
(G)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Community control sanction has the same meaning as in ORC § 2929.01; 
(2)  Limited driving privileges has the same meaning as in ORC § 4501.01. 
§ 531.06 - CONTRIBUTING TO UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD. 
(A)  No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of a child, shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child, as defined in ORC § 2151.022, or a delinquent child, as defined in ORC § 2152.02. 
(2)  Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile court to become an unruly child, as defined in ORC § 2151.022, or a delinquent child, as defined in ORC § 2152.02. 
(B)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day of violation of this section is a separate offense. 
§ 531.07 - INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY. 
(A)  No person, knowing the person is without privilege to do so or being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep, or harbor a person identified in division (A)(1), (2), or (3) of this section from the parent, guardian, or custodian of the person identified in division (A)(1), (2), or (3) of this section: 
(1)  A child under the age of eighteen (18) years of age, or a mentally or physically handicapped child under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age; 
(2)  A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent, unruly, neglected, abused, or dependent children; 
(3)  A person committed by law to an institution for the mentally ill or mentally retarded. 
(B)  No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, or encourage a child or ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person, department, or public or private institution to leave the custody of that person, department, or institution without legal consent. 
(C)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking under division (A)(1) of this section, that the actor reasonably believed that the actor's conduct was necessary to preserve the child's health or safety. It is an affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division (A) of this section, that the actor in good faith gave notice to law enforcement or judicial authorities within a reasonable time after the child or committed person came under the actor's shelter, protection, or influence. 
(D)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with custody. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the child who is the subject of a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is removed from the state, or if the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this section, or if the child who is the subject of a violation of division (A)(1) of this section suffers physical harm as a result of the violation, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a felony and is to prosecuted under the applicable state law. 
(3)  A violation of division (A)(2) or (3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(4)  A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day of violation of division (B) of this section is a separate offense. 
§ 531.08 - DISTRIBUTION OR SALE OF CIGARETTES, TOBACCO PRODUCTS, E-CIGARETTES OR LIQUID NICOTINE TO MINORS PROHIBITED. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
    Business: means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or other entity or venture formed for profit making or non-profit purposes, including but not limited to all retail establishments where goods or services are sold or offered for sale. 
    Cigarette: includes: (1) any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, irrespective of size or shape, and whether or not such tobacco is flavored, adulterated, or mixed with any other ingredient, the wrapper or cover of which is made of paper, reconstituted cigarette tobacco, homogenized cigarette tobacco, cigarette tobacco sheet, or any similar materials; (2) clove cigarettes; and (3) hand-rolled cigarettes. 
    Distribute: means to furnish, give, or provide, whether gratuitous or for compensation in money, barter, or in-kind. 
    Electronic cigarette and e-cigarette: mean any electronic product or device that produces a vapor that delivers nicotine or any other substance to the person inhaling from the device to simulate smoking and that is likely to be offered to or purchased by consumers as an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, or electronic pipe. 
    Liquid nicotine: means any liquid product composed either in whole or in part of pure nicotine and propylene glycol and/or any other substance and manufactured for use with e-cigarettes. 
    Open display unit: for purposes of this section, means any device, furniture, or furnishing within or upon which cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine are displayed to customers, and includes but is not limited to any case, rack, shelf, counter, table, desk, kiosk, booth, stand, or other surface. 
    Retailer: means any person or business that operates a store, stand, booth, concession, or other place at which sales of cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine are made to purchasers for consumption or use. 
    Self-service merchandising: for purposes of this section, means the open display of cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes and liquid nicotine, whether packaged or otherwise, for direct retail customer access and handling prior to purchase without the intervention of assistance of the retailer or the retailer's owner, employee, or agent. Such open display includes the use of an open display unit. 
    Tobacco Product: means any product that is made from tobacco, including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, or snuff. 
(B)  (1)  No person, business, retailer, or other establishment shall distribute, sell, permit to be sold, or offer for sale to any person under eighteen (18) years of age any cigarette, tobacco product, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine within the city. 
(2)  Before distributing or selling any cigarette, tobacco product, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine, to another person, the person distributing or selling any cigarette, tobacco product, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine shall verify the person is eighteen (18) years of age or older by: 
(a)  examining from any person that appears to be under thirty (30) years of age a government-issued photographic identification that establishes the person is at least eighteen (18) years of age; or 
(b)  for sales made through the Internet or other remote sales methods, performing an age verification through an independent, third-party age verification service that compares information available from public records to the personal information entered or provided by the person during the ordering process, that establishes that the person is eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(3)  A violator of this section includes the person who distributes, sells, permits to be sold, or offers for sale any such product to a person under eighteen (18) years of age as well as his or her employer and any person who controls the person who sells, permits to be sold, or offers for sale any such product to a person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(C)  (1)  No person, business, retailer, or other establishment engaged in the retail sale of cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine shall distribute, sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale, or display for sale cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine within the city by means of self-service merchandising. 
(2)  No person, business, retailer, or other establishment engaged in the retail sale of e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine shall place cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine in an open display unit within the city unless the same is located in an area that is inaccessible to customers. 
(3)  No person, business, retailer, or other establishment shall distribute, sell, or offer to sell cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine by or from a vending machine, except in the following locations: 
(a)  An area within a business, office, or other place not open to the general public; 
(b)  An area to which children are not generally permitted access; 
(c)  Any other place not identified in subsection (C)(3)(a) or (b) of this section, upon all of the conditions related to tobacco vending machines provided in ORC § 2927.02. 
(D)  (1)  No person shall knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age, or other identification of any minor with purpose to obtain cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine for that minor. 
(2)  No person shall knowingly furnish any false information regarding that person's name, age, other identification, or relationship as the parent, legal guardian, or spouse of a minor with purpose to obtain cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine for that minor. 
(E)  The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (B) of this section: 
(1)  The minor was accompanied by a parent, spouse who is eighteen (18) years of age or older, or legal guardian of the minor; 
(2)  The person who distributed, sold, permitted to be sold, or offered for sale a cigarette, tobacco product, e-cigarette, or liquid nicotine to a minor is a parent, spouse who is eighteen years of age or older, or legal guardian of the minor. 
(F)  Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal distribution or sale of cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine to a minor, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (B)(1), division (C), or division (D) of this section or any substantially equivalent offense, then illegal distribution or sale of cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine to a minor is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(G)  Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is guilty of failing to verify, a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (B)(1), division (C), or division (D) of this section, or any substantially equivalent offense, then failing to verify is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(H)  Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of illegal merchandising of cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of division (B)(1), division (C), or division (D) of this section or any substantially equivalent offense, then illegal merchandising of cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(I)  Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of permitting minors to use cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (B)(1), division (C), or division (D) of this section or any substantially equivalent offense, then permitting minors to use cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine is a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(J)  Any cigarette, tobacco product, e-cigarette, liquid nicotine, open display unit, or vending machine that is used, possessed, distributed, sold, offered to be sold, or displayed in violation of this section is subject to seizure and forfeiture, and disposal as provided in C.O. § 551.01. 
(K)  (1)  A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found guilty of a charge of a violation of this section in which the age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine is an element of the alleged violation, if the seller, agent, or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred: 
(a)  A person attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes , tobacco products, e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine presented a driver's or commercial driver's license, or an identification card issued under ORC §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52. 
(b)  A transaction scan, as defined in ORC § 2927.021, of the driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the license or card was valid. 
(c)  The cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine were sold, given away, or otherwise distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed transaction scan. 
(2)  In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller has proven the affirmative defense provided this section, the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of this section or a substantially equivalent offense. For purposes of division (K)(1)(c), the trier of fact shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following: 
(a)  Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine is twenty-one (21) years of age or older; 
(b)  Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card presented by a card holder is that of the card holder. 
(3)  In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by division (K)(1) is raised, the registrar of motor vehicles or a deputy registrar who issued an identification card under ORC §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the bureau of motor vehicles in the action. 
(Ord. No. 1-2014; Ord. No. 35-2015, § 2, 6-8-2015 ) 
§ 531.09 - POSSESSION OF CIGARETTES, TOBACCO PRODUCTS, E-CIGARETTES OR LIQUID NICOTINE BY MINORS PROHIBITED. 
(A)  "Cigarette," "Electronic cigarette," "e-cigarette," "liquid nicotine," and "tobacco product" shall have the same meaning under this section as in C.O. § 531.08. 
(B)  No minor shall do any of the following unless accompanied by a parent, spouse who is eighteen years of age or older, or legal guardian of the minor: 
(1)  Use, consume, or possess cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine; 
(2)  Purchase or attempt to purchase cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine; 
(3)  Order, pay for, or share the cost of cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine; 
(4)  Accept or receive cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine. 
(C)  No minor shall knowingly furnish false information concerning that minor's name, age, or other identification for the purpose of obtaining cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine. 
(D)  A juvenile court shall not adjudicate a minor a delinquent or unruly child for a violation of division (B)(1), (2), (3), or (4), or division (C), of this section. 
(E)  (1)  It is not a violation of division (B)(4) of this section for a minor to accept or receive cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine if the minor is required to do so in the performance of the minor's duties as an employee of that minor's employer and the minor's acceptance or receipt of cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine occurs exclusively within the scope of the minor's employment. 
(2)  It is not a violation of division (B)(1), (2), (3), or (4) of this section if the minor possesses, purchases, or attempts to purchase, orders, pays for, shares the cost of, or accepts or receives cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine while participating in a compliance check conducted by a federal, state, local, or corporate entity at a location at which cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine are sold or distributed. 
(F)  If a juvenile court finds that a minor has violated division (B)(1), (2), (3), or (4), or division (C) of this section, the court may do either of the following: 
(1)  Require the minor to attend a youth smoking education program or other smoking treatment program approved by the court, if one is available; 
(2)  Impose a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(G)  If a minor disobeys a juvenile court order issued pursuant to division (F) of this section, the court may do any or all of the following: 
(1)  Increase the fine imposed under division (F)(2) of this section, not to exceed an additional one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00); 
(2)  Require the minor to perform not more than twenty hours of community service; 
(3)  Suspend for a period of thirty days the temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's permit, or driver's license issued to the minor. 
(H)  Any cigarette, tobacco product, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine that is possessed, purchased, ordered, paid for in whole or in part, accepted, given, or received in violation of this section is subject to seizure and forfeiture, and disposal as provided in C.O. § 551.01. 
(Ord. No. 1-2014; Ord. No. 35-2015, § 3, 6-8-2015 ) 
CHAPTER 535. - SAFETY 

§ 535.01 - AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS AND REFRIGERATORS. 
No person shall abandon, discard or knowingly permit to remain on premises under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight container which has a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more and an opening of fifty (50) square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, without rendering such equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges, latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. This section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman. 
§ 535.02 - WELLS AND CISTERNS TO BE COVERED. 
All wells or cisterns in this City shall be covered with reinforced concrete slabs not less than one and one-half (1/2) inches thick or with boiler plate or a similar steel or iron covering not less than three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inch thick. 
§ 535.03 - ABANDONED SEPTIC TANKS, WELLS AND CISTERNS TO BE FILLED. 
All septic tanks, cesspools and sealed vaults which are not in use, due to the abandonment of the buildings which they were intended to serve or because of the availability of sanitary sewers, and all cisterns and dug wells which are not in use, shall be completely filled and kept filled with earth, cinders, gravel or other suitable dry material; provided, however, that the requirements of this section may be waived by the Building Inspector in individual instances, when, in his opinion, the construction or location of such septic tank, cesspool, sealed vault, cistern or dug well does not constitute a health or safety hazard. 
§ 535.04 - FENCES. 
(A)  No person shall install or cause to be installed along or adjacent to the boundary line of the front yard (as defined in the Unified Development Code) of any lot or parcel of ground in this city, any barrier composed of one (1) or more strands of wire, rope, cord, plastic or other type of line, stretched between stakes, poles, trees or other supports, located as described above; provided, however, that a temporary barrier of such type, so constructed or marked as to be readily visible, may be installed to prevent damage to a newly planted lawn, hedge, shrubbery or other planting, to be maintained only for such length of time as is reasonably necessary for the protection of such planting. 
(B)  No person shall install or maintain any fence or barrier as described in C.O. § 535.04, regardless of location, which is composed in whole or in part of barbed wire, or which has wire or metal spikes or prongs, or which is charged with electrical current. 
§ 535.05 - UNVENTED SPACE HEATERS. 
(A)  No person shall install, use, cause or permit to be installed or used in any building any fuel-burning equipment for space heating unless such equipment is vented so as to prevent the accumulation of toxic or injurious gases or liquids. 
(B)  No person shall install, use or cause to be used, in any building, a gas-fired range other than for cooking purposes. 
§ 535.06 - DEGREE OF OFFENSE. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
CHAPTER 537. - SANITATION 

§ 537.01 - OFFENSIVE ODORS. 
No person shall manufacture, create or maintain any noisome, noxious or offensive smell, which becomes injurious to the health, comfort or property of individuals or the public. 
§ 537.02 - TRANSPORTATION OF NOXIOUS SUBSTANCE. 
No person shall carry or cause to be carried, in any vehicle of any type whatsoever, upon the public streets, highways and alleys of the city, any substance or material which by its nature or condition gives off noxious or offensive odors, fumes, smoke or gases. 
§ 537.03 - IMPROPER DRAINAGE. 
No owner, occupant or person in charge of any lot or parcel of ground, shall cause or permit water to accumulate thereon and become stagnant or permit culverts, drains or natural watercourses thereon to become obstructed or cause or permit any putrid or unsanitary substance to accumulate thereon. 
§ 537.04 - OBSTRUCTING DRAINAGE DITCHES. 
No person shall fill in or otherwise obstruct any drainage ditch in any street, alley or other public way or public place in this city. 
§ 537.05 - YARD CARE. 
    [See Appendix A, Property Maintenance Code Section 302.4.] 
§ 537.06 - UNSOLICITED WRITTEN MATERIALS. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
    Front door: means the street-facing entrance(s) to a principal structure. In the event no door faces the street, then any other door of a principal structure nearest the street shall be considered a front door for purposes of this section. 
    Person: means any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other organization. 
    Porch: means an exterior appendage to a principal structure leading to a doorway, including any stairway attached thereto. 
    Premises: means a lot, plot, or parcel of land including any structures, driveways, or other impervious surfaces thereon. 
    Principal structure: means a structure, or combination of structures of primary importance on the premises, and that contains the primary use associated with the premises. The primary use is characterized by identifying the main activity taking place on the premises. 
    Unsolicited written materials: means any written materials delivered to any premises without the express invitation or permission, in writing or otherwise, by the owner, occupant, or lessee of such premises. 
(B)  No Person shall deliver, place, or distribute unsolicited written materials to any premises other than in the following locations and manners: 
(1)  On a porch, if one exists, nearest the front door; or 
(2)  So that such materials are securely attached to the front door; or 
(3)  Through a mail slot on the front door or principal structure, if one exists, as permitted by the United States Postal Service Domestic Mail Manual, Section 508 Recipient Services, Subsection 3.1.2; or 
(4)  Between the exterior front door, if one exists and is unlocked, and the interior front door; or 
(5)  Where permitted, in a distribution box located on or adjacent to the premises; or 
(6)  Securely attached to a hook or within some other receptacle used for the delivery of non-U.S. Mail packages or materials, attached to the mailbox post for the premises, if it exists; or 
(7)  Personally to the owner, occupant, and/or lessee of the premises. 
(C)  Notwithstanding subsection (B), an owner, lessee, or occupant maintains the right to restrict entry to his or her premises. 
(D)  Organizational liability: Pursuant to C.O. § 501.07(A)(2), it is the intent to impose organizational liability for violation of this section committed by an officer, agent, or employee of a business or organization while acting on behalf of the business or organization and within the scope of the officer's, employee's or agent's office or employment. 
(E)  Unsolicited written materials placed at a premises creates a rebuttable presumption that the materials were placed at the premises by the owner, officer, agent, or employee of the business, product, good, service, or message which is being advertised, promoted, endorsed, or conveyed in such materials. Where the materials are delivered as a package and relate to multiple businesses, products, goods, services, or messages, the presumption shall apply to the identified distributor of the package of materials, if any. 
(F)  The provisions of this section do not apply to the United States Postal Service. 
(G)  Violation of this section shall be an unclassified misdemeanor punishable by a fine of two-hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation. 
(Ord. No. 27-2018 , § 1, 4-9-2018) 
§ 537.07 - LITTERING OR DUMPING OF GARBAGE OR RUBBISH. 
(A)  No person shall place or dispose of in any manner, litter which includes any garbage, waste, peelings of vegetables or fruits, brush, leaves, grass clippings, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, tacks, nails, glass, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts or other junk, glass, oil or other matter of an unsightly, unsanitary or dangerous nature on or along any private property, public street, sidewalk, park or other public grounds or otherwise litter any such street or public grounds. 
(B)  No person shall place or dispose of such material on any private property without the consent of the owner or the authorized agent of the owner. 
(C)  No person shall place or dispose of any such material on any unenclosed private property without taking reasonable precautions to prevent such material from being blown or otherwise accidentally removed from the premises, and in no case shall such material be placed or stored between the building setback line of the lot and the street abutting the premises. 
(D)  No person shall place or dispose any household waste, appliances, auto parts, tires, rugs, rags, furniture, paints, disabled or inoperative machinery or equipment, lumber, building materials, demolition materials, wood, wearing apparel, grass clippings, trimmings from trees or shrubs, leaves, other yard wastes or similar materials on any park ground or in any park trash receptacle. 
(E)  Upon a finding that litter has been placed or disposed of on public or private property, and constitutes a detriment to public health, safety or welfare, the city manager or his/her designee shall order removal of such litter by a letter sent certified mail to the property owner, return receipt requested. A period of not more than fifteen (15) days from receipt of certified letter shall be permitted to effect such removal. Should the certified letter be returned unclaimed, the city shall send a letter via regular mail to the owner's last known address, and the owner shall have fifteen (15) days from the date of mailing to effect such removal. 
(F)  Should the owner fail to comply within the specified time, it shall be lawful for the city manager or his/her designee to effect such removal, and to bill to the property owner the actual costs of the work incurred by the city. 
(G)  All expenses incurred by the city shall, when approved by city council, be paid out of any money in the treasury of the city not otherwise appropriated. If such billed costs are not paid by the property owner, city council shall make a written return to the county auditor of its action with a statement of the charges of its services, the fees of the officers who made the service of the notice and return, and a proper description of the premises. Such amounts, when allowed, shall be entered upon the tax duplicate, shall be a lien upon such lands from the date of the entry, and shall be collected as other taxes and returned to the city with the general fund. 
(H)  The provisions of C.O. §§ 537.07(A) and 537.07(C) hereof shall not apply to action taken in accordance with the requirements or authorization of any ordinance relative to the collection of refuse, garbage, brush or leaves or any regulation made pursuant to such ordinance. 
(I)  The possible penalties to be imposed in C.O. §§ 537.07(F) and 537.07(G) are in addition to any other penalty contained within this chapter. 
§ 537.08 - PROHIBITING OUTDOOR STORAGE AND ACCUMULATION. 
§ 537.09 - JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES. 
(A)  No person shall leave a junk motor vehicle as defined in C.O. § 537.09(B) on a public street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of any road or highway, for forty-eight (48) hours or longer. 
(B)  A junk motor vehicle means any motor vehicle meeting all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Left on private property for more than seventy-two (72) hours other than in an enclosed garage, on a public street or other property open to the public for the purpose of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of any road or highway, for forty-eight (48) hours or longer. 
(2)  Three (3) years or older. 
(3)  Extensively damaged, such damage may include but is not limited to any of the following: a broken window or windshield, missing wheels, tires, motor or transmission. 
(4)  Apparently inoperable. 
(5)  Having a fair market value of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less. 
(C)  Any vehicle, as defined above, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance by reason of its presence causing a deteriorating and blighting influence on nearby properties and by reason of its depreciating the enjoyment and use of the properties in the immediate vicinity to such an extent that it is harmful to the public health, welfare and safety of the community in which such junk motor vehicle is located, and shall be abated as described in this chapter. 
(D)  Whoever violates C.O. § 537.09(A) shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor, and shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the city in disposing of such junk motor vehicle, less any monies accruing to the city from such disposal. 
(Ord. No. 49-2010) 
§ 537.10 - JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. 
(A)  No person, except as otherwise provided herein, or as limited by Article 5 of the Unified Development Code, shall leave a junk motor vehicle, as defined in C.O. § 537.09, on private property for more than seven (7) days. A wrecked vehicle being held for repair at an automobile service garage or body shop shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(B)  Whenever the city manager or his authorized representative finds on private property a junk motor vehicle, as defined in C.O. § 537.09, he shall cause written notice of such finding to be served by certified mail, return receipt requested on the titled owner of the vehicle, or on the owner, lessee, agent or tenant having the right of possession of such real property, if the titled owner of the vehicle is unknown. Such notice shall provide that the junk motor vehicle must be removed from the real property identified in the notice within ten (10) days after service of such notice. If the address of the titled owner of the vehicle or of the owner, lessee, agent or tenant having the right to possession of such property is unknown, it shall be sufficient to publish the notice of finding once in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(C)  An owner, lessee, agent or tenant having the right of possession of such real property on which the abandoned vehicle is located or the titled owner of the vehicle may within seven (7) days after service of the notice provided for herein request in writing a hearing before the board of zoning and planning on the question of whether or not the motor vehicle identified in the notice is a junk motor vehicle as defined in C.O. § 537.09. 
Upon receipt of a written request for a hearing, the board of zoning and planning shall proceed to conduct the hearing provided for herein not later than thirty (30) days following the filing of the request with the building inspector. After conducting such hearing, the board of zoning and planning shall render a decision in writing which decision shall be that the motor vehicle is or is not a junk motor vehicle, as defined in C.O. § 537.09. Such decision shall set forth the facts upon which it is based. 
(D)  Upon failure of the titled owner of the vehicle or the owner, lessee, agent or tenant having the right to possession of the real property to comply with the notice or following the hearing and decision by the board of zoning and planning, where following such hearing it is determined that the motor vehicle is in fact a junk motor vehicle, as defined in C.O. § 537.09, the city manager shall cause such junk motor vehicle to be removed by the direct employment of labor or by authorizing another person to remove the vehicle on behalf of the city. 
§ 537.11 - PROHIBITING STORAGE IN VIOLATION OF UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE. 
No person shall park or leave standing motor vehicles in violation of the Unified Development Code and which classifies the use of the premises on which the motor vehicles are parked or left standing as a junk or salvage yard, as defined in C.O. § 1103.39 or an automobile or trailer sales area as defined in C.O. § 1103.10. 
§ 537.12 - DEGREE OF OFFENSE. 
    Unless otherwise specified, whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 27-2018 , § 2, 4-9-2018) 
CHAPTER 539. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 

§ 539.01 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Repealed by Ord. No. 16-79. 
§ 539.02 - UNLOADING ON STREET, SIDEWALK. 
No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the municipality by throwing or letting the same fall upon the pavement of any street, sidewalk or other public way without first placing some sufficient protection over the pavement. 
§ 539.03 - OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC GROUNDS OR HIGHWAYS. 
No person shall obstruct or encumber by fences, buildings, structures or otherwise, a public ground, highway, street or alley. 
§ 539.04 - MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK. 
No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk or, being the owner, occupant or person having care of any building or lot of land bordering on any street or sidewalk, permit the same to be encumbered with barrels, boxes, cans, articles or substances of any kind, so as to interfere with the free and unobstructed use thereof. 
§ 539.05 - SIDEWALK SALES OR DISPLAYS. 
No person shall use any street or sidewalk area, including the lateral strip area between the street and sidewalk, for the display or sale of merchandise or for any advertising display. 
§ 539.06 - PROTECTING SIDEWALKS. 
In the transportation of any goods, materials or equipment across any sidewalk in the city, efficient temporary planking shall be used to protect such sidewalks from breakage and such temporary planking shall be removed at the close of each working day and the surface of the sidewalk immediately cleaned and left in a passable condition. 
§ 539.07 - LANTERNS AND BARRICADES REQUIRED. 
No contractor or other person shall leave unprotected or unguarded or without proper lighting any hole, excavation, pile of dirt, trucks, equipment or other material in any of the streets of the city. 
§ 539.08 - REMOVAL OF LIGHTS AND WARNING DEVICES. 
No person shall, unless legally authorized to do so, remove any light, barrier, sign, marker or obstruction placed on any street or construction project, public or private, as a warning or protection for the public, or willfully, carelessly or negligently destroy any such object. 
§ 539.09 - MOVEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT. 
No materials or machinery or equipment for the construction, maintenance or repair of public utility lines or water mains, sewers, sidewalks, streets, houses, buildings or other structures, shall be transported over the streets and public ways of the city on Sunday, or on other days between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., through traffic excepted. 
This section shall not apply to emergencies wherein it is necessary to transport materials, machinery or equipment or to perform labor for the immediate preservation of property or safety of persons or to maintain the services of public utilities. 
§ 539.10 - PEOPLE OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to so stand, loiter or walk upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public way in the city as to obstruct free passage thereon. 
§ 539.11 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
CHAPTER 543. - PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND OPEN SPACE AREAS 

§ 543.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
    Animal or animals: Includes, but is not limited to, domestic animals as defined in C.O. § 519.01, quadrupeds, birds, including all waterfowl, fish, reptiles, amphibians, crustaceans and mollusks. 
    City-owned property: shall include any real property and public parkland owned by the city, not including easements held or used by the city. 
    Director: The Director of the Parks and Recreation Department of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
    Feed or feeding: means to place, deposit, scatter or distribute in a location accessible to waterfowl, migratory and non-migratory birds, any type of food, including but not limited to corn, wheat or other grains, bread, popcorn, scraps or any substance liable to be eaten by the waterfowl. 
    Fish or fishing: means to take or attempt to take fish by any method, such as placing, setting, drawing or using any device commonly used to capture fish, whether or not capture occurs. 
    Motor vehicle or vehicle: as defined in C.O. § 301.01. 
    Open space areas: means any predominantly open or unimproved lands owned, leased or controlled by the City of Upper Arlington, whether or not the same have been designated as parks or playgrounds. 
    Parkette: as defined in C.O. § 507.01. 
    Public park or playground: as defined in C.O. § 507.01. 
    Public park waters: means any lake, pond, reservoir, stream, pool, channel, lagoon, or other body of water, or any thereof, whether natural or artificial, located in or adjoining a park. 
    Smoking: as defined in C.O. § 1580.01. 
    Smoking materials or devices: as defined in C.O. § 1580.01. 
    Waterfowl: means all birds, migratory or not, including but not limited to swans, geese, ducks and any other waterfowl falling under the jurisdiction of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service. 
(Ord. No. 32-2010; Ord. No. 27-2019 , § 2, 4-22-2019) 
§ 543.02 - ADOPTION OF RULES, VIOLATIONS; UNAUTHORIZED AND PROHIBITED ACTS. 
(A)  The following rules and regulations are ordained and established for the conduct in the parkettes, public parks, playgrounds and open space areas of the city. 
(1)  No person shall cut, injure, deface, remove or disturb any tree, shrub, building, fence, sign, bench or other structure, apparatus or property; or pick, cut, or remove any shrub, bush or flower; or mark or write upon any building, fence, bench or other structure. 
(2)  No person shall make or kindle an open fire except in fireplace or picnic stoves provided for that purpose. 
(3)  No abusive, profane or indecent language, or any lewd or obscene conduct, or any other conduct that may annoy others, shall be allowed. 
(4)  (a)  No person, except law enforcement officers within the scope of their duties shall carry on his/her person firearms of any description, knives, bows and arrows, crossbows, air and gas guns, slingshots, missiles or missile-throwing devices, or other dangerous ordnance or deadly weapon as defined in C.O. ch. 523. This subsection does not apply to those persons licensed to carry a concealed handgun under ORC § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 and in full compliance with applicable requirements of ORC ch. 2923. 
(b)  No person, except law enforcement officers within the scope of their duties, shall shoot or discharge any firearms of any description, knives, bows and arrows, crossbows, air and gas guns, slingshots, missiles or missile-throwing devices, or other dangerous ordnance or deadly weapon as defined in C.O. ch. 523. 
(c)  No person shall have in his or her possession or ignite or detonate any fireworks or explosive devices, as defined in C.O. ch. 523, without having first obtained in writing the permission of the director of parks and recreation. 
(5)  No person shall sell, offer or solicit for sale any goods or merchandise without a written permit therefore from the director of parks and recreation. 
(6)  No person shall use, consume, carry or bring any alcoholic beverage in or upon any parkette, public park, playground or open space areas. 
(a)  This subsection does not apply to intoxicating liquor or beer consumed on the premises of the Amelita Mirolo Barn or within the enclosed area of Northam Park designated by the city manager in accordance with a city permit issued by the city manager pursuant to C.O. § 131.05. 
(7)  Betting, gambling in any form or maintaining any gambling equipment is prohibited. 
(8)  The playing of baseball, golf and other games or contests involving risk of injury to persons or property is prohibited except in areas expressly set aside for such activities, unless otherwise approved by the director of parks and recreation. 
(9)  No person shall distribute any advertising, commercial or promotional circulars, cards or written matter within any parkette, public park, or playground or open space areas. 
(10)  No entertainment or exhibition shall be given in any parkette, public park, playground or open space areas except under the direction or by written permission of the director of parks and recreation. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or litter any form of waste material. 
(12)  No motor vehicles of any description, other than municipal service or emergency vehicles, may enter upon a parkette, public park, playground or open space areas, except as authorized by the director of parks and recreation. 
(13)  No person or group of persons shall erect, place or cause to be placed, alter or cause to be altered any equipment, facilities or grounds in the city-owned parkette, public park, playground or open space areas without special written permission from the director of parks and recreation. 
(14)  No person or group of persons shall enter, use or remain upon city parkette, public park, playground or open space areas between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. except upon the express authorization of the director of parks and recreation. 
(15)  No person shall feed, cause to be fed or provide food for any waterfowl on any public property within the boundaries of the city. Exceptions to this will only be granted through city, state and/or federal permitting processes. 
(a)  Signs shall be conspicuously posted to notify individuals that feeding of waterfowl is prohibited on public property within the city. 
(b)  The absence of a sign shall not be an indication that the no feeding of waterfowl policy does not apply to a particular water source. 
(c)  Defacing, tampering, moving, or damaging such signs shall constitute a violation of this Chapter in addition to any other penalties that may apply regarding the defacement of public property. 
(16)  No person in a park shall engage in the activities of swimming, wading, boating and/or ice skating in areas or at times which have not been set aside for these purposes by appropriate signage. 
(a)  Signs shall be conspicuously posted to notify individuals that these activities are prohibited on public property within the city. 
(b)  The absence of a sign shall not be an indication that these activities do not apply to a particular water source. 
(c)  Defacing, tampering, moving or damaging such signs shall constitute a violation of this chapter in addition to any other penalties that may apply regarding the defacement of public property. 
(17)  No person in a park shall hunt, capture, take, trap or in any other way abuse, molest, injure, pursue or destroy any animal without the permission of the director other than by fishing. 
(18)  Fishing on a catch-and-release only basis is permitted within the City of Upper Arlington. After capture, all fish must be unhooked and returned to the water unharmed. No person shall take or carry away or attempt to take or carry away any fish caught in a public body of water within the City of Upper Arlington. 
(a)  Signs shall be conspicuously posted to notify individuals that a water source is catch-and-release fishing only and criminal penalties exist for taking or carrying away, or attempting to take or carry away fish from the water source. 
(b)  The absence of a sign shall not be an indication that this catch and release policy does not apply to a particular water source. 
(c)  Defacing, tampering, moving or damaging such signs shall constitute a violation of this chapter in addition to any other penalties that may apply regarding the defacement of public property. 
(d)  No person in a park shall fish in public park waters in violation of any sign or signs prohibiting fishing or a manner thereof. 
(19)  Model rocketry, archery and similar hobbies and/or activities shall be prohibited without the written permission of the director of parks and recreation. 
(20)  Smoking and the use of any smoking materials or devices within any areas of any parkette, public park, playground, or open space areas is prohibited. 
(B)  (1)  Except as provided in subsections (B)(2) and (B)(3), whoever violates this section is guilty of violating park rules and regulations, a minor misdemeanor. 
(2)  If the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of this section, violating park rules is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(3)  If a violation of this section constitutes a higher classification of offense under another section of the general offenses code or under a state or federal statute, then the offender may also be prosecuted for said section of the general offense code or state or federal statute. It is the intent of this section that the offender be subject to the full range of penalties provided by said section of the general offense code or state or federal statute. 
(Ord. No. 32-2010; Ord. No. 25-2011, 5-9-2011; Ord. No. 40-2013; Ord. No. 27-2019 , § 3, 4-22-2019) 
CHAPTER 545. - RAILROADS 

§ 545.01 - BLOWING WHISTLES. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company or any agent or employee of a railroad company or any other person to blow or sound any locomotive whistle or air horn within the corporate limits. 
The provisions of this section shall not be construed so as to prevent the sounding of a locomotive whistle in case of immediate danger. 
§ 545.02 - OBSTRUCTING ROADS. 
No railroad company and no conductor of a train of cars or other agent or employee of a railroad company, shall obstruct, unnecessarily, a public road or highway within the city, by permitting a locomotive, railroad car or other obstruction within its or his control to remain upon or across said road or highway for longer than five (5) minutes. The obstruction of such road or highway for more than five (5) minutes shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section, provided that such presumption may be rebutted by evidence that said obstruction was the result of an immovable breakdown, accident or other circumstances beyond the control of said railroad and its employees. 
§ 545.03 - SPEED REGULATIONS. 
No railroad company or agent or employee thereof shall operate or cause to be operated any locomotive, cars or train on any railroad track within this city at a speed greater than forty-five (45) miles per hour, across any street or public way, at grade, or at a speed greater than five (5) miles per hour across any street or public way on any spur or side track at grade. 
§ 545.04 - RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS. 
All persons owning, operating or in charge or control of any railroad locomotive, car, train or other rolling stock, who shall cause, permit or participate in any violation of this section, either as proprietors, owners, lessees, superintendents, agents or employees or otherwise, shall be individually and collectively liable for any penalties imposed by this chapter. 
§ 545.05 - DEGREE OF OFFENSE. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
CHAPTER 547. - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 

§ 547.01 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF PARKING AREAS. 
(A)  Automobile parking areas as used in this section shall include all parcels of land or parts thereof used for the storing or parking of motor vehicles, including the access drives used in connection therewith, except such areas which are incident to and used only in connection with residential buildings designed and used for occupancy by not more than two (2) families, and, subject to said exception, shall include without limitation, all off-street parking and loading spaces as described or required by Article 6, § 6.03 of the Unified Development Code, whether or not such areas are provided with over-head shelters. 
(B)  All automobile parking areas shall be paved with bituminous or Portland cement concrete, paving brick or similar hard surfaced material. Such areas shall be kept clean and maintained in such manner as to prevent dust and dirt from being dissipated in the atmosphere in and around the locality where such parking areas are located, and so as to keep adjacent streets, sidewalks and other property, whether public or private, free from loose material such as dirt, gravel, broken stone or concrete which have been displaced from such surfaces by traffic, rainfall or other means. 
(C)  It shall be the duty of the owner of the premises on which such parking areas are located to comply with the provisions hereinabove set forth as to the paving of such areas and the re-paving, re-surfacing and the making of major repairs, when needed. It shall be the duty of both the owners and the occupants of premises on which such parking areas are located to keep such areas clean and free from dust, dirt and other loose materials as provided in C.O. § 547.01(B). 
(D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of maintaining improper parking areas, a minor misdemeanor. Each day during which such violation continues after written notice thereof has been given the owner, occupant or person in charge of said premises, specifying a reasonable time within which corrective action shall be taken, shall constitute a separate offense. Such notice may be served personally, by mail or by posting the same on said premises. 
§ 547.02 - ADULTERATION OF ITEMS DESIGNED FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION. 
No person shall knowingly do either of the following: 
(A)  Place a pin, needle, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse or other foreign or harmful object in any food, drink, confection or other item designed for human consumption. 
(B)  Furnish to any person any food, drink, confection or other item designed for human consumption, which has been adulterated in violation of C.O. § 547.02(A). 
(C)  Whoever violates C.O. § 547.02(A) or (B) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 547.03 - DISTRIBUTION OR SALE OF CIGARETTES, TOBACCO PRODUCTS, E-CIGARETTES, AND LIQUID NICOTINE TO YOUNG ADULTS PROHIBITED. 
(A)  As used in this section: 
    Business: means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or other entity or venture formed for profit making or non-profit purposes, including but not limited to all retail establishments where goods or services are sold or offered for sale. 
    Cigarette: includes: (1) any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, irrespective of size or shape, and whether or not such tobacco is flavored, adulterated, or mixed with any other ingredient, the wrapper or cover of which is made of paper, reconstituted cigarette tobacco, homogenized cigarette tobacco, cigarette tobacco sheet, or any similar materials; (2) clove cigarettes; and (3) hand-rolled cigarettes. 
    Distribute: means to furnish, give, or provide, whether gratuitous or for compensation in money, barter, or in-kind. 
    Electronic cigarette and e-cigarette: mean any electronic product or device that produces a vapor that delivers nicotine or any other substance to the person inhaling from the device to simulate smoking and that is likely to be offered to or purchased by consumers as an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, or electronic pipe. 
    Liquid nicotine: means any liquid product composed either in whole or in part of pure nicotine and propylene glycol and/or any other substance and manufactured for use with e-cigarettes. 
    Retailer: means any person or business that operates a store, stand, booth, concession, or other place at which sales of cigarettes or tobacco products are made to purchasers for consumption or use. 
    Tobacco product: means any product that is made from tobacco, including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, or snuff. 
    Young adult: means any natural person who has reached the age of eighteen (18) years old but has not yet reached the age of twenty-one (21) years old. 
(B)  (1)  No person, business, retailer, or other establishment shall distribute, sell, permit to be sold, or offer for sale to any young adult any cigarette, tobacco product, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine within the city. 
(2)  Before distributing or selling any cigarette or tobacco product to another person, the person distributing or selling any cigarette, tobacco product, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine shall verify the person is twenty-one (21) years of age or older by: 
(a)  examining from any person that appears to be under thirty (30) years of age a government-issued photographic identification that establishes the person is at least twenty-one (21) years of age; or 
(b)  for sales made through the Internet or other remote sales methods, performing an age verification through an independent, third-party age verification service that compares information available from public records to the personal information entered or provided by the person during the ordering process, that establishes that the person is twenty-one (21) years of age or older. 
(3)  A violator of this section includes the person who distributes, sells, permits to be sold, or offers for sale any such product to a young adult as well as his or her employer and any person who controls the person who sells, permits to be sold, or offers for sale any such product to a young adult. 
(C)  No young adult shall knowingly furnish false information concerning that young adult's name, age, or other identification for the purpose of obtaining cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine. 
(D)  A violation of this section shall be an unclassified misdemeanor. The fine for a first offense within a twelve-month period shall not exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). If the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of this section, or any substantially equivalent offense, within the previous twelve (12) months, the fine shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). For third and subsequent violations of this section or any equivalent offense within a twelve-month period, the fine shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(E)  Any cigarette, tobacco product, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine that is distributed, sold, permitted to be sold, or offered for sale in violation of this section is subject to seizure and forfeiture, and disposal, as provided in C.O. § 551.01. 
(F)  Compliance with the age verification procedures under C.O. § 531.08(B)(2) with respect to the sale of cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes, and liquid nicotine to minors shall not be a defense to a charge under this section. 
(G)  It shall not be a violation of this section to distribute, sell, permit to be sold, or offer for sale to any young adult in this city any product that has been approved as a tobacco cessation aid by the United States Food and Drug Administration. 
(H)  (1)  A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found guilty of a charge of a violation of this section in which the age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine is an element of the alleged violation, if the seller, agent, or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred: 
(a)  A person attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes , tobacco products, e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine presented a driver's or commercial driver's license, or an identification card issued under sections 4507.50 to 4507.52 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
(b)  A transaction scan, as defined in ORC § 2927.021, of the driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the license or card was valid. 
(c)  The cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine were sold, given away, or otherwise distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed transaction scan. 
(2)  In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller has proven the affirmative defense provided this section, the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of this section or a substantially equivalent offense. For purposes of division (H)(1)(c), the trier of fact shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following: 
(a)  Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes cigarettes, tobacco products, e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine is twenty-one (21) years of age or older; 
(b)  Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card presented by a card holder is that of the card holder. 
(3)  In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by division (H)(1) is raised, the registrar of motor vehicles or a deputy registrar who issued an identification card under ORC §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the bureau of motor vehicles in the action. 
( Ord. No. 35-2015, § 1, 6-8-2015 ) 
CHAPTER 549. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

§ 549.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in this chapter: 
    Alcohol: means ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or not, whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. Such term excludes denatured alcohol and wood alcohol. 
    Beer, malt liquor or malt beverages: includes all brewed or fermented malt products containing one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%) or more of alcohol by weight, but not more than six percent (6%) of alcohol by weight. 
    Chauffeured limousine: means a vehicle registered under ORC § 4503.24. 
    Drug of abuse: has the same meaning as in ORC § 3719.011 [3791.01.1]. 
    Intoxicating liquor and liquor: includes all liquids and compounds, other than beer as defined in C.O. § 549.01, containing one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%) or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for beverage purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced, by whatever name called, and whether the same are medicated, proprietary or patented. Such phrase includes wine, as defined in ORC § 4301.01 even if it contains less than four percent (4%) of alcohol by volume, mixed beverages, as defined in ORC § 4301.01 even if they contain less than four percent (4%) of alcohol by volume, alcohol and all solids and confections, which contain any alcohol. 
    Orchestral performance: means a concert comprised of a group of not fewer than forty (40) musicians playing various musical instruments. 
    Person: includes firms and corporations. 
    Underage person: means a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
§ 549.02 - SALES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS, PROHIBITIONS AND MISREPRESENTATIONS. 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall sell intoxicating liquor or beer to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age, or buy intoxicating liquor or beer for, or furnish it to an underage person unless given by a physician in the regular line of his practice, or given for established religious purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian. 
In proceedings before the Ohio Department of Liquor Control, no permit holder, his employee or agent charged with a violation of this section shall, for the same offense, be charged with a violation of ORC § 4301.22(A). (ORC § 4301.69) 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no minor under twenty-one (21) years of age shall purchase intoxicating liquor or beer. 
(C)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall order, pay for, share the cost of, or attempt to purchase any intoxicating liquor or beer, or consume any intoxicating liquor or beer, either from a sealed or unsealed container or by the glass or by the drink, or possess any beer, or intoxicating liquor in any public or private place except as provided in C.O. § 549.02(A) hereof. 
(D)  No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age or other identification for the purpose of obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, intoxicating liquor or beer for a person under twenty-one (21) years of age, by purchase or as a gift. 
(E)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall knowingly show or give false information concerning his name, age or other identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining intoxicating liquor or beer in any place in this city where intoxicating liquor or beer is sold under a permit issued by the Ohio Department of Liquor Control or sold by such department. 
(F)  No person being the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of an underage person shall knowingly permit such underage person to violate any provisions of this chapter, except as provided in C.O. § 549.02(A) and (G) hereof. 
(G)  No person being the owner or occupant of any public or private place located within the city shall knowingly allow any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to remain in or on the place while in the possession of intoxicating liquor or beer or while consuming intoxicating liquor or beer, unless the intoxicating liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person's parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian and the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present at the time of the person's possession or consumption of the beer or intoxicating liquor. 
(H)  (1)  No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations at any hotel, motel, inn, cabin, campground or other hostelry by an underage person or for an underage person if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason to know that the underage person is intoxicated or that the underage person possesses any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not accompanied by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian who is or will be present at all times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by the underage person. 
(2)  No underage person shall knowingly engage, or attempt to engage accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by presenting identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is twenty-one (21) years of age, or older for the purpose of violating this section. 
(I)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall knowingly possess, control or consume any intoxicating liquor or beer in any public or private place unless given by a physician in the regular line of the physician's practice or given for established religious purposes or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(J)  No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin, campground, restaurant, limousine, livery vehicle or charter bus service when the person knows or has reason to know either of the following: 
(1)  That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses, unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxication liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person; 
(2)  That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which it was dispensed to the person. 
(K)  Whoever violates C.O. §§ 549.02 (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), (G), (H), (I) or (J) hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 549.03 - SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS. 
(A)  No person shall sell intoxicating liquor or beer to any individual who habitually drinks intoxicating liquor or beer to excess. 
(B)  No person shall sell intoxicating liquor or beer to an intoxicated person. 
(C)  Whoever violates C.O. § 549.03 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
§ 549.04 - LIQUOR CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE. 
(A)  No person shall consume any intoxicating liquor or beer in a motor vehicle except as provided in C.O. § 549.07(D). 
(B)  Whoever violates C.O. § 549.04 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
( Ord. No. 88-2015, § 1, 1-25-2016 ) 
§ 549.05 - PERMIT REQUIRED. 
(A)  No person by himself or by his clerk, agent or employee shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep or possess for sale, furnish or sell or solicit the purchase or sale of any intoxicating liquor or beer in this city or transport, import or cause to be transported or imported, any beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol in or into this city for delivery, use or sale, unless such person shall have fully complied with ORC chs. 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued by the Ohio Department of Liquor Control and in force at the time. 
(B)  Whoever violates C.O. § 549.05 hereof, shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
§ 549.06 - POSTING LIQUOR AGE WARNING SIGNS. 
(A)  Every place in the city where intoxicating liquor or beer is sold for beverage purposes, either under a permit issued by the Ohio Department of Liquor Control or by the Ohio Department of Liquor Control, shall display at all times, in a prominent place on the premises thereof, a printed card which shall be furnished by the department and which shall read substantially, as follows: 
WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE ... If you are under twenty-one (21) years of age. Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the cost of, attempt to purchase or consume intoxicating liquor or beer or furnish false information as to name, age or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment up to six (6) months, or both. However, if you have attained the age of nineteen (19) years on or before July 31, 1987, you may purchase beer only. 
No person being the holder of a permit issued by the Ohio Department of Liquor Control shall fail to comply with this section. 
(B)  Whoever violates or fails to comply with C.O. § 549.06 hereof, shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
§ 549.07 - OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED. 
(A)  As used in this section, street and motor vehicle have the same meanings as in ORC § 4511.01. 
(B)  No person shall have in his possession an opened container of intoxicating liquor or beer in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Except as provided in division (C)(1)(e) of this section, in an agency store. 
(2)  On the premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Ohio Department of Liquor Control. 
(3)  In any public place. 
(4)  While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street or other public private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(5)  While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(C)  (1)  This section does not apply to: 
(a)  Intoxicating liquor or beer which has been lawfully purchased for consumption on the premises where bought of a holder of an A-1A, A-2, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-7, D-8, E, F, F-2, F-7, or F-8 permit; or 
(b)  Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-3 permit or wine served for consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit; 
(c)  Intoxicating liquor or beer consumed on the premises of a convention facility as provided in ORC § 4303.201 [4303.20.1]; or 
(d)  Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and samplings approved by rule of the liquor control commission; or 
(e)  Spirituous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting sample, as defined in ORC § 4301.71; or 
(f)  Intoxicating liquor or beer consumed inside the Amelita Mirolo Barn and surrounding premises or within the enclosed area of Northam Park designated by the city manager in accordance with a city permit issued by the city manager pursuant to C.O. §131.05. 
(2)  (a)  A person may have in the person's possession an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in C.O. § 549.01 if the person with supervision and control over the performance grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location. 
(b)  A person may have in the person's possession on an F-9 liquor permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the person is attending an orchestral performance and the holder of the F-9 permit grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the F-9 permit is issued. 
(D)  An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the following apply: 
(1)  The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with; and 
(2)  The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with division (D)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or, if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily accessible by the driver. 
(E)  This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of the fee imposed for the use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged contract, or the guest of the person, when all of the following apply: 
(1)  The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine. 
(2)  The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator of the limousine is located. 
(3)  The limousine is located on any street, highway or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. 
(4)  The occupants are not underage persons in violation of C.O. § 549.02 or other sections of C.O. ch. 549. 
(F)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing an open container, a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(Ord. No. 68-2013) 
§ 549.08 - HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION GENERALLY. 
(A)  No beer or other malt beverages shall be sold by or be permitted to be consumed on weekdays upon the premises of a Class C-1, C-2, D-1, D-2 or D-4 permit holder between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. 
No wine, prepared highballs, cocktails or other mixed drinks, as defined in the Liquor Control Act, shall be sold or be permitted to be consumed on weekdays upon the premises of a Class A-2, C-2, D-2 or D-4 permit holder between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. 
No intoxicating liquor or beer shall be sold or be permitted to be consumed on weekdays on the premises of a Class D-3a or D-5 permit holder between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m., and no intoxicating liquor shall be sold or be permitted to be consumed on weekdays on the premises of a Class D-3 permit holder between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. 
No intoxicating liquor or beer shall be sold or be permitted to be consumed on weekdays on the premises of a Class D-4 permit holder between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. 
(B)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of C.O. § 549.08 hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
§ 549.09 - UNOBSTRUCTED VIEW OF INTERIOR. 
(A)  The premises of a retail permit holder shall be arranged so as to provide a clear and unobstructed view of the interior after the legal hours of sale provided for in the Liquor Control Act of the State of Ohio. 
(B)  Whoever violates C.O. § 549.09 hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
§ 549.10 - DISORDERLY PERSONS ON PREMISES. 
(A)  No person owning or operating a restaurant, hotel, club, nightclub or other place where beer, wine or spirituous liquor are permitted to be sold under the authority of the Liquor Control Act within the city, or other person representing such owner or operator, shall permit or allow any riotous, noisy or disorderly person to frequent such restaurant, hotel, club, nightclub or other such place, or resort thereto, or allow any boisterous, noisy or disorderly conduct therein or thereabouts at any time. 
(B)  Whoever violates C.O. § 549.10 hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
§ 549.11 - CONSUMPTION IN PARKS. 
(A)  No person shall consume or possess with intent to consume, any intoxicating liquor or beer in a city park. 
(B)  This section does not apply to intoxicating liquor or beer consumed or possessed in accordance with a city permit issued by the city manager pursuant to C.O. § 131.05. 
(C)  Whoever violates C.O. § 549.11 hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(Ord. No. 25-2011, 5-9-2011) 
§ 549.99 - PENALTIES. 
(A)  Misdemeanor penalties must be imposed upon a person under twenty-one (21) years of age who presents a false, fictitious or altered I.D. card, false or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or legitimate, but altered driver's license when purchasing intoxicating liquor or beer. 
(B)  The following penalties shall be imposed upon any person in violation of C.O. § 549.02(E): 
(1)  A mandatory fine of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first offense. 
(2)  A mandatory fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and a possible license suspension up to sixty (60) days for a second offense. 
(3)  A mandatory fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and a mandatory ninety-day suspension, with community service for the third and subsequent offenses. 
CHAPTER 551. - DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY HELD BY THE CITY 

§ 551.01 - DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY HELD BY THE UPPER ARLINGTON POLICE DIVISION. 
(A)  Property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen or lawfully seized, or forfeited and that is in the custody of the police division shall be safely kept pending the time it is no longer needed as evidence, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this chapter, ORC § 2981.12 and the Property Management Procedure Manual of the police division. 
(B)  The police division shall make a reasonable effort as set forth under C.O. § 551.06 and ORC § 2981.04(D) to locate the persons entitled to possession of property in its custody, and to notify them when and where it may be claimed. If after a period of ninety (90) days the police division is unable to identify or locate the owner of property in its custody; or, once notified, the owner fails to claim such property within seven (7) days that property shall be considered unclaimed property and disposed of pursuant to this chapter. If the property described in section (A) is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, the police department shall not release it to the owner prior to receiving a court order mandating its return. This shall not apply to weapons voluntarily turned over to the police for safekeeping and are not related to a criminal or serious traffic matter. 
(C)  Unclaimed property in the custody of the Upper Arlington Police Division that was found and placed into the custody of the police division by a person not employed by the City of Upper Arlington may be returned to the finder after a period of ninety (90) days provided: 
(1)  The property is not a weapon, firearm or dangerous ordnance. 
(2)  The property is not drugs, drug paraphernalia, obscene material, beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol or any other dangerous or illegal material. 
(3)  The owner of the found property is unknown, cannot be located or fails to claim the property within ninety (90) days after a reasonable attempt to locate the owner is made by the police division. 
(4)  The person who found the property and turned it over to the police division signs an affidavit which shall include a hold harmless agreement that they are the finder of the property in question and that they did not obtain nor do the police have reason to believe that they obtained this property illegally, and that they have fully and truthfully informed the police division of all the circumstances surrounding the finding of this property. 
(Ord. No. 49-2010; Ord. No. 49-2018 , § 3, 6-25-2018) 
§ 551.02 - LOSS OF RIGHT TO PROPERTY. 
(A)  A person loses any right they may have to possession of property: 
(1)  That was the subject or was used in a conspiracy or attempt to commit, or in the commission of, an offense other than a traffic offense, and such person is a conspirator, accomplice or offender with respect to the offense. 
(2)  When a court determines that the property should be forfeited because when, in light of the nature of the property or the circumstances of such person, it is unlawful for him to acquire or possess it. 
§ 551.03 - DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED AND FORFEITED PROPERTY. 
(A)  Unclaimed and forfeited property in the custody of the police division, other than contraband that is subject to the provisions of ORC ch. 2981, other than property forfeited under ORC § 2925.42, other than property that has been lawfully seized in relation to a violation of ORC § 2923.32, other than a vehicle that is criminally forfeited under an order issued under ORC § 4503.233 or 4503.234 and that is to be disposed of under ORC § 4503.234, shall be disposed of on application to and order of any court of record that has territorial jurisdiction within the municipality. This shall be accomplished within a reasonable time after the property is no longer needed for evidence and/or any other reason the police may need to hold the property, and will be done, as follows: 
(1)  Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to ORC § 3719.11 or shall be placed in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable Federal law. 
(2)  Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be given to the police division for that purpose. Firearms suitable as museum pieces or collector's items may be donated for public display to a museum open to the general public provided there is a written agreement that the firearm or dangerous ordnance shall not to be sold. Other firearms and dangerous ordnance not suitable to police use shall be destroyed, or sent to the bureau of criminal identification and investigation for destruction, pursuant to ORC § 2981.12. 
(3)  Obscene materials shall be destroyed. 
(4)  Vehicles used in violation of ORC § 2925.13(A) or C.O. § 551.02 shall be seized and forfeited to the city as set forth in C.O. § 551.05(A)(1) and ORC § 2981.12(6). Such forfeiture shall not apply to common carriers or innocent owners, or shall it affect the rights of a holder of a valid lien. 
(5)  (a)  Money that is not part of any federal and/or state program for asset forfeiture, but is forfeited to the division of police because of its relationship as profits and/or proceeds of any criminal activity, shall be released to the law enforcement fund upon court order. Such money will be tracked separately from other federal and state funds. Forfeited money will be used according to ORC § 2981.13(B) and the police division's internal control policy. 
(b)  Money, which is found unclaimed or forfeited and not associated with any criminal activity, shall be released upon court order to the finance department for deposit into the general fund of the city. 
(6)  Vehicle and vehicle parts forfeited under ORC § 4549.61 to § 4549.63 may be given to the police division for use in the performance of its duties. Such parts may be incorporated into any other official city vehicle. Parts that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives thereof may be sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the director of public safety. Parts from which a vehicle identification number or derivative thereof has been removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed and that are not suitable for police work or incorporation into an official city vehicle shall be destroyed and/or sold as junk or scrap. 
(7)  Beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol seized from a person who is not a holder of a permit issued under ORC chs. 4301 and 4303; or is an offender, and forfeited to the state under ORC § 4301.45 or § 4301.53, shall be sold by the division of liquor control, if the division determines that the beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, is fit for sale, the proceeds of the sale shall be paid into the state treasury. Any such beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol that the division determined to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed. 
(8)  Other unclaimed or forfeited property may be sold at public auction or disposed of as the court considers proper in the circumstances or turned over to the city and converted to city ownership, pursuant to the ORC § 2981.12 provisions for property disposal. 
(9)  (a)  Computers, computer networks, computer systems and computer software, if suitable for police work, may be given to the police for that purpose. Other computers, computer networks, computer systems and computer software shall be disposed of pursuant to C.O. § 551.03(A)(8). Computer software and its application by the city will be governed by any copyright and/or license agreement set forth for the material. Software not properly licensed and/or owned by the city will be deleted or destroyed. 
(b)  As used in this section, computer, computer networks and computer systems have the same meaning as in ORC § 2913.01. 
(Ord. No. 49-2010; Ord. No. 49-2018 , § 4, 6-25-2018) 
§ 551.04 - METHOD OF DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY. 
(A)  The police division may dispose of certain property in its possession in accordance with its own policy and procedures provided that: 
(1)  The property is of little or no monetary value and would normally be considered as trash or rubbish. 
(2)  The property is a small sample or specimen collected as evidence and is no longer needed as evidence. 
(3)  The property is a firearm, dangerous ordnance, explosive or incendiary device, volatile fluid, chemical agent, biological or nuclear material or any other unsafe material that by its nature threatens the public safety and needs to be destroyed or disposed of in order to provide for the safety of the public or public safety officials or is required to be destroyed by court order. 
(Ord. No. 49-2018 , § 5, 6-25-2018) 
§ 551.05 - DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS. 
(A)  The proceeds from property disposed of pursuant to C.O. § 551.03 (A)(2), (A)(4), (A)(6), (A)(8), (A)(9) and C.O. § 551.07 shall be disbursed, as follows: 
(1)  Vehicles and other property obtained as the result of any criminal action may be given to the division of police for use in the performance of its duties. Such vehicles and other property not suitable for police use as determined by the chief of police, will be sold at auction pursuant to C.O. § 551.05(B) below. 
(B)  Funds from vehicles and other property disposed of at auction will be disbursed, as follows: 
(1)  Property in the possession of the law enforcement agency in relation to a delinquent child proceeding in juvenile court, ten percent (10%) of the proceeds from the property disposed of pursuant to this section shall be applied to one (1) or more alcohol and drug addiction treatment programs that are certified by the department of alcohol and drug addictions services under ORC § 3793.06 and that are specified by the court in its order issued under C.O. § 551.03. A juvenile court shall not specify an alcohol or drug addiction treatment program in the order unless the program is a certified alcohol and drug addiction treatment program and except as provided in this section, unless the program is located in the county in which the court that issues the order is located or in a contiguous county. If no certified alcohol and drug addiction program is located in any of these counties, the juvenile court may specify in the order a certified alcohol and drug addiction treatment program located anywhere within the State. The remaining ninety percent (90%) of the proceeds shall be applied as provided in C.O. §§ 551.05(B)(2) and (B)(3). 
If the property was in the possession of the law enforcement agency other than in relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court, all of the proceeds from property disposed of pursuant to this section shall be applied as provided in C.O. §§ 551.05(B)(2) and (B)(3). 
(2)  Up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the net proceeds may, at the City Manager's discretion, be used for the funding of a citizens reward program referred to as Crime Stoppers, Inc., pursuant to C.O. § 223.14(B). 
(3)  Except as provided in C.O. § 511.03 and after compliance with C.O. §§ 551.05(B)(1) and (B)(2), all additional proceeds shall be placed in the city's general fund. 
(C)  This ordinance does not apply to the collection, storage or disposal of abandoned junk motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 49-2010) 
§ 551.06 - NOTIFICATION OF OWNER OF HELD PROPERTY. 
(A)  For the purpose of this ordinance, a reasonable effort by the police division to locate the persons entitled to possession of property within the division's custody may include one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  A telephone call to the last known phone number of the suspected owner of the property whereby actual voice contact with the person entitled to the property was made, or an electronic communication sent to a known email address of the suspected owner. If no phone service is available, no contact was gained and/or the ability to only leave a voice message with an answering machine or service was possible, or, in the case of an electronic communication, the communication was returned as undeliverable, then (A)(2) below will be required. 
(2)  A certified letter mailed to the last known address of the suspected owner of the property with return receipt requested. 
(3)  A brief investigation or inquiry by employees of the police division for the purpose of locating or identifying the owner of the property. 
(B)  With respect to forfeited property, reasonable diligent inquiries, shall be made by the police division to locate the persons with a property interest. 
(Ord. No. 49-2010; Ord. No. 49-2018 , § 6, 6-25-2018) 
§ 551.07 - SALE OF HELD PROPERTY. 
(A)  Property, other than a firearm or dangerous ordnance, unclaimed for the period of ninety (90) days, shall be sold by the chief of police of the city or licensed auctioneer at public auction, after giving due notice thereof by advertisement, published once a week for three (3) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The proceeds shall be disbursed according to C.O. § 551.05. 
(Ord. No. 49-2018 , § 7, 6-25-2018) 
§ 551.08 - OTHER PROPERTY-STORAGE. 
(A)  Other stolen or other property, disposal of which is not provided in the preceding sections, recovered by members of the police force or other city employees, shall be deposited with the police division. Each such article shall be entered in a property receipt book kept for that purpose, with the name of the owner, if ascertained, the person from whom taken, the place where found, with general circumstances, the date of its receipt, and the name of the officer receiving it. 
(B)  A copy of the property receipt shall be given to the arrested party from whom taken, and in case it is not claimed by some person within ninety (90) days after arrest and seizure it shall be returned to the person from whom taken, with reasonable proof of ownership (which could include, but not be limited to: store receipts, canceled checks, and/or a charge card statement), and to no other person, either attorney, agent, factor or clerk, except by special order of the city manager. Should the property be unclaimed and/or reasonable proof of ownership is not substantiated after ninety (90) days notice to provide for its release, the property may be disposed of according to C.O. § 551.07. 
§ 551.09 - OTHER PROPERTY-DISPOSAL. 
(A)  If, within ninety (90) days, the money or property recovered under C.O. § 551.08 is claimed by any other person, it shall be retained by the custodian thereof until after the discharge or conviction of the person from whom it was taken and so long as it is required as evidence in any case in court. If such claimant establishes to the satisfaction of the court that he/she is the rightful owner, the money or property shall be restored to him/her, otherwise it shall be returned to the accused person according to C.O. § 551.08(B), after all liens and claims in favor of the city have first been discharged and satisfied. 
§ 551.10 - EXPENSES OF STORAGE AND SALE, NOTICE. 
(A)  Upon the sale of any unclaimed or impounded property as provided in this chapter, if any such unclaimed or impounded property was ordered removed to a place of storage or stored, or both, any expenses or charges for such removal or storage, or both, and costs of sale, provided the same are approved by the city manager shall first be paid from the proceeds of such sale. Notice shall be given by registered mail, thirty (30) days before the date of such sale, to the owner and mortgagee or other lien holder, at their last known address. 
§ 551.11 - COLLECTION, STORAGE, DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES-PUBLIC PROPERTY. 
(A)  When a vehicle has been impounded pursuant to C.O. § 371.13, the chief of police shall immediately cause a search to be made of the records of the bureau of motor vehicles to ascertain the owner and any lien holder of a motor vehicle ordered into storage; and, if known, shall send notice to the owner or lien holder at his last known address by certified mail with return receipt requested, that the motor vehicle will be declared a nuisance and disposed of if not claimed within ten (10) days of the date of mailing of the notice. The owner or lien holder of the motor vehicle may reclaim it upon payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal and storage, and presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of title to the motor vehicle. 
(B)  If the owner or lien holder makes no claim to the motor vehicle within ten (10) days of the date of mailing of the notice, and if the vehicle is to be disposed of at public auction as provided in C.O. § 551.14, the vehicle will be disposed of and the procedures established herein shall apply. 
§ 551.12 - COLLECTION, STORAGE, DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES-PRIVATE PROPERTY. 
(A)  The owner of a motor vehicle removed pursuant to C.O. § 371.15, may reclaim it upon payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal in an amount not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) and storage in an amount not to exceed eight dollars ($8.00) per twenty-four-hour period, and upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of title to the motor vehicle. If the motor vehicle remains unclaimed by the owner for thirty (30) days, the procedures established by C.O. § 551.13 shall apply. 
§ 551.13 - IMPOUNDED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES-DISPOSAL. 
(A)  Upon the failure of the owners to reclaim vehicles described in C.O. §§ 551.11 and 551.12, the chief of police shall file with the clerk of courts of the county in which the place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with the requirements of these sections: 
(1)  Upon presentation of the affidavit, the clerk of courts shall without charge issue a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, to the chief of police. 
(2)  If the vehicle is to be disposed of to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility as provided in ORC § 4513.62 or § 4513.63, the chief of police shall execute in triplicate an affidavit as prescribed by the registrar of motor vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and the manner in which it was disposed of, and that all requirements of this section have been complied with. The chief of police shall retain the original of the affidavit for his records, and shall furnish two (2) copies to the owner of the motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of the affidavit by the motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility, the clerk of courts shall issue to such owner a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances. 
Whenever the motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility receives an affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this section, such owner shall not be required to obtain an Ohio certificate of title to the motor vehicle in his own name, if, within ten (10) days of the receipt of the affidavit, the vehicle is dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the clerk of courts. 
§ 551.14 - UNCLAIMED VEHICLES-DISPOSAL. 
(A)  Unclaimed motor vehicles ordered into storage and held under this chapter, shall be disposed of at the order of the chief of police to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or scrap metal processing facility as defined in ORC § 4737.05, or to any other facility owned by or under contract with the city, for the disposal of such motor vehicles, or shall be sold by the chief of police, or licensed auctioneer at public auction, after giving notice thereof by advertisement, published once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Any monies accruing from the disposition of an unclaimed motor vehicle that are in excess of the expenses resulting from the removal and storage of the vehicle shall be credited to the city's general fund. 
(B)  For those unclaimed motor vehicles that do not meet the definition of abandoned junk motor vehicles, they shall be disposed of pursuant to ORC § 2981.12 or U.A.C.O. Chapter 551. 
(Ord. No. 49-2010) 
§ 551.15 - JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES-DISPOSAL. 
(A)  The chief of police shall order any junk motor vehicle found in violation of C.O. §§ 537.09, 537.10 and 537.11, to be photographed by a law enforcement officer. The officer shall record the make of motor vehicle, the serial number when available, and shall also detail the damage or missing equipment to substantiate the value of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less. The chief of police shall thereupon immediately dispose of the junk motor vehicle to a junk yard or scrap metal processing facility as defined in ORC § 4737.05, or to any other facility owned by or under contract with the city for the disposal of such motor vehicles. The records and photographs relating to the junk motor vehicle shall be retained by the chief of police after the disposition of such vehicle for a period of at least two (2) years. Such officer shall execute, in quadruplicate, an affidavit as prescribed by the registrar of motor vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and the manner in which it was disposed of, and that all requirements of this section have been complied with and he shall sign and file the same with the Clerk of Courts of Franklin County. Any monies arising from the disposal of a junk motor vehicle shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 49-2010) 
CHAPTER 552. - INCARCERATION FEES 

§ 552.01 - REIMBURSEMENT. 
Any person who is convicted of an offense, other than a minor misdemeanor, and sentenced to confinement in the Franklin County Jail or the City Workhouse, may be required to reimburse the City of Upper Arlington for its expenses incurred by reason of the offenders' confinement, including, but not limited to, the expenses relating to the provision of food, clothing and shelter. Such reimbursement shall include expenses for pre-conviction confinement when credit for such confinement is credited against the term of imprisonment (in accordance with ORC §§ 307.93, 341.14, 341.18, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56, 2929.22.3 and 2947.19). 
§ 552.02 - AMOUNT OF REIMBURSEMENT. 
The amount of the reimbursement required shall be determined by the court after a hearing held pursuant to ORC § 2929.15. The amount of reimbursement ordered by the court shall not exceed the actual costs of the confinement for each day of confinement. 
The court shall consider all factors that affect the offenders financial ability to make reimbursement to the city. Reimbursement may be made either in a lump sum or under a payment plan. 
When the municipal court or mayor's court makes a reimbursement determination pursuant to ORC § 2929.15, a judgment entry and order of reimbursement for expenses of confinement shall be filed and entered that sets forth the total amount of reimbursement due to the city, and the reimbursement schedules and methods. 
§ 552.03 - EXCEPTIONS. 
This ordinance shall not apply to offenders that the court finds to be indigent. 
§ 552.04 - DEPOSITORY. 
Funds that are reimbursed to the city pursuant to this ordinance shall be paid into the general fund of the city treasury. 
§ 552.05 - FAILURE TO PAY. 
If an offender does not pay to the city the reimbursement ordered by the court pursuant to this chapter, the city attorney may collect that claim or institute an appropriate civil action in the name of the city in the Franklin County Common Pleas Court to recover from the convict the reimbursement for the expenses of confinement as determined by the court. If an action is filed, it shall be brought not later than one (1) year after the person is released from incarceration. If it is deemed in the best interests of the city, the city attorney is authorized to compromise and settle such claim in an amount less than the total reimbursement due to the city. 
Part 7 - BUSINESS REGULATION CODE 
CHAPTER 711. - ELECTRICIANS 

§ 711.01 - REGISTRATION FEE, EXPIRATION. 
No person shall engage in the business of installing, maintaining, or repairing electric wiring for light, heat or power within the city unless such person has been registered for such work by this city. At the time of registering, the registrant shall indicate the name of the company for whom he will be applying for permits. Such registration shall be issued provided the applicant possesses a valid and unexpired License as defined in ORC § 4740.01(A) and (D) issued by the State of Ohio. The fee for this registration shall be the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02. Such registration shall expire on the 31st of December next ensuing after the date thereof. 
§ 711.02 - REQUIREMENT OF INSURANCE. 
A person desiring to engage in the business of installing, maintaining, or repairing electric wiring for light, heat or power within the city shall maintain contractor's liability insurance, including without limitation, completed operations coverage, in an amount providing for the payment of up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for one (1) person injured, and up to three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injury to more than one (1) person in one (1) accident, resulting from doing the work authorized by the registration and up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage in the course of doing the work authorized by the registration. The city shall be included as an additional insured. The insurance shall be issued by an insurance company duly authorized to do business and issue policies of insurance in the State of Ohio. The applicant shall provide proof of this insurance acceptable to the director. 
(Ord. No. 58-2016 , § 2, 11-7-2016) 
§ 711.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
CHAPTER 717. - PLUMBERS 

§ 717.01 - REGISTRATION REQUIRED. 
No person shall hereafter follow, engage in or work at the trade or occupation of plumbing in the city, either as a master plumber or journeyman plumber, until he, or the person by whom he is employed shall have first secured a registration in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
§ 717.02 - REGISTRATION FEE, EXPIRATION. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or work at the trade of plumber in the city, either as master or journeyman plumber, unless such person has obtained a plumbing registration from the community development department. Such registration shall be issued provided the applicant possesses a valid and unexpired license as defined in ORC § 4740.01(A) and (E) issued by the State of Ohio. A master plumber's registration shall not be issued until the provisions of C.O. § 717.03 have been complied with. Such registration shall expire on the 31st day of December next ensuing after the date thereof. 
The fees shall be the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 717.03 - REQUIREMENT OF BOND FOR MASTER PLUMBER. 
A master plumber desiring to engage in the plumbing trade in this city shall furnish, prior to the issuance of the registration hereinabove provided for, a bond executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Ohio in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned to reimburse the City of Upper Arlington for all damage caused by any act or omission of said plumber, his agents or employees, to any property which the city may own or for which it may be responsible, and to hold said city harmless from all claims for damages on account of the negligence or misfeasance of said plumber, his agents or employees, and from all cost or expense growing out of the defense of such claims. Said bond is to be in force from the date of its acceptance and the issuance of registration by the community development department, to the end of the year covered by said registration, and must be renewed annually on the re-issuance of the registration. The bond shall be on a form prescribed by the director. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 58-2016 , § 3, 11-7-2016) 
§ 717.04 - REQUIREMENT OF INSURANCE. 
A person desiring to engage in the business of installing, maintaining, or repairing electric wiring for light, heat or power within the city shall maintain contractor's liability insurance, including without limitation, completed operations coverage, in an amount providing for the payment of up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for one (1) person injured, and up to three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injury to more than one (1) person in one (1) accident, resulting from doing the work authorized by the registration and up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage in the course of doing the work authorized by the registration. The city shall be included as an additional insured. The insurance shall be issued by an insurance company duly authorized to do business and issue policies of insurance in the State of Ohio. The applicant shall provide proof of this insurance acceptable to the director. 
(Ord. No. 58-2016 , § 4, 11-7-2016) 
§ 717.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
CHAPTER 723. - SEWER CONTRACTORS 

§ 723.01 - REGISTRATION REQUIRED: BOND AND FEE. 
Any person, before constructing, repairing or laying any private sanitary sewer line which connects with any public sanitary sewer line owned by the city, shall apply for a registration to the community development department, which application shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with good and sufficient surety to the satisfaction of the community development department, that the registrant shall indemnify, save, defend and hold harmless the city from and against all claims, actions and suits, whether groundless or otherwise, and from and against all liability, losses, damages, costs, charges, counsel fees and other expenses of every nature and character arising from or growing out of the construction, repairing or laying of the same. The bond shall be on a form prescribed by the director. 
The community development department shall charge a registration fee the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02 and the registration shall be valid until the first (1st) day of January of the year following the year of issuance unless canceled for cause or the failure to maintain good and sufficient bond. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 58-2016 , § 5, 11-7-2016) 
§ 723.02 - ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION. 
The community development department shall not issue any registration until satisfied that applicant is ready, able and willing to perform such work in a good and workman-like manner and in accordance with the usual and customary standards of sewer construction; and the community development department shall cancel such registration if registrant fails to perform such work in a good and workman-like manner and in accordance with the usual and customary standards of sewer construction or if registrant fails to maintain good and sufficient bond. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 723.03 - REQUIREMENT OF INSURANCE. 
A person desiring to engage in the business of constructing, repairing or laying any private sanitary sewer line which connects with any public sanitary sewer line within the city shall maintain contractor's liability insurance, including without limitation, completed operations coverage, in an amount providing for the payment of up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for one (1) person injured, and up to three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injury to more than one (1) person in one (1) accident, resulting from doing the work authorized by the registration and up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage in the course of doing the work authorized by the registration. The city shall be included as an additional insured. The insurance shall be issued by an insurance company duly authorized to do business and issue policies of insurance in the State of Ohio. The applicant shall provide proof of this insurance acceptable to the director. 
(Ord. No. 58-2016 , § 6, 11-7-2016) 
§ 723.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
CHAPTER 729. - SIDEWALK AND DRIVEWAY CONTRACTORS 

§ 729.01 - REGISTRATION REQUIRED; FEE. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of constructing or repairing sidewalks or driveways within the limits of any public street in the city, unless such person shall have registered with the community development department and shall have paid the annual fee the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02 for such registration. 
Repair work shall include resurfacing or oiling of blacktop. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 729.02 - APPLICATION; BOND. 
Such applicant for registration shall satisfy the city manager as to his ability to properly and safely install and repair such sidewalks and driveways. Each application shall be accompanied by a bond in the in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with good and sufficient surety to the satisfaction of the city manager, conditioned that such person will pay any and all damages caused by or growing out of such construction or repair work to any property of the city and shall indemnify and save harmless the city from all liability, loss, damages and expenses of every nature growing out of such construction or repair work. The bond shall be on a form prescribed by the director. 
(Ord. No. 58-2016 , § 7, 11-7-2016) 
§ 729.03 - SUSPENSION OF REGISTRATION. 
Registration of any registrant may be suspended or canceled by the city manager for any violation of the ordinances of this city governing such construction or repairs, or for fraud or inferior workmanship, or for failure to maintain a good and sufficient bond. 
§ 729.04 - REQUIREMENT OF INSURANCE. 
A person desiring to engage in the business of installing, maintaining, or repairing sidewalks and driveways within the city shall maintain contractor's liability insurance, including without limitation, completed operations coverage, in an amount providing for the payment of up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for one (1) person injured, and up to three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injury to more than one (1) person in one (1) accident, resulting from doing the work authorized by the registration and up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage in the course of doing the work authorized by the registration. The city shall be included as an additional insured. The insurance shall be issued by an insurance company duly authorized to do business and issue policies of insurance in the State of Ohio. The applicant shall provide proof of this insurance acceptable to the director. 
(Ord. No. 58-2016 , § 8, 11-7-2016) 
§ 729.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
CHAPTER 730. - TENT, CANOPY, AND MEMBRANE STRUCTURE RENTALS AND CONSTRUCTION 

§ 730.01 - REGISTRATION REQUIRED; FEE. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of renting or constructing tents, canopies, or membrane structures within the city unless such person has registered with the city, in a manner determined by the city manager or designee, and paid the annual fee specified in C.O. ch. 401 for such registration. 
(Ord. No. 63-2016 , § 6, 11-28-2016) 
§ 730.02 - FIRE CODE PERMIT REQUIRED. 
Annual registration with the city under C.O. § 730.01 shall not absolve a person engaged in the business of renting or constructing tents, canopies, or membrane structures within the city from securing the permits required by C.O. § 1701.02. 
§ 730.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates C.O. § 730.01 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
CHAPTER 735. - HOUSE MOVERS 

§ 735.01 - LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; BOND. 
No person, except a licensed house mover, shall move any building over, upon or across any street or alley or from one location to another within the limits of this city. Every person desiring to engage in such business shall annually obtain a license therefor from the city manager, for which a fee, paid in accordance with the provisions of C.O. § 401.02, shall be charged, which license shall be in effect until the end of the calendar year on which issued, unless revoked for cause. No such license shall be issued until the party applying therefor shall have given bond in the penal sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), with good and sufficient sureties to the approval of the city manager, conditioned that such party will pay all damages to the property of the city or of other persons, caused by or in any way growing out of, the moving of any building in this city, or the occupancy of any street or alley by such building or the equipment used in connection with such operations, and will pay all damages for injury to or death of any person or persons arising from such moving or occupancy, will indemnify and save harmless this city from all liability, loss, damages and expenses of every nature growing out of such moving or occupancy, and will in all respects strictly comply with the conditions of such license and the conditions of any permit which may be issued as hereinafter provided. The bond shall be on a form prescribed by the director. 
Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the moving of any building, the width of which is not more than eight (8) feet and which is not more than ninety-nine (99) square feet in floor area. 
Each such license issued by the city manager shall be revoked by him for fraudulent use thereof or continued violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 58-2016 , § 9, 11-7-2016) 
§ 735.02 - MOVING PERMIT AND FEES. 
No person shall move any building or structure without applying for and obtaining a permit from the city manager for such purpose and shall at the time such permit is issued, pay a fee in accordance with the provisions of C.O. § 401.02, and shall pay an additional fee in accordance with the provisions of C.O. § 401.02 for each day or portion thereof, beyond the first day, during which such building or structure occupies a public street or way in this city. 
§ 735.03 - ROUTE TO BE FOLLOWED. 
The city manager shall, when any building or structure is proposed to be moved over or along any street or public way in the city, designate the streets or other public places to be used in the moving of such building or structure, together with the time which such building or structure may remain upon the street or other public place, and it shall be unlawful for any person to take a different route than the one designated in such permit, or to allow a building or structure to remain in the streets or public places a longer time than so designated. 
§ 735.04 - CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS. 
No permit shall be granted for the moving of any building or structure to a location where it would be in violation of any of the ordinances of the city relating to the erection, location or occupancy of buildings or structures. 
§ 735.05 - WARNING LIGHTS AT NIGHT. 
No building or structure shall be permitted to be in any street or alley, or part thereof, from thirty (30) minutes before sunset to thirty (30) minutes after sunrise, unless the licensee moving such building shall adequately warn all persons using such street or alley of the obstruction so existing in such highway by the proper placing of an adequate number of red lights in such position as will reasonably serve such purpose. 
§ 735.06 - REQUIREMENT OF INSURANCE. 
A person desiring to engage in the business of moving any building over, upon or across any street or alley or from one location to another within the city shall maintain contractor's liability insurance, including without limitation, completed operations coverage, in an amount providing for the payment of up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for one (1) person injured, and up to three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injury to more than one (1) person in one (1) accident, resulting from doing the work authorized by the registration and up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage in the course of doing the work authorized by the registration. The city shall be included as an additional insured. The insurance shall be issued by an insurance company duly authorized to do business and issue policies of insurance in the State of Ohio. The applicant shall provide proof of this insurance acceptable to the director. 
(Ord. No. 58-2016 , § 10, 11-7-2016) 
§ 735.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each and every day's violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
CHAPTER 741. - HEATING, VENTILATING, AIR-CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION CONTRACTORS 

§ 741.01 - REGISTRATION FEE, EXPIRATION. 
(A)  There shall be four (4) separate registrations: warm-air heating, steam and hot-water heating, ventilating and air-conditioning and refrigeration. A contractor performing any said types of work shall be required to have a registration and pay the fee for such type. Ventilating systems may be installed by either a warm-air or air-conditioning contractor. Conversion burners may be installed by either a warm-air or steam or hot-water contractor, registered under this section. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install, erect, alter, repair, reset or replace as contractor or as person in charge of such operation, any warm-air, steam or hot-water heating plant, plants or parts thereof, or winter or summer air-conditioning or ventilating system, refrigeration and/or cooling systems, or parts thereof as defined in this chapter, within the corporate limits of the city, unless such person is the holder of a registration then in force, issued by this city, giving such person the right to perform or supervise such work, or unless such person has then in his employ, a holder of such registration then in force, charged with supervising such work. Such registration shall be issued provided the applicant possesses a valid and unexpired license as defined in ORC § 4740.01(A), (B) and (C) issued by the State of Ohio. The occupying owner of a dwelling unit may, with the assistance of any member of his immediate family, personally carry on in such unit any work governed by this chapter without such registration(s), provided that such owner shall take out a permit therefore. 
§ 741.02 - FEES FOR REGISTRATION AND RENEWAL. 
Any applicant having complied with the provisions of C.O. § 741.01 shall be issued necessary registrations to supervise and perform any installations and work in the branch or branches of the industry for which such applicant shall have met the requirements of C.O. § 741.01 upon payment of a fee the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02, for each registration required, to the community development department. 
Such registrations shall expire on the thirty-first (31st) day of December next ensuing after the date thereof. 
Any applicant who shall not have renewed his registration within a period of one (1) year after the expiration date thereof shall be issued a new registration only after full compliance with the provision of C.O. § 741.01. The registration shall state whether it is for warm-air heating, ventilation and air-conditioning or steam and hot-water heating. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 741.03 - REQUIREMENT OF INSURANCE. 
A person desiring to install, erect, alter, repair, reset or replace as contractor or as person in charge of such operation, any warm-air, steam or hot-water heating plant, plants or parts thereof, or winter or summer air-conditioning or ventilating system, refrigeration and/or cooling systems within the city shall maintain contractor's liability insurance, including without limitation, completed operations coverage, in an amount providing for the payment of up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for one (1) person injured, and up to three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injury to more than one (1) person in one (1) accident, resulting from doing the work authorized by the registration and up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage in the course of doing the work authorized by the registration. The city shall be included as an additional insured. The insurance shall be issued by an insurance company duly authorized to do business and issue policies of insurance in the State of Ohio. The applicant shall provide proof of this insurance acceptable to the director. 
(Ord. No. 58-2016 , § 11, 11-7-2016) 
§ 741.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
CHAPTER 745. - DEMOLITION CONTRACTORS 

§ 745.01 - REGISTRATION REQUIRED; FEE. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of demolition of buildings and/or structures in the city unless said person shall have registered with the community development department for said work by this city. 
At the time of registering, the registrant shall indicate the name of the company for whom he will be applying for permits. The fee for this registration shall be the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02. Such registration shall expire on the 31 st of December next ensuing after the date thereof. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 745.02 - BOND. 
A demolition contractor desiring to engage in the business of demolition of buildings and/or structures in the city shall furnish, prior to the issuance of the registration hereinabove provided for, a license bond executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Ohio in the penal sum of not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned to reimburse the City of Upper Arlington for all damage caused by any act or omission of said demolition contractor, his agents or employees, to any property which the city may own or for which it may be responsible, and to hold said city harmless from all claims for damages on account of the negligence or misfeasance of said demolition contractor, his agents or employees, and from all cost or expense growing out of the defense of such claims. Said license bond is to be in force from the date of its acceptance and the issuance of registration by the community development department, to the end of the year covered by said registration, and must be renewed annually on the re-issuance of the registration. The bond shall be on a form prescribed by the director. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 58-2016 , § 12, 11-7-2016) 
§ 745.03 - INSURANCE. 
A demolition contractor desiring to engage in the business of demolition of buildings and/or structures in the city shall maintain contractor's liability insurance, including without limitation, completed operations coverage, in an amount providing for the payment of up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for one (1) person injured, and up to three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injury to more than one (1) person in one (1) accident, resulting from doing the work authorized by the registration and up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage in the course of doing the work authorized by the registration. The city shall be included as an additional insured. The insurance shall be issued by an insurance company duly authorized to do business and issue policies of insurance in the State of Ohio. The applicant shall provide proof of this insurance acceptable to the director. 
(Ord. No. 58-2016 , § 13, 11-7-2016) 
§ 745.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor, subject to a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
CHAPTER 747. - GENERAL CONTRACTORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Enacted through Passage of Ordinance No. 149-2002. 

§ 747.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall be defined as follows: 
    General contractor: means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, or other entity which builds, constructs, remodels, alters, or otherwise improves any land or building or portion thereof and coordinates other contractors or subcontractors working on the same project. 
    Owner/Resident: means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, or other entity that is listed as the owner of record with the Franklin County Auditor. 
§ 747.02 - REGISTRATION REQUIRED. 
(A)  No person or entity shall engage in the business of building, constructing, remodeling, alteration of or otherwise improving any land or building or portion thereof in the city unless the person or entity has a valid general contractor registration certificate issued by the city. 
(B)  No person shall permit another person or entity to act as a general contractor in the city unless the person or entity has a valid general contractor registration certificate issued by the city. 
(C)  No person or entity shall act as or claim to be a general contractor in the city, unless that person or entity has a valid general contractor registration certificate issued by the city. 
(D)  No owner/resident shall engage in any work as a general contractor on their property that requires a building permit, unless such owner/resident currently resides at the property or intends to reside at the property upon completion of the project and has submitted a signed owners certificate provided by the community development department stating that: 
(1)  They are the owner/resident of the property; 
(2)  They currently reside at the property or intend to reside at the property upon completion of the project; 
(3)  They will be performing the permitted work; and 
(4)  They will comply with all codes and ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 747.03 - REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  A general contractor seeking to register shall submit the following to the community development department: 
(1)  A completed application for registration on a form prescribed by the chief building official; 
(2)  The contractor's certificate of liability insurance demonstrating a minimum combined bodily injury and property damage coverage in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) naming the City of Upper Arlington as the certificate holder. Liability insurance coverage shall be maintained in full force throughout the term of the registration. A copy of any policy changes including renewals shall be forwarded to the building division at least twenty (20) days prior to such changes or renewals taking effect; 
(3)  A license bond executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Ohio in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), which bond shall provide that the licensee shall fully indemnify and hold harmless the City of Upper Arlington for all claims for damages on account of the negligence, misfeasance, or failure of such licensee to comply with the terms of any ordinance of the city and with the terms and laws of the State of Ohio. The bond shall be on a form prescribed by the director. Such bond shall be in force throughout the term of the registration and shall be renewed annually prior to renewal of such license; and 
(4)  The registration fee established by city council and set forth in C.O. § 401.02, community development department-master list of fees. 
(B)  Upon submission of the items required above, the chief building official or his designee shall issue a registration certificate. Such registration shall expire on the 31 st of December next ensuing after the date issued. 
(C)  The chief building official may deny an application for registration if: 
(1)  The general contractor fails to submit any of the items required above; 
(2)  The general contractor fails to comply with the applicable requirements of C.O. ch. 13, the State of Ohio building codes, or the city's construction specifications; or 
The general contractor provides false information for permit or registration application; or the general contractor has any outstanding violations of any other ordinances in the City of Upper Arlington; or 
(3)  The general contractor has had a prior registration certificate revoked within the past three (3) years. 
(D)  An owner/resident may engage in work as a general contractor on their own property without obtaining a general contractor registration certificate if: 
(1)  They currently reside at the property or intend to reside at the property upon completion of the project; and 
(2)  They fully comply with the requirements of C.O. § 747.02(D). 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 58-2016 , § 14, 11-7-2016) 
§ 747.04 - ASSIGNMENT, TRANSFER, USE BY THIRD PERSONS. 
A registered general contractor shall not assign, transfer or allow any other person to use its registration certificate for any purpose. 
§ 747.05 - SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION. 
(A)  The chief building official may immediately suspend or revoke a registration certificate or deny renewal of a registration certificate if: 
(1)  The general contractor fails to comply with the requirements of C.O. ch. 13, the State of Ohio building codes, or the city's construction specifications; 
(2)  The general contractor fails to maintain the required three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) liability insurance coverage pursuant to C.O. § 747.03(A)(2); 
(3)  The general contractor fails to maintain and renew the required five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) license bond pursuant to C.O. § 747.03(A)(3); or 
(4)  The general contractor is issued one (1) or more "Stop Work" orders for code violations that remain unresolved during any calendar year. 
(B)  An order of the chief building official suspending or revoking a general contractor's registration certificate shall be effective upon written notice served upon the general contractor. 
§ 747.06 - APPEALS. 
If the chief building official denies a general contractor's application for registration, suspends or revokes a general contractor's registration certificate, or denies renewal of a registration certificate, the general contractor shall have the right to appeal to the Upper Arlington Board of Building Standards. The contractor shall submit a notice of appeal to the board of building standards within ten (10) days from receipt of the order of the chief building official. The general contractor must also pay the required fees for such appeal pursuant to C.O. § 401.02, community development department-master list of fees. Notwithstanding C.O. § 1306.07, the decision of the board of building standards shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 747.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each and every day's violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the above penalty, the city may seek injunctive relief or any other remedy provided by law. 
CHAPTER 761. - OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT 

§ 761.01 - LICENSE REQUIRED. 
No person shall present or exhibit, or participate in presenting or exhibiting, any circus, menagerie, carnival, fair, free show or similar form of outdoor entertainment whether under a tent or otherwise, without first obtaining a license therefor from the city manager. 
§ 761.02 - FEE. 
The license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for each and every day, or part thereof, the circus or other entertainment is exhibited or performed. 
§ 761.03 - CONSENT OF OWNERS OR TENANTS. 
If there are one (1) or more buildings used for residence purposes within a distance of four hundred (400) feet from the lot or parcel of ground on which such circus or other entertainment is to be given, the application for license shall be accompanied by a written consent signed by the majority of the tenants or owners occupying the buildings used for residence purposes within such distance. 
§ 761.04 - PUBLIC GROUNDS RESTRICTED. 
The license shall not give any right to use or occupy any public street or other public land in connection with a circus or other entertainment and no street or other public land shall be so used or occupied for such purpose without permission therefor given in advance by action of council. 
§ 761.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
CHAPTER 767. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS 

§ 767.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Canvasser: means any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the city, not having been requested or invited by the occupant thereof, who seeks to disseminate any verbal or written message, including ideas, thoughts or messages regarding any cause, issue, or religion; any person circulating petitions for signatures; or any political candidate, by means of traveling from place-to-place without acting as a solicitor, and whose actions do not violate any local, state or federal law. Canvasser includes a person who requests a voluntary donation to a non-profit organization as part of the verbal or written message. Nothing in this definition exempts a canvasser from the requirements of any other chapter of the Codified Ordinances, including any section imposing criminal liability. 
    Charitable: Includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, fraternal, veteran's medical and social research. 
    Peddler: means any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the city, not having been requested or invited by the occupant thereof, carrying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature and offering the same for sale. This definition also includes any person who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme to evade the provisions of this chapter. 
    Person: means any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other organization. 
    Premises: as used within the context of C.O. ch. 767, shall be defined as the area of an estate, including land and/or buildings and its appurtenances thereon, used for residential purposes. 
    Religious or religion: Shall not include the word charitable, but shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. 
    Solicitor: means any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the city, not having been requested or invited by the occupant thereof, for taking or soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future. This definition also includes any person who requests, either directly or indirectly, money or financial assistance on a plea or representation that it will be used for a specific purpose, except for canvassers requesting a voluntary donation to a non-profit organization as part of their verbal or written message. 
(Ord. No. 25-2018 , §§ 1, 2, 4-9-2018) 
§ 767.02 - REGISTRATION AND PERMIT REQUIRED. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a peddler or solicitor without first registering for a permit, pursuant to C.O. § 767.03; paying a registration fee, pursuant to C.O. § 767.04; and obtaining a permit, pursuant to C.O. § 767.05. Each person engaged in such business shall be required to register, pay the registration fee, and obtain a permit regardless of whether other employees or agents of the same entity have registered. 
Canvassers shall be exempt from registration, shall be exempt from paying a registration fee, and shall be exempt from obtaining a permit. 
§ 767.03 - REGISTRATION PROCESS. 
Any person seeking to engage in the business of a peddler or solicitor in the City of Upper Arlington shall register for a permit with the city by completing an application form provided by the city manager. Said application shall be submitted to the city manager or his/her designee no later than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of business. 
The application form shall require the following documentation, and any other information deemed necessary by the city manager or his/her designee. If the applicant is an organization, each and every individual who seeks to peddle or solicit on behalf of the organization shall complete an application and provide the following documentation: 
(1)  Name of the applicant or organization; 
(2)  A brief physical description of the applicant, including age, weight and height; 
(3)  The applicant's or organization's social security number or federal identification number; 
(4)  The name and address of the person by whom the applicant is employed or for whom he is soliciting, if any, and the length of the applicant's service with such employer or person; 
(5)  All places of residence of the applicant and all employment during the preceding year; 
(6)  The nature and character of the goods to be sold or services to be furnished or the purpose for which funds are being peddled or solicited by the applicant or organization; 
(7)  The names of other municipalities in which the applicant or organization has conducted peddling or solicitation activities; 
(8)  Verification that the applicant or organization has complied with the requirements pertaining to charitable solicitations, if applicable; 
(9)  If the applicant or organization is a not-for-profit organization, applicant must provide a copy of a currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-exempt status of the organization pursuant to Internal Revenue Code § 501(C)(3); 
(10)  Applicant shall make available and permit the city to copy his/her current, valid drivers license or other current, valid government-issued identification that contains a picture of the applicant; 
(11)  Disclosure of any prior or current criminal record; 
(12)  Period of time for which permit is requested; 
(13)  Signatures of the peddler or solicitor and/or official of the organization. 
§ 767.04 - REGISTRATION FEE. 
Upon filing the registration application with the city manager, the person shall pay a fee sufficient to cover the cost to the city of processing the application. The amount of the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), plus any additional costs related to processing the application, such as a background check. 
§ 767.05 - ISSUANCE OF PERMIT. 
Upon an investigation and determination by the city manager or his/her designee, a permit shall be issued subject to the following conditions: 
(A)  All of the statements made in the application are true; 
(B)  The applicant or organization proposes to engage in a lawful commercial or professional enterprise; 
(C)  Neither the applicant or organization nor enterprise upon which the applicant or organization proposes to engage constitutes a clear and present danger to the residents of the municipality; 
(D)  The applicant or organization has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise; 
(E)  The business of the peddler or solicitor will not be a fraud upon the public; 
(F)  The applicant or organization has not been convicted of any felony and/or crime involving moral turpitude (e.g., theft, passing bad checks, misuse of a credit card, unauthorized use of property or vehicle, identity theft, etc.); 
(G)  The applicant and/or organization possesses a positive overall quality, public esteem or character as seen or judged by people in general and does not offend the sensibilities of people in general; 
(H)  Neither the applicant nor the organization has engaged in a disruptive, threatening, or discourteous manner or behavior; 
(I)  The city shall conduct an independent record check of all applicants, at the expense of the applicant. The city manager shall have the authority to exempt an applicant from the record check based on information known to the city, such as prior history, locally established connections, community ties, scholastic endeavors, non-profit history, or similar information. 
§ 767.06 - FRAUD PROHIBITED; REVOCATION OF PERMIT. 
(A)  No person shall directly or indirectly make or perpetrate any misstatement, deception or fraud in connection with any solicitation or peddling for any purpose in the city or in any application filed under C.O. ch. 767. 
(B)  No person having entered into an agreement to conduct any peddling or soliciting on behalf of any person or organization shall fail to remit or pay to the party entitled thereto the proceeds of such peddling or solicitation in accordance with the terms of the agreement; nor shall the city be a party or held liable to any such agreement. 
(C)  The city manager or his/her designee may revoke at any time any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter for violation of any provision of this chapter, or for good cause, which may include, but is not limited to, disruptive or discourteous behavior during the peddling or solicitation process, harassment of residents, or claims of damage by residents. 
§ 767.07 - PERMIT EXPIRATION. 
All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire sixty (60) days from date of issuance, unless an earlier expiration date is noted on the permit. 
§ 767.08 - PERMIT EXHIBITION. 
Every person receiving a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall at all times wear the permit conspicuously attached on their outer clothing. 
§ 767.09 - PERMIT TRANSFER PROHIBITED. 
It is unlawful for any person other than the original permit holder to use or exhibit any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
§ 767.10 - HOURS RESTRICTED. 
It is unlawful for any person, while conducting the business of a peddler, solicitor or canvasser to enter upon the premises of any private residence between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
§ 767.11 - POSTED PREMISES. 
It is unlawful for any person, while conducting the business of a peddler, solicitor or canvasser in the city, to enter upon the premises of any private residence where the owner, occupant, or person legally in charge of the premises has posted, at the entry to the premises, or at the entry to the principal building on the premises, a sign bearing the words No Peddlers, No Solicitors, No Canvassers, No Trespassing or words of similar import. 
§ 767.12 - CHARITABLE, NON-PROFIT AND RELIGIOUS SOLICITATIONS. 
Any person who solicits for charitable, non-profit or religious purposes shall complete a registration application with the city manager. No fee shall be required. 
Each non-profit applicant or organization that does not meet the definition of "charitable" shall provide with his/her registration application a copy of a currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-exempt status of the organization pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code § 501(C)(3). 
§ 767.99 - PENALTY. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. The penalty upon conviction of such person shall be imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days and/or a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
CHAPTER 771. - STREET SOLICITATION 

§ 771.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in this chapter, the following words are defined as hereafter set forth: 
    Charitable organization: shall means any organization that has received from the Internal Revenue Service a currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-exempt status of the organization pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code § 501(C)(3). 
    Contribution: the gift, sale for less than market value or purchase for more than market value of alms, food, clothing, money or property, to include donations under the guise of a loan of money or property or the rental thereof for any charitable use or purpose. 
    Solicit and solicitation: the request, either directly or indirectly, for money or financial assistance on the plea or representation that such money or financial assistance will be used for a charitable purpose. Without limiting the generality of the above, the words solicit and solicitation shall include the following methods of securing money or financial assistance on the plea or representation that it will be used for a charitable purpose: 
(A)  Any oral or written request. 
(B)  The distribution or circulation of any handbills, written advertisement or publication. 
A solicitation, as defined herein, shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any contribution or makes any sale. 
§ 771.02 - STREET SOLICITATION. 
Any organization seeking to solicit contributions on a street, highway or roadway for charitable purposes shall apply for a permit with the City of Upper Arlington on an application form provided by the city manager for the purpose of said solicitation. Said application shall be submitted not later than thirty (30) days prior to said event and a permit shall be issued by the city manager subject to the following conditions: 
(A)  Street, highway or roadway solicitation shall be conducted only by charitable organizations. Charitable organizations seeking to solicit shall submit a currently valid ruling or determination letter from the Internal Revenue Service recognizing the tax-exempt status of the organization pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code § 501(C)(3). Said Internal Revenue Service ruling or determination must be attached to the application. 
(B)  A permit under this section shall not be issued to an organization for more than one (1) day each calendar year. 
(C)  The city manager may limit the locations of said solicitation if such solicitation may cause excessive traffic congestion or hazard or conflicts with a previously issued parade permit or scheduled event. 
(D)  All street, highway or roadway solicitors shall wear light-colored clothing and must display identification which delineates the organization conducting the solicitation. 
(E)  All street or highway solicitations shall be conducted only when traffic has stopped for a red light. 
(F)  Solicitations shall not occur during adverse weather conditions that limit a motorist's visibility, or would otherwise be cause for excessive traffic congestion, constitute a traffic safety hazard, or impede emergency vehicle access. The chief of police or his designee shall be responsible for determining if such conditions may be caused or exist and may order the cancellation or cessation of said solicitations. 
(G)  Street, highway or roadway solicitations shall occur during daylight hours for a period not greater than eight (8) hours in any calendar day and shall not begin prior to one (1) hour after sunrise nor shall they extend beyond 5:00 p.m. or one (1) hour before sunset, whichever occurs first. In addition, no solicitations shall occur at the following times: Sundays or Holidays, Monday through Friday 7:30 a.m.-8:30 a.m.; 11:30 a.m.-1:30 p.m.; 4:30 p.m.-6:30 p.m. 
(H)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall conduct any street, highway or roadway solicitation. 
(I)  Any organization seeking a permit for street, highway or roadway solicitation shall provide the City of Upper Arlington with a current certificate of insurance of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) that insures the organization for any and all claims that may arise as a result of soliciting contributions in the street, highway or roadway and which insurance policy contains a clause that names the City of Upper Arlington and its officers, agents or employees as additional named insured under such policy. 
(J)  The person responsible for said organization shall execute a signed release on behalf of all solicitors exempting the City of Upper Arlington and its officers, agents or employees from any and all liability and agreeing to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend any and all claims against said city for personal or bodily injury, or property damage which may occur as a result of said street, highway or roadway solicitations in the City of Upper Arlington. 
§ 771.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter or any condition of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined as prescribed by C.O. ch. 501. 
CHAPTER 773. - TAXICABS 

§ 773.01 - LICENSE REQUIRED. 
No taxicab shall be kept for hire and regularly operated in the city, unless a valid license has been issued to the owner and the operator thereof and is in force by the City of Columbus in accordance with Columbus City Codes §§ 587, 589 and 591. The city manager may waive any or all of these regulations for a taxi company that proposes to operate exclusively within the geographical boundaries of the City of Upper Arlington. 
The term taxicab shall not be held to include motor buses or automobiles leased or rented for private use without the services of a chauffeur or driver. 
(Ord. No. 17-2010) 
§ 773.02 - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE. 
It shall be an affirmative defense under C.O. § 773.01 that the owners, drivers or operators of any taxicabs kept for hire and regularly operated held a valid license in any Ohio municipality, provided the license meets the same or substantially similar requirements and regulations as set forth in City of Columbus Codes §§ 587, 589 and 591. 
(Ord. No. 17-2010) 
§ 773.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor and fined not more than one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Ord. No. 17-2010) 
CHAPTER 775. - PUBLIC MASS TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 

§ 775.01 - UNAUTHORIZED PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SERVICE. 
No person shall engage in the operation of a public mass transportation system within this city, by means of motor vehicles or otherwise, whether such operation consists of one (1) or more routes, without the approval of the council, acting by ordinance, which ordinance may provide for the determination of fares, routes, schedules, type of equipment and other conditions of service. 
§ 775.02 - EXCEPTED OPERATIONS. 
This chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
(A)  School buses, while operated for the transportation of school children and other authorized personnel to and from school or school sponsored activities. 
(B)  Buses operated by or on behalf of churches for transportation to or from church services or other church sponsored activities. 
(C)  Limited transportation activities similar to those described in C.O. § 775.02(A) and (B), in which transportation is not offered or furnished to the general public. 
(D)  Any motor transportation company as defined in ORC ch. 4921, whose route or routes provided by its certificate of convenience and necessity extend into or through this city, to the extent that the operations of such company within this city are authorized by and under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio. 
(E)  Chartered motor bus service. 
§ 775.03 - UNAUTHORIZED SERVICE BY CERTIFICATED CARRIERS. 
No motor transportation company, as defined in ORC ch. 4921, shall carry passengers whose complete ride is within this city, or whose ride is to or from this city and a contiguous city or cities, unless authorized to do so pursuant to ordinance or resolution of the council. 
§ 775.04 - EXCEPTION AS TO EMERGENCY SERVICE. 
The provisions of C.O. §§ 775.01 and 775.03 shall not apply to a public mass transportation operation authorized by the city manager authorization heretofore or hereafter given him by the council. 
§ 775.05 - AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER IN EMERGENCIES. 
The city manager shall have authority, in the event of a breakdown or threatened breakdown of public transportation service in this city, to make temporary arrangements to provide such service within this city and between this city and contiguous cities, to continue for such period of time as he deems necessary, unless sooner terminated by action of the council. 
§ 775.06 - APPLICATION OF C.O. §§ 775.01, 775.03 AND 775.99. 
The provisions of C.O. §§ 775.01, 775.03 and 775.99 shall apply to all persons, firms and corporations participating in the activities proscribed or regulated by said sections, whether as principals, agents, employees or otherwise, including operators or drivers of vehicles used in such activities. 
§ 775.99 - PENALTIES. 
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days, or both. 
CHAPTER 776. - PROPANE GAS INSTALLATIONS 

§ 776.01 - ADOPTION OF STANDARDS. 
The provisions of National Fire Protection Association, entitled NFPA Standard 58-92-Standard for the Storage and Handling of Liquified Petroleum Gases, are hereby adopted and shall govern such installations in this city, and the use, servicing, maintenance and removal thereof, except as otherwise provided herein or by statute or lawful regulation adopted pursuant to statute. 
§ 776.02 - REGULATION AND APPROVAL BY THE CITY MANAGER. 
The city manager is authorized to regulate and approve site locations for installations in all non-residence districts, and also in residence districts in cases where the capacity of the tank or tanks proposed to be installed on a residence site is more than one thousand (1,000) gallons. Such approval may be conditioned upon reasonable requirements for landscaping or otherwise minimizing unsightly conditions incident to such installations. 
§ 776.03 - FENCING. 
A chain link fence, eight (8) feet in height, shall surround every tank or group of tanks having a capacity of more than one thousand (1,000) gallons. Barbed wire shall not be used in connection with such fence. Such a fence may be required for tanks having a capacity of less than one thousand (1,000) gallons in non-residential districts, if the city manager deems the same necessary in the interest of public safety. 
§ 776.04 - RESTRICTIONS AS TO EXISTING BUILDINGS. 
Propane gas installations shall not be made for the purpose of serving any existing building which can be served by natural gas, unless such installation is required by reason of an addition to such building for which natural gas is unavailable. 
§ 776.05 - DISCONTINUANCE OF USE. 
The use of liquified petroleum gas tanks shall be discontinued within six (6) months from the time when natural gas pipe line service becomes available to any property being served by such tanks. 
§ 776.06 - REMOVAL OF TANKS AND ACCESSORIES. 
Storage tanks and their accessory equipment, including fences, shall be removed within three (3) months after discontinuance of the use thereof, unless an extension of time is authorized by the city manager because of special circumstances which would work a hardship on the owner of the premises involved. 
§ 776.99 - PENALTIES. 
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than six (6) months, or both. 
CHAPTER 777. - CABLE SYSTEMS AND VIDEO SERVICE 

§ 777.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cable service: means (1) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service and (2) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
    Cable system: means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include (1) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1) or more television broadcast stations; (2) a facility that serves only subscribers without using any public right-of-way; (3) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II [47 U.S.C. § 201 et seq.] of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541(c)) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or (4) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
    Gross revenues: means all cash, credit, property of any kind or nature, or other consideration received by an operator arising from or attributable to the sale or exchange of cable services by the operator within the city or in any way derived from the operation of its system for the provision of such services, including, but not limited to, monthly fees charged to subscribers for basic services; monthly fees charged to subscribers for any optional service; monthly fees charged to subscribers for any tier optional service; monthly fees charged to subscribers for any tier of service other than basic service; pay television fees; installation, disconnection and reconnection and late payment fees; leased channel fees; fees, payments or other consideration received from programmers (exclusive of payments in support of marketing); convertor rentals or sales; and the sale, exchange or cablecast of any programming developed on or for community service channels or institutional users. Traditional advertising revenues and revenues from home shopping channels and like services in which goods or services are purchased by subscribers utilizing the system which are not delivered to or on behalf of the subscribers via the system shall not be included in gross revenues; provided, however, that infomercials and rental or lease payments for programming or channel time and like revenues are not classified as advertising revenue. This sum shall be the basis for computing the fee imposed pursuant to C.O. § 777.10 hereof. This sum shall not include any taxes on services furnished by an operator which are imposed upon any subscriber or user by the state, county, city or other governmental unit and collected by the operator on behalf of said governmental unit. Other than adjustments of subscriber refunds and uncollectibles, there shall be no other deductions from this sum unless specified herein. Gross revenues shall also include revenues received by an operator's affiliates, subsidiaries, parent, or any person in which an operator has a financial interest, arising from or attributable to the sale or exchange of cable services within the city, where such revenue was diverted by the operator in such a manner as to lower gross revenues and therefore paid for services permit fees hereunder. 
    Operator: means any person, persons, partnership, firm, company, corporation or association operating a cable system and holding a permit granted by an ordinance of council to operate same within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Transmission and distribution, carriage and/or utilization and origination: refer to methods, techniques and procedures in the operation of a cable system as authorized by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), either by virtue of enabling rules and regulations or in the absence of prohibiting rules and regulations. 
§ 777.02 - TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION OF SIGNALS. 
The transmission and distribution of electronic signals may be made at the option of the operator, as follows; and, in addition to being as authorized by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) shall be in accordance with applicable law. 
(A)  Through coaxial cable, fiber optic and/or other digital or analog conductors installed in underground conduit owned and maintained by the operator, or attached to poles or installed in underground conduit of electric or telephone utility companies now in existence or hereafter lawfully installed and in use by one of said utilities as transmission or distribution lines. No cable, wire or other conductor and no other equipment, fixture or apparatus used or designed for use in any cable system shall be erected or installed above the surface of the ground, except as herein specifically permitted. Notwithstanding the above, the operator may request permission from the city manager to install poles, in situations where poles are reasonably required for the operation of the cable system. In such situations, the city manager shall not unreasonably withhold permission to place the poles. 
Notwithstanding the authorization for the use by the operator of electric or telephone utility poles, the operator shall discontinue the use of said poles at such time as they are no longer being used by the electric and telephone companies, it being the intent hereof that if said utility companies substitute underground transmission or distribution lines for any material portion of their overhead lines, the operator shall provide underground conduits or make other arrangement for such portions of its lines, in order that the poles and attached conductors may be removed. 
(1)  The operator shall grant to the city, free of expense, joint use of all its underground conduit, for any proper municipal purposes, insofar as it may be done without interfering with the operator's own use thereof. For purposes of this section, proper municipal purposes shall not include the operation of a municipally owned cable system or the resale or assignment of operator's conduit space by the city to third parties. 
(a)  If the city makes any use of conduit owned and maintained by the operator, the city shall hold the operator harmless from any and all actions, causes of action, or damages caused by the city's use thereof. 
(b)  Any construction and utilization by the city, as regards conduit of the operator, shall conform to the same requirements set forth for the operator in the general areas of safety, quality, maintenance and RF (radio frequency) interference. 
(2)  The city shall grant to the operator, free of expense, joint use of all its underground conduit, for any proper cable system purposes, insofar as it may be done without interfering with the city's own use thereof. 
(a)  If the operator makes any use of conduit owned and maintained by the city, the operator shall hold the city harmless from any and all actions, causes of action, or damages caused by the operator's use thereof. 
(b)  Any construction and utilization by the operator, as regards conduit of the city, shall conform to the requirements set forth in this ordinance in the general areas of safety, quality, maintenance and RF (Radio frequency) interference. 
(3)  The right of construction, including easements, is not implied, except in locations where the city has the authority to grant such rights and easements or except as permitted by Federal law. In such locations, the city manager may authorize such construction, if it will not conflict with other public uses thereof. All other rights of construction, including easements, shall be the responsibility of the operator. 
(4)  No construction either on poles or of underground conduit shall begin without prior written approval of the city manager; provided, however, the city manager shall issue all necessary work authorizations for the construction of the cable system upon passage of an ordinance of council authorizing a permit to operator pursuant to this chapter. 
(5)  All trimming of trees necessitated by the operator's installations, whether on public or private property, shall be the responsibility of the operator and shall be accomplished by competent professional tree trimmers, approved by the city manager, in accordance with the requirements of C.O. ch. 907 of the streets and services code. 
(6)  Before commencing work within any easement area on private property (other than an easement obtained by the operator directly from the property owner), the operator shall give written notice to the owner of such property as to the proposed construction and/or installations to be made in such area. Such notice shall be given at least seven (7) days before commencement of any construction or installation. 
(B)  Through the air by means of radiowave transmission facilities of the operator, either totally or in part in combination with C.O. § 777.02(A). 
(C)  Through the air by means of radiowaves transmitted by some other common carrier source, including satellite, either totally or in part in combination with C.O. § 777.02(A) and (B). 
(D)  Through any combination of the alternatives for transmission and distributions of signals hereinabove set forth. 
§ 777.03 - CONDITIONS OF SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION. 
The operator shall comply with the following conditions, and the city shall be charged specifically with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this section. 
(A)  Construction and maintenance of the transmission and distribution system shall be in accordance with the National Electrical Code (also referred to as the Code of the Board of Underwriters), and such applicable ordinances and regulations of the State of Ohio and the City of Upper Arlington as may be presently in effect or may become effective in the future. 
(B)  The operator shall, at its cost and expense, install and maintain during the life of the permit granted by ordinance and/or cause to be installed and maintained adequate shielding, filtering and grounding as to prevent interference with television and radio reception of non-subscribers to the operator's service or services. 
(C)  All Federal Communications Commission (FCC) rules and regulations governing RF (radio frequency) interference presently in effect, and as may become effective in the future, will be observed. 
(D)  All installations of equipment shall be of a permanent nature and durable, installed in accordance with accepted good engineering practices; sufficient to comply with all existing State of Ohio and City of Upper Arlington rules, regulations and ordinances, so as not to interfere in any material manner with the right of the public or individual property owners; and shall not materially interfere with the use or enjoyment of public or private property adjacent thereto. The operator shall obtain advance written approval by the city manager. city manager approval of any installation of equipment in, on, or over any public street or other property owned by the city or in which the city holds easement rights, shall not be unreasonably withheld. Upon completion of such installation, the operator shall furnish the city manager with accurate maps and other supporting data showing the location of such installation. In the event that any such installation should thereafter interfere with a proposed public use of such property or easement, the operator shall, upon written request by the city manager, relocate such installation, at the operator's expense. 
(E)  In operating its system, the operator shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Technical standards set forth in the Federal Communications Commission Rules and Regulations, Part 76, Subpart K . 
(2)  The operator shall interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions insofar as possible shall be preceded by notice, and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the cable system. 
(3)  The operator will strive, insofar as practical and economically feasible, for the betterment of the cable system, taking advantage of all reasonable improvements as they become available to it. 
(F)  The operator shall maintain a payment center in Franklin County, Ohio, which will be open at least 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday and at least 9:00 a.m. to noon Saturdays, excluding legal holidays. The operator shall have either a local or a toll free telephone number and an adequate number of telephone lines to handle typical traffic, and will be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs and adjustments may be received and processed with a minimum of delay. 
(G)  The operator shall meet the customer service standards set forth in the Federal Communications Commission Rules and Regulations, Part 76, Subpart H, Section 76.309. 
(H)  The operator shall provide the city manager with the name of its chief management employee, so that complaints or comments made to any city office may be referred to that person for proper action. 
(I)  In the case of any emergency or disaster, the operator shall, upon request of the city manager or the official performing the duties of the city manager, make available, without charge, one (1) video and audio channel for use by the city during emergency or emergency access regulations or standards, the operator shall provide service consistent with such standards and be deemed in compliance. 
(J)  The operator shall install one (1) drop with standard service without initial or monthly charge to each and all public and private elementary and secondary schools located within the City of Upper Arlington. 
(1)  Any internal distribution system installed by a school must conform to all applicable federal, state and city rules, regulations and ordinances, and must be operated in such a manner as not to interfere with the operator's system. 
(K)  The operator shall install one (1) drop with standard service without initial or monthly charge, to the following locations within the city: 
(1)  Municipal services center; 
(2)  Fire House No. 1; 
(3)  Fire House No. 2; 
(4)  Fire House No. 3; 
(5)  Upper Arlington Public Library; 
(6)  Each recreation center operated by the city. 
(L)  The operator shall provide its standard monthly service, excluding premium services and pay per view, without charge to the municipal services center and each recreation center operated by the city. 
(1)  Installation and service will be subject only to the municipal services center and recreation center being contiguous to a main or lateral cable, or within range of radiowaves, if radiowaves are utilized by the operator for the transmission and each distribution of signals. 
(M)  The operator shall provide without charge complete monitoring facilities, including installation, necessary equipment and maintenance of said equipment, up to and including six (6) city offices, to be designated by the city manager. 
(1)  The monitoring equipment will permit sampling of all services offered by the operator. 
(2)  Monitoring facilities will be provided whether the city offices are located contiguous to main or lateral cables or not, and even if special construction is required for their activation. 
(N)  In lieu of complying with the provisions of C.O. § 777.03(J)-(M) hereof, the city may allow the operator to substitute alternative services, of substantially the same value. Said alternative services shall be described in the permit issued pursuant to C.O. ch. 777. 
(O)  Operator shall carry all government access programming designated by the city manager or his designee on a government access channel provided, free of charge, for the city's use. Government access programming shall be carried on the same channel number by each cable system. If operators are unable to agree on channel designation, the city manager shall mediate the issue between the operators. If mediation fails to resolve the issue then the city manager shall designate the channel number. 
§ 777.04 - CABLECASTING. 
The operator shall comply with the regulations set forth in 47 C.F.R. Part 1, Subpart G. 
§ 777.05 - INDEMNIFICATION, INSURANCE AND BONDS. 
(A)  The operator shall indemnify and save harmless the City of Upper Arlington and all agents, officers, employees and representatives thereof from all claims, demands, causes of action, copyright action, liability, judgments, costs and expenses or losses for injury or death to persons or damage to property owned by and Workers' Compensation claims against any parties indemnified herein, arising out of, caused by, or as a result of the operator's construction, erection, maintenance, use or presence of, or removal of any poles, wires, lines, cable, conduit, appurtenances thereto, or equipment of attachments thereto. 
(B)  The city shall give operator reasonably prompt written notice of any claim, demand, action or proceeding for which indemnification will be sought under this provision of the agreement and, if such claim, demand, action or proceeding is a third-party claim, demand, action or proceeding, franchisee will have the right at its expense to assume the defense of such claim, demand, action or proceeding, using counsel reasonably acceptable to the city. The city shall have the right to participate, at its own expense, with respect to any such third-party claim, demand, action or proceeding that operator so defends. In connection with any such third-party claim, demand, action or proceeding, operator and the city shall cooperate with each other and provide each other with access to relevant books and records in their possession. No such third-party claim, demand, action or proceeding shall be settled without the prior written consent of the city, which consent the city shall not unreasonably withhold or delay. 
(1)  The operator shall carry good and sufficient public liability and property damage insurance to fulfill the terms of C.O. § 777.05 (A), which insurance shall be in the amounts of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage in any one occurrence, or less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) aggregate in any single policy year; and not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) bodily injury or death of any one (1) person, with a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) as to any one (1) occurrence. Such policy shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney as to its form and extent of coverage (as distinguished from dollar amount of coverage). Such policy shall specifically insure against claims arising as the result of underground excavation. 
(2)  The City of Upper Arlington shall be named as an additional insured in any such policy (or policies). 
(3)  The policy (or policies) shall provide by endorsement that it may only be canceled or amended by the insurance company after sixty (60) days notice, in writing, to the city manager. 
(4)  Said policy (or policies) must be in force before the operator commences any construction or installations. 
(5)  The operator shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance. 
(6)  The policy shall provide that the naming of the city as an additional insured shall not exempt the insurer from liability to the city for damage to property owned by it or in which it has an interest. 
(7)  All contractors and subcontractors of the operator must comply with the insurance requirements of C.O. § 777.05(B)(1)-(6). 
(C)  Upon termination, non-renewal or revocation of its permit or upon cessation of operations by the operator, said operator is under obligation to remove all of its equipment and installations over and under city streets, at the request of council; over and under private property at the request of the property owners; and from the homes or business establishments of subscribers, at their request. This section is subject to the rules and regulations of the FCC regarding cable home wiring. 
(1)  The operator shall post bond in the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) guaranteeing the removal of all its equipment and installations, if its operation ceases, whatever the cause or reason, if requested to do so by the council, individual private property owners or subscribers. 
(2)  Such bonding as called for in C.O. § 777.05(B)(1), shall be subject to these requirements: 
(a)  Such bond shall be executed by the operator and one (1) or more sureties authorized to do business in the State of Ohio, and shall be approved by the city attorney as to form. 
(b)  Either the bond (or bonds) or certified copies must be on file with the city manager. 
(c)  The bond (or bonds) must provide by endorsement that it cannot be canceled or amended by the bonding company prior to ten (10) days notice to the city manager. 
(d)  Said bond (or bonds) must be effective before the operator commences any construction or installations. 
(D)  The operator shall maintain and, within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this ordinance, specifically agrees to maintain throughout the term hereof, a faithful performance bond running to the city, executed by a surety company authorized to do business as surety in the State of Ohio, in the penal sum of up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to ensure that the operator shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of this chapter, and that, in case of any breach of this chapter, the amount of all damages and penalties proximately resulting from the failure of the company to well and faithfully observe and perform any provision of this chapter shall be recoverable by the city from said bond. 
(1)  Such bond shall be executed by the operator and one (1) or more sureties authorized to do business in the State of Ohio, and shall be approved by the city attorney as to form. 
(2)  Either the bond (or bonds) or certified copies must be on file with the city manager. 
(3)  The bond (or bonds) must provide by endorsement that it cannot be canceled or amended by the bonding company prior to thirty (30) days notice to the city manager. 
(E)  The city manager, in his discretion, may waive the requirements of C.O. § 777.05(C) and (D). 
§ 777.06 - RATES FOR SERVICES TO SUBSCRIBERS. 
(A)  The city will follow the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Rate Regulations in its regulation of the service rates and charges of any cable television system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in C.O. ch. 777. In connection with such regulation, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties. The city manager, or his or her designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC Rate Regulations in order to enable the city to regulate service rates and charges; provided, however, this advance notice requirement shall not apply to bona fide promotional pricing or sales efforts by operator. 
(B)  The operator shall file a schedule of all of its rates with the city manager no less than thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date of such rates or the commencement of a new service, or of a change in established rates and upon notification to subscribers of such rates or rate changes; provided, however, this advance notice requirement shall not apply to bona fide promotional pricing or sales efforts by operator. 
(C)  Optional services of a non-continuous nature, such as individual movies, sports events, educational programs, etc., may have variable rates and are exempt from filing requirements. 
(D)  No operator shall charge subscriber's rates in excess of the filed rates for any service requiring filing rates. 
(E)  A current, up-to-date copy of all the operator's rates, rules, regulations and policies having to do with subscriber service will be kept in its public file in the city. No rule, regulation or policy shall be contrary to provisions of the ordinance. 
§ 777.07 - SPECIAL PROVISIONS. 
Taking into account certain additional services which, to be successful, necessarily would have to cross corporate lines of many Greater Columbus municipalities, and considering these services to be in the public interest, and not wanting to curtail their development, the following services are specifically exempted from licensing requirements and excluded from fee payments to the city, so long as said services are offered by an operator holding a permit under ordinance. 
(A)  Services created primarily for area hotels and motels, and utilized as a promotional-informational vehicle for Greater Columbus, reaching only guests in participating hotels and motels. 
(B)  Services created for special and/or occasional closed-circuit presentations, not for the viewing and/or listening of the general public. 
(1)  This particular exclusion/exemption is not applicable to any regular, continuing service or services which the operator may offer. 
(C)  The exemptions and exclusions detailed herein shall apply to both originations by the operator and to signals merely re-transmitted and/or distributed by the operator. 
§ 777.08 - PERMITS TO OPERATE CABLE SYSTEMS IN THE CITY. 
(A)  No operator shall offer service to subscribers by means of a cable system within the city unless he holds a permit granted by ordinance of council, and authorizing such a system within the city, and in, under and over the streets, highways and other public grounds of the city. 
(B)  All permits granted by ordinance pursuant to this section shall be non-exclusive and non-assignable without the prior consent of the city; and council reserves the right to issue as many such permits as it deems advisable in the public interest. 
(C)  The permit shall take effect and will be in force from and after the earliest period allowed by law, and upon the filing by the operator with the city manager of its acceptance, in writing, of each and all of the terms and provisions of this ordinance; provided, however, if the operator shall refuse to file such written acceptance within thirty (30) days after passage of the ordinance by council, then the ordinance granting its permit shall be null and void. Nothing in this section shall preclude operator from commencing construction of its cable system during such thirty-day period at its own risk. 
(D)  If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of C.O. ch. 777 is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, or in conflict with rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), then such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision of this ordinance, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(E)  Any permit granted pursuant to this ordinance may be revoked by a simple majority vote of the council upon the recommendation of the city manager, for violation of material provisions of said ordinance, by giving the operator ninety (90) days notice in writing of intention to revoke such permit unless such violation is corrected during the period of notice. In the event a violation of a material provision of this ordinance cannot be reasonably cured within ninety (90) days, then operator may request an extension of the time to cure and the city manager shall not unreasonably withhold consent to such an extension. The operator shall have an opportunity for a public hearing prior to any vote to revoke the permit. 
(F)  The term of each permit shall be ten (10) years, except that the granting of an initial permit may be for a longer period. 
§ 777.09 - CONDITION OF SERVICE. 
(A)  All service(s), offered by the operator, shall be made available to all applicants whose residences are contiguous to a main or lateral cable or within range of radiowaves, if radiowaves are utilized for transmission and distribution. All service, offered by the operator may be made available, subject to operator's reasonable business judgment, to all applicants whose establishments are contiguous to a main or lateral cable, or within range of radiowaves, if radiowaves are used for transmission and distribution. 
(B)  Service to multiple-unit buildings (including apartment houses and office buildings) will be subject to the permission of the owner or manager of each building. 
(C)  Except for bona fide promotional programs, the operator shall not discriminate within groups of similar subscribers relative to rates, charges, service, service facilities, repairs, maintenance, rules or regulations. 
§ 777.10 - PERMIT FEES AND PAYMENT THEREOF. 
(A)  The operator for the privilege of holding a permit to operate a cable system in the City of Upper Arlington entitling operator to install its distribution and transmission facilities in, under and over the streets, highways and other public grounds of the city, subject to the overall provisions of this ordinance, which have been conceived for the protection of the city and its citizens, shall make payments to the city as follows: 
(1)  Each year the operator shall pay to the city five percent (5%) of the gross revenue of the cable system, except that the permit may allow a lower payment, if the five percent (5%) of gross revenue payment would create a disparate payment rate between similarly situated operators. 
(B)  All payments to the city under this ordinance shall be made semi-annually with the operator having the option to use a calendar or fiscal year as the operating year. The operator shall not change the accounting period initially selected unless the change is first approved in writing by the finance director. 
(1)  The mid-year payment of the franchise fee may be on the basis of unaudited total gross revenue information and shall be due and payable within forty-five (45) days of the end of the sixth month of the operating year. 
(2)  The year-end payment of the franchise fee shall be due and payable within ninety (90) days after the close of the operator's operating year. At the time of this payment, operator shall submit to the finance director complete revenue information in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and that as a whole fairly and accurately presents the revenues of the operator for the year. The revenue information shall be attested to by the system manager of the operator. The city manager may require the operator to submit revenue information in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles audited and certified by an independent certified accountant in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards, and that as a whole fairly and accurately presents the revenues of the operator for the year. The calculation of the franchise fee shall be clearly shown as part of this certified statement in a form approved by the city manager. 
(C)  All payments to the city shall be by check, made payable to the City of Upper Arlington, and either hand-delivered or sent by mail to the finance director. 
(D)  City council, the city manager, or their authorized representative, shall have the right to reasonable inspection of the books and records, financial or otherwise, maps, plans, and other similar materials of the operator at a time and place convenient to the city's representatives. Further, the operator shall provide upon request of the city manager a written report documenting the number of subscribers (but not the subscribers' identities) and the types of services provided to subscribers as specified by the manager. To the extent allowable by law, information designated proprietary by operator shall be treated as such and be held confidential and shall not be considered public records. Such report shall be submitted no later than the fifteenth (15th) day of the following month. With respect to any inspection conducted by the city pursuant to this subsection, the city shall be responsible for its own expenses. 
(1)  These payments shall be known as the annual franchise fee and shall be credited to the general fund, City of Upper Arlington. 
(2)  The operator shall pay a minimum fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) annually for the period of its permit. 
(a)  The minimum fee shall be credited to the required franchise fee payable annually to the city. 
§ 777.11 - BASIS OF SERVICE. 
The service to be offered by the operator shall be on a solely voluntary basis on the part of the subscriber, who, if his residence or commercial establishment is contiguous to main or lateral cables or within range of radiowaves if radiowaves are utilized for transmission and distribution, may subscribe to the aforementioned service at will. Under no circumstances will the operator require a subscriber to pay for service longer than the service is desired. 
§ 777.12 - DELAYS. 
Provisions of this section notwithstanding, delays in the performance of the operator's obligations under the ordinance which are caused by equipment shortages, a state of war or national emergency, acts of God, or any circumstances beyond the control of the operator, as determined by the council, shall not be construed to be in violation of the requirements set forth herein, and reasonable extensions of time shall be granted therefor. 
§ 777.13 - SCOPE OF ORDINANCE. 
(A)  This is an enabling ordinance authorizing the operation of cable system(s) in the City of Upper Arlington, but it does not take the place of any franchise, license or permit which may be additionally required by law of the operator, either currently or at some later date; provided, however, that during the term of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the city shall not unreasonably deny operator any such franchise, license or permit. 
(B)  It shall be the responsibility of the operator to obtain any and all such franchises, licenses or permits necessary to the operation and conduct of its business activities. 
(C)  Failure of the operator to obtain and conform to the provisions of any and all such franchises, licenses or permits, and to make prescribed payments if required as a condition of their issuance, shall be considered in violation of this ordinance, and subject to the penalties set forth in C.O. §§ 777.08(E) and 777.99. 
§ 777.14 - RECOVERY OF FRANCHISE COSTS. 
Operator, within sixty (60) days after receipt from the city of the permit issued pursuant to this ordinance, shall reimburse the city for reasonable costs and out of pocket expenses incurred by the city in connection with the granting of the franchise permit. The amount of said costs and expenses shall be set forth in the franchise permit. 
§ 777.15 - PRIVACY. 
The operator shall strictly observe the privacy and property rights of subscribers in accordance with applicable law. The subscribers' rights of privacy shall be protected at all times by the operator. Individual subscriber preferences, viewing habits, beliefs, philosophy, creeds, religions or political beliefs shall not be revealed to any person, firm, agency, governmental unit, police department or investigating agency unless upon the authority of a court of law or upon prior voluntary valid written authorization of the subscriber, which shall not in any event be required as a condition of receiving service. 
(A)  A subscriber may at any time revoke any authorization previously made, by delivering to the operator in writing a substantial indication of his intent to so revoke. Any such revocation shall be effective on receipt by the operator. 
(B)  The operator shall not, without the specific authorization of the subscriber(s) involved, sell, or otherwise make available to any person or group of persons lists of the names and addresses of its subscribers, which identifies the viewing habits of any individual subscriber, except as the same is necessary for the construction, marketing and maintenance of the operator's facilities and services hereunder and the concomitant billing of subscribers for said services, or as the same may be necessary to give leased access channel users sufficient and pertinent information to make full use of said leased access channel. 
(C)  Neither the operator, nor the city, nor the council shall tap and/or monitor or arrange for the tapping and/or monitoring or permit, either expressly or impliedly, any other person to tap and/or monitor any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose whatsoever, without the express permission of the subscriber. Notwithstanding the preceding sentences, the operator shall be entitled to conduct systemwide or individually addressed sweeps for the purpose of verifying system integrity, controlling return-path transmission, or billing for pay services. 
(D)  Liability for obscenity, defamation, or invasion of privacy on any access channels shall rest with the person or group of persons utilizing said access channels. 
(E)  The operator shall make available to subscribers a device by which the subscriber can prohibit viewing of a particular cable service during periods selected by that subscriber. 
§ 777.16 - VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER. 
(A)  Definition. For purposes of this section, "video service" and "video service provider" shall have the same meanings as in ORC § 1332.21. 
(B)  Video service provider fee. 
(1)  All video service providers shall use a percentage of five percent (5%) in calculating the video service provider fee pursuant to ORC § 1332.32. 
(2)  All video service providers shall include advertising revenue in computing gross revenue pursuant to ORC § 1332.32. 
(3)  All video service providers offering video service in the City of Upper Arlington shall pay the video service provider fee calculated in accordance with this section and ORC § 1332.32 to the City of Upper Arlington. 
§ 777.99 - PENALTY. 
(A)  In addition to the provisions of C.O. § 777.08(E) having to do with revocation of permits, this penalty shall apply: 
Whoever violates any provision of C.O. ch. 777 of the City of Upper Arlington after being given notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure the violation, may be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense of each successive day continued. 
The operator recognizes the right of the city to provide, by ordinance, for a civil penalty which may be assessed against it in an amount not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) per day and/or abatement or rebate of subscriber fees to affected subscribers for each violation. Such penalties may be assessed for: 
(1)  Failure to provide data and reports as required by this ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to provide services required under this ordinance which failure affects the system as a whole or a substantial segment of subscribers. 
(3)  Failure to comply with the terms of the ordinance. 
(4)  Persistent or repeated failure to provide services to or make timely repairs or to correct billing errors for individual subscribers. 
(5)  Prior to the imposition of any penalty authorized by this section, the operator shall be given written notice setting forth the specific violation or violations and a reasonable period of time to cure the specified violation or violations. 
CHAPTER 779. - PRIVATE HAULERS OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE 

§ 779.01 - PERMIT REQUIRED. 
No person shall engage in the collection, transportation or disposal of garbage, refuse or materials intended for municipally sponsored recycling programs in this city unless they or their employer are the holder of a permit issued in accordance with the provisions of Regulation 711 of the Franklin County Board of Health. 
§ 779.02 - VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  Vehicles to be operated for the collection and transportation of solid wastes within the City of Upper Arlington shall have either packer type bodies or dump truck bodies fitted with tight covers to prevent the escape of any portion of the load being transported, and must be operated and maintained so that the contents will not spill or leak from said vehicle. No pushcart propelled by manpower shall be used for the collection or disposal of garbage or refuse. 
§ 779.03 - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS. 
The city manager is authorized to promulgate reasonable regulations for the administration of this ordinance. 
§ 779.04 - DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE. 
Garbage and refuse shall be disposed of only at a site and in the manner authorized by the governmental agency having jurisdiction thereof. 
§ 779.05 - IDENTIFICATION OF VEHICLE. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle for the collection, transportation or disposal of garbage, refuse or materials intended for municipally sponsored recycling programs within the City of Upper Arlington, unless such vehicle is displaying the current Franklin County Board of Health Refuse Hauler Permit sticker prominently exhibited on the driver's door pillar or as reasonably close to this location as possible. Failure to display the permit sticker as indicated shall constitute an unlicensed vehicle subject to the penalties set forth in C.O. § 779.99. 
§ 779.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor for the first offense. The second conviction or bond forfeiture for the same violation within a thirty-six-month period shall be deemed a fourth degree misdemeanor. 
CHAPTER 780. - EXPLOSIVES 

§ 780.01 - RECORDS OF EXPLOSIVES. 
(A)  Every person, corporation or partnership engaged in any occupation involving the storage or sale of any explosive, as defined in ORC § 3743.01, except those explosives used solely in signaling devices which have been designated as such by the state fire marshal, shall maintain and keep a record of the following information: 
(1)  Amounts and types of such explosives on hand at the effective date of this chapter, and at least annually thereafter. 
(2)  Purchases and receipts of such explosives. 
(3)  Amounts and types of such explosives used and the uses made of the same. 
(4)  Amounts and types of such explosives otherwise disposed of, to whom delivered, and for what purpose. 
(5)  The name, address and age of each person by whom such explosives were delivered, and the signature of each person to whom such explosives were delivered. 
(B)  The record provided for in C.O. § 780.01(A) shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years and shall be available at all times to all law enforcement officials. 
§ 780.02 - REPORTS TO POLICE. 
Every person, corporation or partnership who keeps or stores explosives shall make an immediate report to the police division of this city of explosives which have been stolen or which are otherwise missing, and of the circumstances under which the same disappeared. 
§ 780.03 - SALES LIMITED TO PERMIT HOLDERS. 
No person, corporation or partnership engaged in any occupation involving the sale of explosives as defined in ORC § 3743.01 shall sell or otherwise dispose of explosives to any person unless that person exhibits a valid permit as provided for by C.O. § 780.04 hereof. In addition to the information required by C.O. § 780.01, the seller of explosives shall keep a record of the permit number and the name of the law enforcement office who issued such permit. 
§ 780.04 - PERMITS TO USE EXPLOSIVES, FEES. 
(A)  No person shall purchase, keep or use explosives for any illegal purpose, or otherwise than in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  Any person who proposes to purchase, keep or use explosives shall first secure a user's permit from the chief of the division of police of this city (hereinafter referred to as the police chief). The application for the permit shall state the name, address and age of the applicant and the location and purposes of the explosive's use, and shall be accompanied by an affidavit as provided by C.O. § 780.04(D). The police chief may issue either temporary or annual permits, each of which shall bear his name and title and a permit identification number. Temporary permits shall expire ten (10) days after the date of issue. Annual permits shall only be issued to persons whose business necessitates the frequent or repeated use of explosives. Annual permits shall expire one (1) year from their date of issue and may be renewed upon payment of the prescribed fee, resubmission of the affidavit prescribed by C.O. § 780.04(D), and a further investigation by the police chief verifying that the applicant still qualifies as a permit holder. 
(C)  The fee for a temporary permit shall be five dollars ($5.00). The fee for an annual permit shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). All moneys collected shall be deposited to the credit of the general fund of the city. 
(D)  Each applicant for a permit to buy, keep or use explosives shall file with his application his signed affidavit certifying that he is not a fugitive from justice, that he is not under indictment for any felony of violence involving moral turpitude, that he has never been convicted of such a felony, that he is not addicted to or illegally using any narcotic drug, barbiturate, amphetamine, hallucinogen or other dangerous drug, and that he is not an habitual drunkard or other adjudication of mental incompetence. 
(E)  The police chief shall conduct an investigation to verify the truth of the facts alleged in the affidavit provided for in C.O. § 780.04(D). If, upon investigation, he is satisfied that the applicant is qualified, he shall issue the permit. 
(F)  No person shall obtain or attempt to obtain a permit by falsification or misrepresentation of any of the facts in his application or affidavit. 
(G)  No person shall give a permit issued to him to another for use and no person shall use a permit issued to another. 
(H)  No permit shall be issued to a corporation or partnership. Provided, however, that an officer or bona fide regular employee of a corporation, or a member of a partnership, who holds such a permit, may purchase explosives thereunder for the corporation by whom he is employed or the partnership of which he is a member. 
§ 780.05 - NON-COMPLIANCE WITH THIS CHAPTER. 
No person who is not engaged in the business of dealing in or keeping explosives, operating in compliance with all provisions of law relating to such business, shall buy, sell or deal in explosives. No person other than such dealer or keeper of explosives shall, after the effective date of the provisions of this chapter, acquire or possess explosives, except as permitted by this chapter. Possession of such explosives after said effective date shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this prohibition. 
§ 780.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
CHAPTER 781. - OIL AND GAS WELLS 

§ 781.01 - OIL AND GAS WELL PROHIBITED. 
The drilling of wells for oil or gas and other activities incident to the production of oil and gas within this city are hereby prohibited. 
§ 781.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates the provisions of C.O. § 781.01 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
CHAPTER 783. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

§ 783.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm permit: means a permit issued by the chief of police or fire chief to any owner or other person in control of a building, property or part thereof, located in the city, to install and maintain an alarm system. 
    Alarm permit holder: means a person, organization, company or any other entity in control of a building, structure or facility, or any portion thereof, which is intended to be protected by an alarm system and has a permit issued to him by the chief of police or fire chief. 
    Alarm system: means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal audibly, visibly or electronically, to a location outside the structures protected by the system or to a monitoring station which in turn notifies the appropriate agency, the presence of fire, smoke, robbery, burglary, vandalism, intrusion or other activity requiring urgent attention to which the police division or the fire division is expected to respond, including interconnected alarm systems, as defined below, but shall not include alarms installed in motor vehicles. 
    Alarm system (interconnected): means an alarm system which directly or indirectly, automatically or manually, uses a telephone line, cable line and/or radio and microwave transmission, to transmit an alarm or message upon activation of the alarm system. 
    Alarm system (local): means an alarm system that when activated only sounds a horn, bell, buzzer, or other type of audible or visible alarm that is designed to be audible or visible beyond the premises being served, but which does not result in the transmission of a signal to any other location. 
    Appropriate chief: means the Upper Arlington Chief of Police or the Upper Arlington Fire Chief. 
    Automatic dialing device: means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice, message, or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response. 
    False alarm: means an alarm signal or message eliciting an urgent response by the police division or fire division when a situation requiring such response by the police or fire does not, in fact, exist. 
The following conditions shall not be considered a false alarm: 
(A)  An alarm which has been activated as a result of testing or repair shall not be considered a false alarm, if prior notification has been given the day of such repairs or test to the agency which the alarm would signal. 
(B)  Adverse weather or telephone or power outages or other catastrophic acts of God not reasonably subject to control by the alarm manufacturer, installer or alarm permit holder which cause an alarm signal are not considered false alarms. 
(C)  An alarm which has been activated shall not be considered as a false alarm, if the responding public safety division receives a request to cancel. Such request must be made to the same location as the request for service and must be received prior to the arrival of any units or equipment. 
§ 783.02 - ALARM PERMITS. 
(A)  Any residence or building or part thereof located within the City of Upper Arlington may be equipped with an alarm system for the purpose of detecting and signaling the presence of a fire or unauthorized intrusion. A permit for the installation of an alarm system may be required by the local Building and Fire Codes, for buildings other than single family residences. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and installer to secure said permits from the city's community development department. 
(B)  Applications for alarm user permits shall be made on forms provided by the chief of police. The application shall include the name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the name, address and telephone number of the property (including business phone number) and central station phone number of the applicant's alarm company, if any. 
The application shall also include notice that a permit holder who has been charged with a false alarm may appeal that finding pursuant to the appeals procedure set forth in C.O. § 783.08. 
Each application for an alarm user permit for an alarm system which pertains to a residence shall provide at least two (2) other names and telephone numbers of persons to contact in case of an emergency when the user is unavailable. Each application for an alarm user permit for an alarm system which pertains to a building, structure or facility other than a residence shall provide at least three (3) such names, unless such facility employs less than three (3) persons. An alarm monitoring company name may be substituted for one (1) of the required names, if a contractual arrangement exists between the user and the monitoring company. 
If an alarm user has more than one (1) alarm system protecting two (2) or more separate structures having different addresses, a separate permit shall be required for each system at each address. 
(C)  A one-time alarm permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged for a permit issued under the provisions of this ordinance. 
Permits are issued to a Resident or business for a specific location. Should the Resident or business move from the address indicated on the original permit, the alarm permit shall be void. 
(D)  No person shall install, operate or allow on the premises under his control the operation of an alarm system unless such person first obtains a valid alarm permit. This requirement shall be the responsibility of the owner unless the occupant of the property is different from the owner, in which case it shall be the responsibility of both. 
(E)  Each holder of an alarm user permit shall, within ten (10) days of any change of the information on the alarm user permit application, notify the chief of police in writing of any and all changes in the information on the application. 
(F)  Each application for an alarm permit shall contain an agreement to submit to the assessment of a service charge for false alarms. Failure to agree to this provision shall be cause to deny issuance of an alarm user permit, or if one (1) has been issued, shall be cause to revoke any such alarm user permit. 
(G)  The information contained in an alarm user permit application shall be securely maintained and restricted to inspection only by the chief of police, fire chief and their designated representatives. 
(H)  Any system installed shall be installed in accordance with local building and fire codes, as well as applicable standards. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 783.03 - AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICES. 
(A)  The city may subscribe to one (1) or more telephone lines for burglar alarms, or for fire alarm purposes, or for similar purposes; and when any line is designated as provided for above, persons may, upon proper application and compliance with applicable laws, be granted a permit to install a device or devices which automatically select the designated telephone line for the purpose of playing a recorded message or to otherwise report an intrusion or other emergency. The permit fee shall be established by the city manager, in such amount as to reimburse the city for the cost of any telephone lines dedicated to automatic dialing devices. Such fee shall be revised at the beginning of every fiscal year to reflect the most recent cost experience. 
(B)  No person shall use or cause to be used, any telephone device or telephone attachment that automatically selects any telephone line allocated by the telephone company to the city or any of its departments or divisions, except a telephone line which shall be specifically designated by the city manager for such purpose. Such designated telephone line or lines shall terminate at the Municipal Services Center Communications Center located at 3600 Tremont Road. 
(C)  All automatic dialing devices shall be reprogrammed to use the designated telephone line within ten (10) days of notification of designation by the city manager; additionally, the message format must be approved by the appropriate chief prior to interconnection. 
§ 783.04 - EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION OF ALARM SYSTEMS. 
(A)  All equipment used in installations for which a permit is required shall meet the applicable standards of the Underwriters Laboratories of the United States and of Canada, Factory Mutual, or the National Fire Protection Association, or other recognized industry standard. Applicant may be required to submit evidence of the reliability and suitability of the equipment to be installed. 
(B)  The chief of police and the fire chief or their designated representative shall have the authority, at reasonable times, and upon oral notice, to enter upon any premises within the city, to inspect only the installation and operation of an alarm system, the purpose of which is to report an emergency to the police or fire division. In the event the premises to be inspected is a private dwelling, such inspection shall only be done between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., and only if the notice is in written form addressed to the permit holder and presented to a responsible adult. Under this ordinance, such residences are only subject to the above inspection after three (3) false alarms have originated from them. The written notice shall cite the specific false alarm history of that permit. Failure to allow reasonable inspection of such alarm system may be grounds for revocation of the alarm permit. 
(C)  The chief of police or fire chief may require that repairs or adjustments be made whenever he has determined that such are necessary to assure proper operation. Failure to make such repairs or adjustments may be grounds for revocation of the alarm permit. 
§ 783.05 - SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND APPEALS PROCEDURE FOR PERMITS. 
(A)  Before a permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked for any reason except as prescribed in C.O. § 783.99(D), a hearing must be held before the appropriate chief. A notice setting forth the time, place and nature of the hearing shall be sent to the alarm permit holder no less than seven (7) days prior to said hearing. 
(B)  After said hearing, the appropriate chief shall either dismiss the case or shall forward a recommendation of revocation and/or suspension to the city manager. Within ten (10) days after receiving the recommendation, the city manager shall approve or disapprove the recommendation and notify the permit holder accordingly. 
(C)  Any decision made by the city manager pursuant to this section may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within five (5) days of receipt of the city manager's decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the city council within thirty (30) days after the filing of the appeal and that body may affirm, amend, or reverse the decision or take other action deemed appropriate. 
(D)  At the end of the revocation and/or suspension period, the alarm permit holder will be required, if the holder intends to continue using his or her alarm system, to first re-file an application and have it approved by the appropriate chief. 
§ 783.06 - LIABILITY OF CITY. 
(A)  The issuance of any permits in conjunction with this chapter shall not constitute acceptance by the city of any liability to maintain any equipment, to answer alarms, or for anything in connection therewith. 
§ 783.07 - EXEMPTIONS. 
(A)  The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to home smoke detectors not intended to be heard outside the dwelling unit, or to local alarm systems or audible alarms affixed to automobiles, boats, boat trailers, house trailers and recreation vehicles or other motor vehicles. 
§ 783.08 - ALARM VALIDITY DETERMINATION. 
(A)  Whenever an alarm is activated requiring an urgent response to the location by the police division or the fire division, a police officer or firefighter who responded to the alarm address shall inspect the areas protected by the system and shall determine whether the emergency response was in fact required as indicated by the alarm system. 
(B)  If the inspecting police officer or firefighter determines the signal to be a false alarm, the police officer or firefighter shall make a report of the false alarm to the respective chief. The respective division shall then provide the permit holder written notification of the false alarm determination. 
(C)  Any permit holder who has been charged with a false alarm may appeal the finding of the police division or the fire division to the city manager for each such determination of a false alarm. Such appeal shall be made in writing within ten (10) days of the date of issuance of the false alarm notification. The city manager shall then provide the permit holder written notification of the false alarm determination. 
The permit holder may further appeal the decision of the city manager to the Upper Arlington Safety Committee. Such appeal shall be made in writing within ten (10) days of the date of issuance of the decision of the city manager. The safety committee's decision shall be final. 
§ 783.09 - FALSE ALARM SERVICE CHARGES. 
(A)  Each false alarm response shall constitute a separate violation, whether police or fire response is elicited. any response to a false alarm to a city address by another agency, in lieu of response by Upper Arlington agencies, as a result of mutual aid or automatic response agreements, shall constitute a false alarm. 
(B)  No service fee shall be assessed for the first three (3) false alarms per calendar year for each alarm permit. 
(C)  Any permit holder whose alarm system allows or causes to be transmitted more than three (3) false alarms within a calendar year for a given system shall be assessed a service charge for each such additional false alarm response. Such fee shall be uniform and based as much as is practical on average cost to the city per false alarm response and shall be set by the chief of police or fire chief subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(D)  Should the alarm permit holder find the false alarm was caused by faulty equipment, the service charge can be waived, if the permit holder has the equipment repaired. The permit holder must submit a request along with documentation of service to the chief of police for approval. 
§ 783.99 - PENALTIES. 
(A)  No person shall operate an alarm system without first obtaining a permit as required by this chapter, or after having a permit revoked or suspended, and after exhausting the right of appeal, fail to disconnect the alarm system. Violation of this section shall be a minor misdemeanor. Each day of such unpermitted use shall constitute a separate violation. 
(B)  After three (3) false alarms in a calendar year, the chief of police or fire chief will review the alarm holder's permit and recommend to the city manager, continuance of the permit or revoking of the permit for up to a maximum of six (6) months. The alarm permit holder may appeal the city manager's decision to city council as provided for in C.O. § 783.05(C). City council's decision shall be final. The chief of police or fire chief may order the disconnection of any alarm system upon forwarding a recommendation of suspension or revocation of an alarm permit to the city manager pending his review and any appeals. 
(C)  No alarm permit holder shall knowingly allow his alarm system to be used by any person to create a false alarm as defined in C.O. § 517.13. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to any other penalty prescribed by C.O. § 501.09, the alarm permit held by such permit holder may be suspended or revoked for up to one (1) year. 
(D)  No person, organization or business that installs an alarm system shall fail to remit the permit fee as required by C.O. § 783.02(C). No person, organization or business shall fail to attempt in good faith to collect the permit fee as required by C.O. § 783.02(C). No person, organization or business shall fail to notify the chief of police or fire chief of the installation or removal or termination of an alarm system as required by C.O. § 783.02(D). Whoever violates C.O § 783.99(D) shall be guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor and may be fined up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
CHAPTER 785. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

§ 785.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult booth: means any area of a sexually oriented business establishment set off from the remainder of such establishment by one (1) or more walls or other dividers or partitions and used to show, play or otherwise demonstrate any adult materials or to view any live performance that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
    Adult entertainment establishment: means an establishment which features semi-nude or totally nude, topless, bottomless, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainment or services which are obscene or harmful to juveniles as defined by ORC § 2907.01(E) and (F). 
    Adult material: means any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture, slide, transparency, figure, image, description, motion picture film, phonographic recording, digital recording, taped or other method of recording, computer displays or other tangible thing capable of arousing interest through sight, sound or touch as defined by ORC § 2907.01(E) and (F). 
    Commercial establishment: means any place where admission, services, performances, or products are provided for upon payment of any form of consideration. 
    Days: means calendar days, unless otherwise specifically set forth in this ordinance. 
    Nude or state of nudity: means a state of undress that exposes to view 1) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, anus or female breast, such coverage to constitute not less than a g-string and pasties below a point immediately above the top of the areolas, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola(s) is/are completely and opaquely covered with at least pasties, or any device that, when worn, simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    Registered premises: means the place or location described in the sexually oriented business establishment registration where a sexually oriented business is authorized to operate. No sidewalks, streets, parking areas, public rights-of-way, or grounds adjacent to any such place or location shall be included within the Registered premises. 
    Registrant: means any person or entity that has been issued a sexually oriented business Registration pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance. 
    Reviewing departments: means the city manager's office, the police department, the community development department, the fire division and the city attorney's office. 
    Semi-nude: means a state of dress or undress in which clothing covers no more than the human genitals, pubic region, anus, and areolas of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices or by other minor accessory apparel such as hats, gloves and socks. 
    Sexually oriented business establishment: means any of the following commercial establishments, as defined herein: 
(A)  Adult cabaret: means any commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business features or provides any of the following: 
(1)  Persons who appear semi-nude. 
(2)  Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays or other visual representations or recordings of any kind that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
(B)  Adult store: means a commercial establishment that: 
(1)  Contains one (1) or more adult booths; 
(2)  As a substantial or significant portion of its business offers for sale, rental, or viewing any adult materials, or 
(3)  Has a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of adult materials. 
(C)  Adult theater: means any commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business features or provides films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides or other visual representations or recordings of any kind that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation or specified sexual activities. 
    Sexually oriented business establishment employee: means any individual, including entertainers, who work in or at, or render any services directly related to the operation of, an adult entertainment establishment, provided, however, that this definition shall not include persons delivering goods, materials (other than adult materials), food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to the establishment. 
    Sexually oriented business establishment patron: means any individual other than a sexually oriented business establishment employee, present in or at any sexually oriented business establishment at any time when such sexually oriented business establishment is open for business, provided, however, that this definition shall not include persons delivering goods, materials (other than adult materials), food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the establishment. 
    Specified anatomical areas: means and includes any of the following: 1) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the areolas; or 2) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified criminal act: means any unlawful, lewd, indecent or immoral criminal conduct. 
    Specified sexual activities: means and includes any of the following: 1) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 2) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 3) masturbation, actual or simulated; or 4) excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in this definition. 
    Straddle dance: means the use by any person, including specifically but without limitation, a sexually oriented business establishment employee, of any part of his or her body to touch the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast of any sexually oriented business establishment patron or any other person, or the touching of the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast of any person by any sexually oriented business establishment patron. Conduct shall be a "straddle dance" regardless of whether the touch or touching occurs while the person is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area. Conduct shall also be deemed a straddle dance regardless of whether the touch or touching is direct or through any medium. Conduct commonly referred to by the terms "lap dance," "table dance," "couch dance" and "face dance" shall be included within this definition of straddle dance. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 785.02 - LICENSOR. 
(A)  The city manager or his designee shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To administer and rule upon the applications for, and the issuance, renewal, suspension, and revocation of sexually oriented business registrations as set forth in this ordinance; 
(2)  To conduct or provide for such inspection of sexually oriented businesses as shall be necessary to determine and ensure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and other applicable provisions of law; 
(3)  To periodically review the provisions of this ordinance and the conduct and operation of sexually oriented business establishments, and to make such related reports and recommendations to city council; 
(4)  To conduct such hearings, studies, and reports he may deem necessary, and to conduct such hearings on the revocation or suspension of a sexually oriented business establishment registration as required pursuant to this ordinance; 
(5)  To take such further actions as he may deem necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this ordinance and to exercise such additional powers in furtherance thereof as are implied by the powers and duties expressly set forth in this ordinance. 
§ 785.03 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT REGISTRATIONS GENERALLY. 
(A)  A sexually oriented business registration shall be required to establish, operate or maintain a sexually oriented business within this city. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person not having a current and valid sexually oriented business registration to establish, operate, or maintain a sexually oriented business establishment within the city at any time after the effective date of this ordinance. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any registrant to establish, operate or maintain a sexually oriented business establishment within this city except in the manner authorized by, and in compliance with, the provisions of this ordinance and the registrant's sexually oriented business registration. 
(D)  Every sexually oriented business registration shall be provided by the city and shall, at a minimum, prominently display on its face the name of the registrant, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. Every registrant shall display the registration at all times in plain view in a conspicuous place on the registered premises so that it can be easily seen and read at any time by any person entering the registered premises. 
(E)  Sexually oriented business registrations shall be operative and valid, unless first terminated, suspended, or revoked for a term of one (1) year commencing on the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making an application. Application for renewal shall be made at least forty-five (45) days before the expiration date. 
§ 785.04 - FORM AND SUBMITTAL OF REGISTRATION APPLICATION. 
(A)  An application for a sexually oriented business registration, or the renewal thereof, shall be made in writing to the city manager on a form prescribed by the city manager and shall be signed by 1) the applicant, if the applicant is an individual, 2) at least one (1) of the persons entitled to share in the profits of the organization and having unlimited personal liability for the obligations of the organization and the right to bind all other such persons, if the applicant is a partnership (general or limited), joint venture, or any other type of organization, or 3) by a duly authorized agent, if the applicant is a corporation. Each application shall specifically identify the applicant and the registered premises for which a sexually oriented business registration is sought. No such registration shall be sought unless and until city council approves the location of the establishment in accordance with the provisions of Article 5, § 5.03 A.3 of the Unified Development Code - Conditional Business District, and any such approval by city council shall be null and void and of no effect whatsoever if the applicant for a sexually oriented business registration is unable to satisfy the requirements of this ordinance and obtain a sexually oriented business registration. 
(B)  Every applicant for a sexually oriented business registration shall pay an administrative processing fee in the amount specified in C.O. ch. 401. This fee shall in all cases be non-refundable. 
(C)  Required information and documents. 
(1)  Names of Applicants. 
(a)  Individuals: The applicant's legal name, all of the applicant's aliases, the applicant's business address and social security number, written proof of the applicant's age, the citizenship and place of birth of the applicant and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of the applicant's naturalization. 
(b)  Corporations: The applicant corporation's complete name and official business address; the legal name, all aliases, and the ages, business addresses, and social security numbers of all the directors, officers, and managers of the corporation and of every person owning or controlling more than fifty (50) percent of the voting shares of the corporation; the corporation's date and place of incorporation and the objects for which it was formed; proof that the corporation is a corporation in good standing and authorized to conduct business in the State of Ohio; and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
(c)  Partnerships (general or limited), joint ventures, or any other type of organization where two (2) or more persons share in the profits and liabilities of the organization: The applicant organization's complete name and official business address; the legal name, all aliases, and the ages, business addresses and social security numbers of each partner (other than limited partners) or any other person entitled to share in the profits of the organization, whether or not any such person is also obligated to share in the liabilities of the organization. 
(2)  The general character and nature of the business of the applicant. 
(3)  The location, including street address and legal description, and telephone number of the premises for which the sexually oriented business registration is sought. 
(4)  The specific name of the business that is to be operated under the sexually oriented business registration. 
(5)  The identity of each fee simple owner of the registered premises. 
(6)  A diagram showing the internal and external configuration of the registered premises, including all doors, windows, entrances, exits, the fixed structural internal features of the registered premises, plus the interior rooms, walls, partitions, stages, performance areas, and restrooms. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; provided, however, that each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches and sufficient to show clear compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. The requirements of this paragraph shall not apply for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted for the registration sought to be renewed and if the registrant certifies that the registered premises has not been altered since the immediately preceding issuance of the registration and that the previous diagram continues to accurately depict the exterior and interior layouts of the registered premises. The approval or use of the diagram required pursuant to the paragraph shall not be deemed to be, and shall not be interpreted or construed to constitute, any other city approval otherwise required pursuant to applicable city ordinances and regulations. 
(7)  The specific type or types of sexually oriented business(es) that the applicant proposes to operate in the registered premises. 
(8)  A copy of each sexually oriented business registration, liquor license, and gaming registration currently held by the applicant or any of the individuals identified in the application. 
(9)  The name of the individual or individuals who shall be the day-to-day, on-site managers of the proposed sexually oriented business. 
(10)  Any application for a sexually oriented business registration that does not include all of the information and documents required pursuant to this section shall be deemed to be incomplete and shall not be acted on or processed by the city. The city manager, or his designee, shall, within five (5) business days of such submittal, return the incomplete application to the applicant along with a written explanation of the reasons why the application is incomplete. 
§ 785.05 - PROCESSING OF REGISTRATION APPLICATION. 
(A)  Upon the filing of an application for a sexually oriented business registration, the city manager or his designee shall refer the application to the reviewing city departments for investigation to be made on the information contained in the application. The application process shall be completed within thirty (30) days from the date of the city's receipt of the completed application. After the investigation, the city manager or his designee shall issue a registration unless the requirements set forth in this ordinance are not met. 
(B)  An applicant may appeal any decision of the city manager or his designee denying an application to the Council of the City of Upper Arlington. The applicant must file the appeal with the clerk of council within ten (10) City of Upper Arlington business days after service of notice upon the applicant of the city manager's, or his designee's, decision. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The city manager or his designee may submit a memorandum in response if he so desires. After reviewing the memoranda, as well as the city manager's, or his designee's, written decision, the city council shall vote either to uphold or overrule the decision. City council shall rule on the appeal within thirty (30) days of its filing. All parties shall comply with the city manager's, or his designee's, decision pending appeal. 
§ 785.06 - STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS REGISTRATION. 
(A)  The city manager or his designee shall issue a sexually oriented business registration to any applicant if, but only if, the city manager or his designee finds and determines all of the following based on the reports, investigations, and inspections conducted by the city manager or his designee and the reviewing departments and on any other credible information on which it is reasonable for the city manager or his designee to rely. 
(1)  All information and documents required by this ordinance for issuance of a sexually oriented business registration have been properly provided and the material statements made in the application are true and correct. 
(2)  No person identified in the application has been convicted of, or pleaded nolo contendere to, any criminal act within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(3)  No person identified in the application is overdue on payment to the city or to any government agency of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed on any such individual in connection with any sexually oriented business. 
(4)  The sexually oriented business and the registered premises comply with all then-applicable building, health, and safety codes and have received all necessary zoning approvals required pursuant to the then-applicable provisions of Part 11-Unified Development Code. 
(5)  The applicant has confirmed in writing and under oath as part of the application that the applicant has read this ordinance and all provisions of Part 11-Unified Development Code applicable to sexually oriented businesses, that the applicant is familiar with their terms and conditions, and that the registered premises and the proposed sexually oriented business establishment and its proposed operation are and shall be in compliance therewith. 
(B)  If the city manager or his designee determines that the applicant has not met any one (1) or more of the conditions set forth herein, then the city manager or his designee shall deny issuance of the sexually oriented business registration and shall give the applicant a written notification and explanation of such denial. 
(C)  If the city manager or his designee does not issue or deny the sexually oriented business registration within thirty (30) City of Upper Arlington business days after the properly completed application is submitted, then the sexually oriented business registration applied for shall be deemed to have been issued. 
§ 785.07 - INSPECTION BY THE CITY. 
(A)  Authority: The city manager or his designee and other city representatives and departments with jurisdiction shall periodically inspect all sexually oriented businesses as shall be necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and all other applicable law. 
(B)  Registrant cooperation: A registrant shall permit representatives of the city to inspect the registered premises and the sexually oriented business establishment for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and all other applicable law at any time during which the registered premises is occupied or the sexually oriented business establishment is open for business. 
(C)  Interference or refusal illegal: It shall be unlawful for the registrant, any sexually oriented business employee, or any other person to prohibit, interfere with, or refuse to allow, any lawful inspection conducted at any time by the city pursuant to this ordinance or any other authority. 
(D)  Suspension or revocation: Any such prohibition, interference, or refusal shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the sexually oriented business registration. 
§ 785.08 - CHANGE IN INFORMATION. 
During the pendency of any application for, or during the term of, any sexually oriented business registration, the applicant or registrant shall promptly notify the city manager or his designee in writing of any change in any material information given by the applicant or registrant in the application for such registration, including specifically, but without limitation, any change in managers of the sexually oriented business establishment or in the individuals identified in the application pursuant to this ordinance; or if any of the events constituting grounds for suspension or revocation pursuant to this ordinance occur. 
§ 785.09 - REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES. 
(A)  General compliance: All registered premises and sexually oriented business establishments shall comply with the provisions of this ordinance, and with the provisions of all other applicable city ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations and all other applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(B)  Hours of operation: 
(1)  No sexually oriented business establishment shall be open for business at any time on any State of Ohio or Federal holiday. 
(2)  No sexually oriented business establishment shall be open for business between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on any day. 
(3)  No sexually oriented business establishment shall be open for business at any time on any Sunday. 
(C)  Animals: No animals, except those trained and required to assist disabled persons, shall be permitted at any time or in any sexually oriented business establishment or registered premises. 
(D)  Restrooms: All restroom in a sexually oriented business establishment shall be equipped with standard toilets, sinks, and other traditional lavatory facilities. No adult materials or live performances shall be provided or allowed at any time in the restrooms of a sexually oriented business establishment. separate male and female restrooms shall be provided for and used by sexually oriented business establishment employees and patrons. 
(E)  Restricted access: No sexually oriented business establishment patron shall be permitted at any time to enter into any of the non-public portions of any sexually oriented business establishment, including specifically, but without limitation, any storage areas or dressing or other rooms provided for the benefit or sexually oriented business employees. This subsection shall not apply to persons delivering goods and materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to the registered premises or to any persons performing appropriate legal inspections. These persons shall remain in the non-public areas only for the purposes and to the extent and time necessary to perform their job duties. 
(F)  Specific prohibited acts: 
(1)  No sexually oriented business employee or any other person at any sexually oriented business establishment shall appear, be present, or perform while nude, semi-nude; further, no such employee shall appear, be present, or perform while nude at any sexually oriented business establishment that serves or otherwise provides alcoholic liquor pursuant to a registration issued by the State of Ohio. 
(2)  No sexually oriented business employee or any other person at any sexually oriented business establishment shall perform or conduct any specified sexual activity with or for any sexually oriented business patron or any other person at any sexually oriented business establishment. No sexually oriented business establishment patron or any other person at any sexually oriented business establishment shall perform or conduct any specified sexual activity with or for any sexually oriented business establishment employee or patron or any other person at any sexually oriented business establishment. 
(3)  Straddle dances, as previously defined, shall be prohibited at all sexually oriented business establishments. 
(G)  Noise: No loudspeakers or sound equipment audible beyond the Registered premises shall be used at any time. 
(H)  Gambling and related devices prohibited: No sexually oriented business establishment shall contain any video, pinball, slot, bagatelle, pigeon-hold, pool, or any other games, machines, tables or implements. 
(I)  Manager's station: Each sexually oriented business establishment shall have one (1) or more manager's stations. The interior of each sexually oriented business establishment shall be configured in such a manner that there is a direct and substantially unobstructed view from at least one (1) manager's station to every part of each area, except restrooms, of the establishment to which any sexually oriented business establishment patron is permitted access for any purpose. 
(J)  Alcohol prohibition: No sexually oriented business establishment that serves or otherwise provides alcoholic liquor pursuant to a liquor license shall provide or allow sexually oriented business establishment employees that appear, are present, or perform while nude. 
(K)  Employee registration: All application for a sexually oriented business registration, or the renewal thereof, shall be made in writing to the city manager on a form prescribed by the city manager and shall be signed by the applicant. Every applicant for an employee registration shall pay an administrative process fee in the amount specified in C.O. ch. 401. The following information shall be required: 
(1)  The applicant's legal name, all of the applicant's aliases, the applicant's address, telephone number and social security number, written proof of the applicant's age, and the citizenship and place of birth of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and location, including street address and telephone number of the sexually oriented business establishment for which the registrant will be working. 
(3)  The title of the job the registrant will be performing. 
Such employee registration shall be operative and valid for a period of one (1) year commencing on the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making an application. An application shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date. 
§ 785.10 - SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT BOOTHS. 
(A)  Prohibited except in adult stores: Adult booths shall be prohibited in all sexually oriented business establishments except adult stores. 
(B)  Occupancy and prohibited acts: Only one (1) individual shall occupy an adult booth at any one time. No individual occupying an adult booth shall engage in any specified sexual activities. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of an adult booth. 
(C)  Open booth requirement: In addition to satisfying the manager station requirements of this ordinance, all adult stores containing adult booths shall be physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion of each adult booth shall be visible from the common area of the adult store. To satisfy this requirement, there shall be a permanently open and unobstructed entranceway for each adult booth and for the entranceway from the area of the adult store that provides other adult materials to the area of the adult store containing the adult booths. Each of these entranceways shall not be capable of being closed or obstructed, entirely or partially, by any door, curtain, partition, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever that would be capable of wholly or partially obscuring the area of the adult store containing the adult booths within a sexually oriented business establishment for the purpose of providing secluded viewing of adult materials or live performances. 
(D)  Aisle required: There shall be one (1) continuous lighted main aisle alongside the adult booths provided in any adult store. Each person situated in a booth shall be visible at all times from the aisle. 
(E)  Holes prohibited: Except for the open booth entranceway, the walls and partitions of each adult booth shall be constructed and maintained of solid walls or partitions without any holes or openings whatsoever. 
(F)  Signage: A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entranceway to each adult booth that states that only one (1) person is allowed in an adult booth at any one time, that it is unlawful to engage in any specified sexual activities while in an adult booth, and that it is unlawful to damage or deface any portion of an adult booth. 
(G)  Age limitations: 
(1)  No sexually oriented business establishment employee nor any sexually oriented business establishment patron at an adult booth or a registered premises that includes an adult booth shall be under the age of 21. 
(2)  No person under the age of 21 shall be admitted to any adult booth or any registered premises that includes an adult booth. 
(3)  No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any adult booth or at any registered premises that includes an adult booth. 
(4)  No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or other goods or services at or from any adult booth or any registered premises that includes an adult booth. 
§ 785.11 - SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT CABARETS. 
(A)  Performance area: The performance area of an adult cabaret shall be limited to one (1) or more stages or platforms permanently anchored to the floor (a "cabaret stage"). Each cabaret stage shall be elevated above the level of, and horizontally separated by at least eighteen (18) inches from the patron seating areas and from all areas of the premises to which patrons have access. A continuous barrier at least two (2) feet in height and located at least eighteen (18) inches from all points of the perimeter of each cabaret stage shall separate each cabaret stage from all patron seating areas. No patron shall be allowed at any time on any cabaret stage. 
(B)  Lighting: Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the public areas of the adult cabaret so that all objects are plainly visible at all times. A minimum lighting level of not less than three-foot candles horizontal, measured at thirty (30) inches above the floor and on ten-foot centers shall be maintained at all times for all areas of the adult cabaret where sexually oriented business establishment patrons are permitted. 
(C)  Tipping: No sexually oriented business establishment patron shall offer, and no sexually oriented business establishment employee having performed on any cabaret stage shall accept any form of tip or gratuity offered directly or personally to the employee by the sexually oriented business establishment patron. Rather, all tips and gratuities to sexually oriented business establishment employees performing on any cabaret stage shall be placed into a receptacle provided for the receipt of such tips and gratuities by the sexually oriented business establishment or shall be placed by the sexually oriented business establishment patron on the cabaret stage on which the sexually oriented business establishment employee is performing. 
(D)  Notice of select rules: A sign at least two (2) feet by two (2) feet with letters of at least one (1) inch high shall be conspicuously displayed on or adjacent to every cabaret stage stating the following: 
THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF UPPER ARLINGTON, OHIO. ENTERTAINERS ARE: 
1.  NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL CONDUCT. 
2.  NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT ANY TIPS DIRECTLY OR PERSONALLY FROM PATRONS. ANY SUCH TIPS MUST BE PLACED INTO THE RECEPTACLE PROVIDED BY MANAGEMENT OR MUST BE PLACED DIRECTLY ON THE CABARET STAGE. 
3.  NOT PERMITTED TO APPEAR IN A STATE OF NUDITY. 
(E)  Age limitations: 
(1)  No sexually oriented business establishment employee or sexually oriented business establishment patron at an adult cabaret or a registered premises used for an adult cabaret shall be under the age of 21. 
(2)  No person under the age of 21 shall be admitted to any adult cabaret or to any registered premises used for an adult cabaret. 
(3)  No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any adult cabaret or any registered premises used for an adult cabaret. 
(4)  No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or other goods or services at or from any adult cabaret or any registered premises used for an adult cabaret. 
§ 785.12 - SPECIAL REGULATION FOR ADULT STORES. 
(A)  Windows: Window areas for adult stores shall not be covered or obstructed in any way. 
(B)  Age limitations: 
(1)  No sexually oriented business establishment employee or sexually oriented business establishment patron at an adult store or a registered premises used for an adult store shall be under the age of 21. 
(2)  No person under the age of 21 shall be admitted to any adult store or to any registered premises used for an adult store. 
(3)  No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any adult store or registered premises used for an adult store. 
(4)  No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or other goods or services at or from any adult store or any registered premises used for an adult store. 
§ 785.13 - SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT THEATERS. 
(A)  Seating: Each adult theater shall provide seating only in individual fixed chairs with arms or in fixed seats separated from each other by immovable arms and not on couches, benches, or any other multiple person seating structures. 
(B)  Aisle: Each adult theater shall have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating area in order that each person seated in the adult theater shall be visible from the aisle at all times. 
(C)  Sign: Each adult theater shall have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entranceway to the auditorium or similar area that lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats in the auditorium area. 
(D)  Age limitations: 
(1)  No sexually oriented business establishment employee or sexually oriented business establishment patron at an adult theater or a registered premises used for an adult theater shall be under the age of 21. 
(2)  No person under the age of 21 shall be admitted to any adult theater or to any registered premises used for an adult theater. 
(3)  No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any adult theater or any registered premises used for an adult theater. 
(4)  No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or other goods or services at or from any adult theater or any registered premises used for an adult theater. 
§ 785.14 - REGISTRANT RESPONSIBILITY FOR EMPLOYEES. 
Every act or omission by a sexually oriented business establishment employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed to be the act or omission of the registrant if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the registrant, or as a result of the Registrant's negligent failure to supervise the sexually oriented business establishment employee. The registrant shall be punished for any such act or omission in the same manner as if the registrations committed the act or caused the omission. Accordingly, any such act or omission of any such employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed, for purposes of determining whether the registrant's sexually oriented business establishment registration shall be revoked, suspended, or renewed, to be the act or omission of the registrant. 
§ 785.15 - REGISTRATION REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION. 
(A)  Grounds: Pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section, the city manager or his designee may suspend for not more than thirty (30) days, or revoke, any sexually oriented business establishment registration if the city manager or his designee, based on credible and reasonably reliable information and evidence, determines that any one (1) or more of the following has occurred: 
(1)  The registrant has violated any of the provisions or requirements of this ordinance or the sexually oriented business establishment registration issued pursuant hereto, or any provision of the city's codified ordinances applicable to the registered premises or the sexually oriented business establishment. 
(2)  The registrant: 
(a)  Knowingly or negligently furnished false or misleading information or withheld information on any application or other document submitted to the city for the issuance or renewal of any sexually oriented business establishment registration; or 
(b)  knowingly or negligently caused or suffered any other person to furnish or withhold any such information on the registrant's behalf. 
(3)  The registrant has committed a felony or specified criminal act on the registered premises. 
(4)  The registrant authorizes, approves, or, as a result of the registrant's negligent failure to supervise the registered premises or the sexually oriented business establishment, allows a sexually oriented business establishment employee, a sexually oriented business establishment patron, or any other person to: 
(a)  Violate any provisions or requirements of this ordinance or of the provisions or requirements of the sexually oriented business establishment registration issued pursuant hereto; or 
(b)  Commit any felony or specified criminal act on the registered premises. 
(B)  Procedure: A sexually oriented business establishment registration may be suspended for not more than thirty (30) days or revoked pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in this subsection. 
(1)  Notice: Upon determining that one (1) or more of the grounds for suspension or revocation under subsection (1) of the section may exist, the city manager or his designee shall serve a written notice on the registrant in person or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the registrant's address as set forth in the registrant's application. The written notice shall, at a minimum: 
(a)  State that the city manager or his designee has determined that the sexually oriented business establishment registration may be subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to this ordinance; 
(b)  Identify the specific grounds for the determination; and 
(c)  Set a date for a hearing regarding the determination as to the possibility of suspension or revocation of the sexually oriented business establishment registration. The date of the hearing shall be no less than five (5) days after service of the city manager's or his designee's notice, unless an earlier or later date is agreed to by the registrant and the city manager or his designee. 
(2)  Hearing: The hearing shall be conducted by the city manager, and the hearing body shall be comprised of the city manager, the assistant city manager and the finance director. At the hearing, the registrant may present and submit evidence and witnesses to refute the grounds cited by the city for suspending or revoking the registration and the city and any other persons may submit evidence and witnesses to sustain such grounds. The administrative record compiled on the sexually oriented business establishment pursuant to this ordinance shall be made part of the hearing record. Within three (3) City of Upper Arlington business days after the close of the hearing, the city manager shall, having considered the record made at the hearing, render a decision in writing, setting forth the reasons for the decision. The action taken by the hearing body may in turn be appealed to the Council of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio by filing a written notice of appeal with the clerk of council within ten (10) City of Upper Arlington business days after service of notice upon the applicant of the hearing body's decision. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The hearing body may submit a memorandum in response. After reviewing the memoranda and the administrative record, the city council shall vote to either uphold or overrule the decision. City council shall rule on the appeal within thirty (30) City of Upper Arlington business days of its filing. 
(3)  Notice and effective date of suspension or revocation: The written decision shall be served on the Registrant in person or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the registrant's address as set forth in the registrant's application. Any suspension or revocation, as the case may be, shall take effect on the day that the city manager's written decision is delivered in person or three (3) City of Upper Arlington business days after it is placed in the United States mail as provided in this paragraph. 
(4)  Surrender of registration: Upon the suspension or revocation of a sexually oriented business establishment registration pursuant to this ordinance, the city manager shall take custody of the suspended or revoked registration. 
§ 785.16 - ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD. 
The city manager or his designee shall cause to be kept an accurate record of every sexually oriented business establishment registration application received and acted on, together with all relevant information and material pertaining to such application, any sexually oriented business establishment registration issued pursuant hereto, and any sexually oriented business establishment operated pursuant to such sexually oriented business establishment registration. 
§ 785.17 - RECORDKEEPING BY REGISTRANT. 
The registrant of every sexually oriented business establishment shall maintain a register of all of its sexually oriented business establishment employees. For each such employee, the register shall include the following information: 
(A)  Legal name; 
(B)  Any and all aliases; 
(C)  Date of birth; 
(D)  Gender; 
(E)  Social security number; 
(F)  Date of commencement of employment; 
(G)  Date of employment termination, if applicable; 
(H)  Specific job or employment duties. 
The register shall be maintained for all current employees and all employees employed at any time during the preceding thirty-six (36) months. The registrant shall make the register of its sexually oriented business establishment employees available for inspection by the city immediately upon demand at all reasonable times. 
§ 785.18 - PENALTY. 
Any person who violates, neglects, refuses to comply with, or assists or participates in any way in violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this ordinance or of any of the provisions or requirements of any sexually oriented business establishment registration, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. The penalty upon conviction of such person shall be imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days and/or a fine not exceeding two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). 
Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The city manager or his designee shall cause written notice to be given to any such person of any such violation and the penalty and fine therefore by serving a citation in person or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the registrant's address as set forth in the registrant's application. 
§ 785.19 - NUISANCE DECLARED. 
Any sexually oriented business establishment established, operated, or maintained in violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this ordinance or of any sexually oriented business establishment registration shall be, and the same is, declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth in this ordinance, commence an action to enjoin, remove, or abate such nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin any person from establishing, operating or maintaining a sexually oriented business establishment contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. 
§ 785.20 - SEVERABILITY. 
In the event that any provision of this ordinance, or any part thereof, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction on its face or as applied, such holding shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of any of the remaining provisions of this ordinance, or any part thereof, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance or of said provision as applied to any other person or circumstance. 
Part 9 - STREETS AND SERVICES CODE 
CHAPTER 901. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 

§ 901.01 - STREET OPENINGS, PERMIT, DEPOSIT. 
No person shall open or excavate in any street without first obtaining a right-of-way permit in accordance with the requirements of C.O. § 933.15. 
All such openings or excavations shall be done subject to the requirements of C.O. ch. 933. 
(Ord. No. 64-2016 , § 2, 11-28-2016) 
§ 901.02 - SIDEWALK INSPECTION PROGRAM. 
The city manager shall conduct an inspection program with its primary consideration to be the publics' health, safety and welfare. The city manager or authorized designees shall inspect each sidewalk in public rights-of-way for streets and alleys at a minimum of once every five (5) years. 
§ 901.03 - OWNER TO REPAIR SIDEWALKS. 
Each owner of any lot or parcel of ground in the city shall cause the sidewalk and every part thereof in front of, alongside or abutting such lot or parcel to be kept in good order and repair and free from any nuisance. The city manager or designee may direct such owner to perform replacement or repair as needed to ensure the publics' health, safety and welfare, if one of the following is present: 
(A)  A minimum of one (1) inch vertical separation anywhere in the sidewalk area, including individual blocks. 
(B)  Slope along or across a sidewalk block of one (1) inch or more per foot above or below the adjacent sidewalk block's grade. 
(C)  Spalled concrete, deteriorated patches, wedges or ramps, exceeding a 1 in 12 slope, loose or partial infill, cracks of one-half (1/2) inch or more in width, or cracks with protruding vegetation, all of which create an irregular walking surface. 
Should the city manager or designee determine that any of the conditions set forth in C.O. § 901.03(A), (B), or (C) are caused by the presence or growth of tree roots from a tree growing within a public street right-of-way, the city shall perform all necessary repairs or replacement of sidewalk damaged by tree growth at city expense. 
The city manager or designee may approve alternate repair methods of sidewalk construction, which do not meet construction requirements as defined in C.O. § 1304.03 to facilitate repair or replacement of existing sidewalks. 
The city manager's or designee's notification to repair and replace sidewalks shall be in writing, include the address of the property, the reason why a repair or replacement is needed, repair methods and payment requirements. Should the owner fail to contact the city manager or designee within thirty (30) days of notification or complete needed repairs within ninety (90) days of the date of notification, the city manager is authorized and directed to cause or contract such repairs or replacement and bill the owner at the rate stated within the written notification provided to the owner which shall include material, labor, equipment and administrative costs. If the owner fails to pay the bill within thirty (30) days of the date on the city's bill, the rate shall be charged against the real estate upon which the sidewalk is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
Such owner shall not be subject to the penalty provided by C.O. § 901.99, by reason of his failure to keep such sidewalk in repair, unless written notice has been given him by the city manager or designee, designating the repairs needed and fixing a time, not less than ten (10) days after the date of such notice, within which such repairs are to be made. Without excluding other methods of giving such notice, notice may be given by certified or registered mail, addressed to such owner at the address, if any, shown in the county treasurer's office for the mailing of tax bills, or for want of such address, to the lot or parcel in question, if there is a building thereon. Notice shall be deemed to be complete upon mailing. 
§ 901.04 - NOTICE TO CONSTRUCT SIDEWALKS. 
If during the course of the sidewalk inspection program, the city manager or designee finds a location in which sidewalks have been installed on one (1) side of a street along sixty percent (60%) or more of the frontage between intersecting streets, it shall be the duty of the city manager to report this location to council. It is hereby declared to be the intention and policy of council that sidewalks be installed the entire distance between intersecting streets when sixty percent (60%) or more of the frontage between said streets has been provided with sidewalks. Additional sidewalks needed to complete a continuous block between intersecting streets shall be installed by the abutting property owner, or at his/her expense unless otherwise directed by the city council. 
§ 901.05 - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ABUTTING NEW BUILDINGS, PERMIT. 
(A)  Whenever a building is about to be constructed on a lot or parcel of land that comprises a part of a subdivision plat filed for record after August 27, 1956 and abuts any street that has been improved by the installation of curbs and gutters, the owner shall apply for and obtain, simultaneously with the issuance of the building permit for such construction, a permit for the construction of sidewalks abutting such land, and shall construct the sidewalks per City Code prior to the final inspection and approval of the building construction. 
(B)  (1)  Whenever a building is about to be constructed on a lot or parcel of land that comprises a part of a subdivision plat filed for record on or before August 27, 1956, abuts any street that has been improved by the installation of curbs and gutters, and where sidewalk has been installed on the same block and the same side of the street as the lot or parcel, the owner shall apply for and obtain, simultaneously with the issuance of the building permit for such construction, a permit for the construction of sidewalks abutting such land, and shall construct the sidewalks per City Code prior to the final inspection and approval of the building construction. 
(2)  Corner lots or parcels required to install sidewalks by this section shall only be required to install sidewalks abutting the lot on the frontage that has a preexisting sidewalk between the lot or parcel and the next intersecting street on the non-corner side of the lot or parcel. If both streets fronting the corner lot or parcel have such preexisting sidewalk, then the corner lot or parcel will be required to install sidewalk on both frontages. 
(Ord. No. 11-2012; Ord. No. 48-2015, § 1, 7-13-2015 ) 
Section 2 of Ord. No. 48-2015 states, "The amendments to C.O. § 901.05 in Section 1 of this Ordinance shall be applied retroactively to not require the construction of a sidewalk by any property owner that constructed a building after April 9, 2012 on a lot or parcel that comprises a part of a subdivision plat filed for record on or before August 27, 1956 where no sidewalk has been installed on the same block and the same side of the street as the lot or parcel, regardless of whether the approved plans for the building included the construction of a sidewalk." 
§ 901.06 - DRIVEWAY GUTTER REPAIR. 
Each owner of any lot or parcel of ground in the city from which a driveway into an abutting street shall cause the curb and gutter at the driveway entrance to be maintained, repaired or replaced as needed. Since gutters at driveway entrances have usually been constructed by private contractors, and not as a part of the original construction of the street curbs and gutters, it shall be the city's policy not to replace defective or deteriorated driveway entrances at the city's expense unless the curb and gutter in the entire block is being replaced by the city as a general improvement. Exceptions to this policy may be made by the council in instances where the driveway gutter was constructed, as part of the original street improvement, and it appears that such construction was defective. 
The city manager or designee may direct such owner to perform replacement or repair as needed to ensure the safe passage of vehicles and pedestrians along the city's streets and alleys. The city manager's or designee's notification to repair or replace a driveway gutter shall be in writing, include the address of the property, the reason why a repair or replacement is needed, repair methods and payment requirements. Should the owner fail to complete needed repairs within thirty (30) days, the city manager is authorized and directed to cause or contract such repairs or replacement and bill the owner at the rate stated within the written notification provided to the owner. If the owner fails to pay the bill within thirty (30) days of the date on the city's bill, the rate shall be charged against the real estate upon which the driveway gutter is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
§ 901.07 - DRIVEWAY GUTTER OBSTRUCTION. 
No person shall, and no person, being the owner of property abutting the right-of-way, shall permit another person to remove, rebuild, disturb, repair, alter or fill any curb or gutter so as to restrict or change the flow of the surface water therein. If the contractor or person so removing, rebuilding, disturbing, repairing, altering or filling the curb and gutter cannot be found or identified, then the abutting owner shall be held responsible for such violation. 
§ 901.08 - CURB AND GUTTER, DRIVEWAY AND CURB CUT PERMITS, FEE. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make, construct or replace any driveway or entrance to private property from any public street or to remove, disturb, alter or fill any curb on any such street for the purpose of installing a driveway or entrance or repairing a curb and gutter in front of their property without first obtaining a right-of-way permit in accordance with the requirements of C.O. § 933.15. All such openings or excavations shall be done subject to the requirements of C.O. ch. 933. 
The fee for a permit to construct a new driveway over city property or to replace an existing driveway over city property shall be paid for each type of work and as specified in C.O. § 401.06. Such fees shall be charged and collected by the finance department and deposited in the general fund. The fee shall not be refunded, if the permit is not used. No permit shall be issued except to the property owner or his authorized agent or contractor, and no such work shall be performed except by a registrant under C.O. § 729.02. The city manager may refuse any permit, if the issuance thereof does not meet the requirements of C.O. chs. 907, 1304 and U.D.O. § 6.03. Any sealing, resurfacing or oiling of driveways not affecting the curb or gutter in any way, shall be exempted from the right-of-way permit requirement stated above. 
(Ord. No. 34-2011, 7-13-2011; Ord. No. 64-2016 , § 3, 11-28-2016) 
§ 901.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
CHAPTER 903. - STREET IMPROVEMENTS 

§ 903.01 - COUNCIL APPROVAL, CITY CONTRACT. 
Upon receipt of a request for the right to improve any public street, road, alley or right-of-way, by paving, installing curbs, gutters, storm or sanitary sewers or water lines, if favorable action upon such request is taken by council, the person making such request shall enter into a contract with the city, which contract shall contain the terms and conditions as set forth in this chapter. 
§ 903.02 - SPECIFICATIONS. 
The improvements to be constructed shall be in accordance with plans and specifications to be approved by the director of public service and the city manager, which plans and specifications shall meet the minimum requirements of the city for such improvement. Plans for the paving of streets shall not be approved unless provision is made to insure complete drainage of the street and adjacent areas. No part of such improvements shall be constructed on private property unless satisfactory easements are obtained. 
( Ord. No. 75-2015, § 2, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 903.03 - COMMENCEMENT OF WORK. 
The making of such improvements shall be commenced on or before a date to be fixed by the city manager and prosecuted with diligence to completion. 
§ 903.04 - LIABILITY AND CLAIMS. 
The city shall be held free and harmless from any and all liens and claims for damage of every nature arising or growing out of the improvements so agreed to be made. 
§ 903.05 - PAYMENT OF COSTS, DEPOSITS. 
The person granted such right shall pay the cost to the city of approval of plans and specifications, inspection and engineering supervision of construction by the director of public service and the cost of legal services to the city and administrative expense incident to such improvements. Such person, if required by the city manager, shall deposit such sums of money as are estimated to be necessary for the foregoing purposes, and in the event that such estimated amounts are found to be insufficient shall deposit such additional sum as may be necessary, all unexpended monies so deposited to be refunded. 
( Ord. No. 75-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 903.06 - LEGAL CHARGES. 
The charge to be collected for legal services and administrative expenses shall be one percent (1%) of the field cost of such improvements, as estimated by the director of public service; provided, however, that the city manager may determine upon a different charge where, in his opinion, such per centum charge is not fair to both parties. 
( Ord. No. 75-2015, § 4, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 903.07 - DETERMINATION OF CHARGES. 
The charge to be collected for approval of plans and specifications and engineering supervision of construction shall be four percent (4%) of the field cost of such improvements, as estimated by the director of public service. The charge to be collected for inspection of construction shall be one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the estimated field cost, or, at the discretion of the city manager, the actual expense incurred by the city on an hourly basis for the required inspections. 
Such charges, after collection by the city manager, shall be transmitted to the finance director for payment to the general fund. 
( Ord. No. 75-2015, § 5, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 903.08 - SUSPENSION OF WORK. 
Any violation of the terms of the contract or noncompliance therewith shall be cause for the suspension of work upon order of the director of public service. 
( Ord. No. 75-2015, § 6, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 903.09 - PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS. 
Such person shall secure the performance of his contract in one of the following ways: 
(A)  Furnish a surety bond satisfactory to the city manager, in the amount of the cost of the improvement as estimated by the city director of public service, to guarantee the faithful performance of the contract. 
(B)  Deposit in a bank or savings and loan association satisfactory to the city manager, a sum not less than the estimated cost of construction, to be held in escrow to guarantee the faithful performance of the contract. The form of the escrow agreement shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney and the city manager. It may provide that payments be made from such fund from time to time upon certificates by the director of public service, that the balance remaining in the fund after such payments will, in his opinion, be adequate to pay the remaining cost of the improvements, and such further terms as may be determined by the city attorney and the city manager to be necessary or advisable to insure the performance of the contract. 
(C)  Deposit with the city manager a certified copy of his contract with the contractor proposing to make such improvement, together with a certified check payable to the city, in an amount not less than the contract price of such improvement, to be held in escrow by the city manager until the satisfactory completion of construction, unless there be a default in the performance of the contract with the city, in which event the check may be cashed by the proper city official and the proceeds thereof used to complete the improvement, to pay claims connected with the improvement for which such person may be liable, or to cure any other default in the performance of the contract with the city or of the construction contract. 
( Ord. No. 75-2015, § 7, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 903.10 - IMPROVEMENTS TO BECOME CITY PROPERTY. 
Upon completion of the work in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor, the improvements shall become the property of the city at no cost to the city and without encumbrance of any nature. 
§ 903.11 - REQUIREMENTS OF CITY MANAGER. 
The contract shall contain such further provisions as may be determined by the city manager to be necessary for the protection of the city and to carry out the intent of this chapter. 
CHAPTER 907. - TREES, SHRUBBERY, AND OTHER PLANTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 89-2015, § 7, adopted February 22, 2016 , amended chapter 907 title to read as herein set out. Formerly, such chapter was titled Trees and Shrubbery. 

§ 907.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in Title 9, Chapter 907 of the Upper Arlington Codified Ordinances: 
    City manager: means the city manager or a person designated by the city manager. 
    Groundcover: means any plant or shrub that does not exceed ten (10) inches in height. 
    Herbaceous plant: means a plant which has no persistent woody stem and may be annual, biennial, or perennial. 
    Managed forest: real property dominated by trees and associated shrubs and understory plants that is maintained by methods such as selective removal of dead, damaged, or diseased trees and/or control of invasive species or forest insects and diseases. 
    Noxious weeds: shall include but not be limited to thistle, burdock, jimson weed, ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak and poison sumac. 
    Pathway: means right-of-way between the curb and the abutting owner's property line (treelawn), where sidewalks have not been constructed. 
    Person: means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Plant: means any member of the plant kingdom, as distinguished from the animal kingdom, that generally has rigid cellulose walls and makes its own food by photosynthesis. 
    Property line: means the outer edge of a street or highway. 
    Property owner: means the person owning such property as shown by the County Auditor's Plat of the City of Upper Arlington, Franklin County, Ohio, including the executor, administrator or beneficiary of the estate of a deceased owner. 
    Public property: shall include all property owned by the City of Upper Arlington. This includes right-of-way. 
    Public trees: shall include all trees now or hereafter growing or planted in any city park or on other city owned property, and all street trees now or hereafter growing or planted within the right-of-way of any city street, regardless of who purchased or planted the tree. 
    Shrub: means a low growing woody plant with one or several perennial stems, producing branches, shoots or multiple stems from or near the base of the plant, and incapable of being pruned to provide at least six (6) feet of clear branchless trunk within five (5) years of planting. 
    Street or highway: means the entire width of every public way, easement or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and shall include alleys. 
    Tree: means a tall growing woody plant with one (1) or more perennial main stem(s) or trunk(s) which develops branches from the aerial section of the stem rather than the base; capable of being pruned to provide at least six (6) feet of clear branchless trunk below the crown within five (5) years of planting. 
    Treelawn: means that part of a street or highway, lying between the abutting owner's property line and that portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic. 
    Weeds: means all plants or vegetation, other than mowed grasses (turf lawns), trees or shrubs but shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
( Ord. No. 89-2015, § 1, 2-22-2016 ) 
§ 907.02 - DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER TO PRUNE PLANTS ON PRIVATELY OWNED PROPERTY. 
(A)  It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning real property bordering on any street upon which property there may be plants, trees or shrubs, to prune, or cause to be pruned, such plants, trees or shrubs in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade the street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks or pathways, obstruct visibility of traffic signs, obstruct visibility of or from any driveway, street, or alley intersection, or generally obstruct vehicular traffic. 
(B)  Should any person or persons owning real property bordering on any street fail to prune plants, trees, or shrubs as herein provided above, the city manager shall order such person or persons within fifteen (15) days after receipt of written notice, to so prune such plants, trees, or shrubs. The order shall be served by hand delivery to the property owner or by mailing a copy of the order to the last known address of the property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. Should the certified letter be returned unclaimed, the city shall send a letter via regular mail to the owner's last known address, and the owner shall have fifteen (15) days from the date of mailing to comply with the order. 
(C)  When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply within the specified time, it shall be lawful for the city, its employees, or agents to enter onto the property to prune such plants, trees, or shrubs and to bill to the property owner the actual cost of the work incurred by the city. In addition to paying the actual cost of the work, the property owner shall pay a penalty equal to fifty percent (50%) of the actual cost of the work. 
(D)  If the property owner fails to pay for the actual cost of the work and/or the penalty, city council may make a written return to the county auditor of its action with a statement of the charges of its services, the fees of the officers who made the service of the notice and return, and a proper description of the premises. Such amounts, when allowed, shall be entered upon the tax duplicate, shall be a lien upon such lands from the date of the entry, and shall be collected as other taxes and returned to the city with the general fund. 
(E)  Notices of violations of this section shall be served by certified mail or by hand delivery to the property owner. 
( Ord. No. 89-2015, § 2, 2-22-2016 ) 
§ 907.03 - DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER TO REMOVE PRIVATELY OWNED TREES. 
(A)  The city manager or designee may remove or cause or order to be removed, any privately owned tree(s), plant(s), or shrub(s) or part thereof which by reason of its nature is dangerous or injurious to existing sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements. The city manager or designee shall examine or cause to be examined every tree, plant, or shrub within one hundred (100) feet of any sanitary or storm sewer, drain, manhole or other public utility line above or below the surface of the ground, which has been reported as dangerous to or causing interference with said sewer, drain, manhole or public utility line. If the city manager or designee determines that the tree, plant, or shrub is dangerous or causing damage to or obstruction of such sewer, drain, manhole or public utility line, the city manager or designee shall give to the property owner of said tree, plant, or shrub, written notice of the determination and an order to remove said tree, plant, or shrub or injurious part thereof within thirty (30) days. Service of such notice shall be as prescribed in subsection (C). 
If the city manager or designee declares the removal of privately owned tree(s), plants(s), or shrub(s) pursuant to this section to be an emergency, the city, its employees, or agents may take immediate action to abate the emergency and to bill the property owner the actual costs of the work incurred by the city. If the property owner fails to pay for the actual costs of the work, the collection of such unpaid amount shall be as prescribed in C.O. § 907.02(D). 
(B)  No property owner shall retain or permit to stand, any privately owned tree(s), plant(s), or shrub(s) that a certified arborist designated by the city manager has determined to be dead, diseased, insect infested, or a nuisance so as to present a risk or hazard to the health, safety and welfare of other persons or the property of other persons in the City of Upper Arlington. The determination by the certified arborist that a privately owned tree, plant, or shrub is dead, diseased, or insect infested shall be based on industry standards. The City Manager or designee shall give to the property owner written notice of the determination and an order to remove said tree, plant, or shrub within thirty (30) days. Service of such notice shall be as prescribed in subsection (C). 
If the city manager or designee declares the removal of privately owned tree(s), plants(s), or shrub(s) pursuant to this section to be an emergency, the city, its employees, or agents may take immediate action to abate the emergency and to bill the property owner the actual costs of the work incurred by the city. If the property owner fails to pay for the actual costs of the work, the collection of such unpaid amount shall be as prescribed in C.O. § 907.02(d). 
(C)  A removal order of a non-emergency nature shall be served by mailing a copy of the order to the last known address of the property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. A period of no more than thirty (30) days from receipt of the certified mail shall be permitted to comply with the order. Should the certified mail be returned unclaimed, the city shall send a copy of the order via regular mail to the owner's last known address, and the property owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date of mailing to comply with the order. 
(D)  Should the property owner fail to comply with a removal order within the specified time, it shall be lawful for the city, its employees, or agents to enter onto the property to remove such privately owned trees, plants, or shrubs, and to bill to the property owner the actual cost of the work incurred by the city. In addition to paying the actual cost of the work, the property owner shall pay a penalty equal to fifty percent (50%) of the actual cost of the work. If the property owner fails to pay for the actual cost of the work or the penalty, the collection of such unpaid amount shall be as prescribed in C.O. § 907.02(D). 
(E)  The person to whom a removal order of a non-emergency nature is directed may appeal the order by filing a written notice with the city clerk notifying the city manager and superintendent of parks and forestry of such an appeal within the thirty (30) days after receipt of the certified letter, or within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing if sent via regular mail. Except as provided in subsection (B), the city manager will delay enforcement of the removal order until such time that the appeal may be presented to and decided by the tree commission. 
(F)  The appeal shall be placed on the tree commission meeting agenda within ninety (90) days. The appellant may submit in writing to the city clerk any supporting additional information, explanations, blueprints, consultant reports, etc. Supporting documents must be received at least seven (7) days prior to the tree commission's review. 
The tree commission shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the requirements of ORC § 2506.07. A quorum of the tree commission must be present and four (4) votes shall constitute a majority of the tree commission in determining the result. 
The tree commission's written decision shall be signed by the chair, or vice chair in the chair's absence. 
(G)  The decision of the tree commission may be appealed to city council by filing a written notice with the city clerk within seven (7) days of the tree commission's decision. 
(H)  The appeal from the tree commission's decision shall be placed on the city council meeting agenda within ninety (90) days from the date of the notice of appeal. The appellant may submit in writing to the city clerk any supporting additional information, explanations, blueprints, consultant reports, etc. Supporting documents must be received at least seven (7) days prior to city council's review. 
(I)  City council's written decision shall be considered the final decision of the city for purposes of filing an administrative appeal to common pleas court pursuant to ORC § 2506.01. 
(Ord. No. 114-2010, 3-16-2011) 
§ 907.04 - REMOVAL, REPLANTING AND REPLACEMENT OF PLANTS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. 
(A)  Wherever the city manager determines it is necessary to remove a tree, plant or shrub from a treelawn, the city's right-of-way, or other public property in connection with the paving of a sidewalk, or the paving or widening of a portion of a street, alley or highway used for vehicular traffic, or to ensure visibility from any street, alley or driveway intersection, or because the tree, plant or shrub is dead, diseased or insect infested, or for emergency purposes, or any other reason, the city shall remove such trees, plants or shrubs and transplant when practical or replace trees that cannot be efficiently moved. The city manager's decision for removal may be based on a standardized approved document that sets forth the criteria for the removal of trees, plants or shrubs. 
(B)  No person or property owner shall remove a tree or shrub from a treelawn, the city's right-of-way or other public property for the purpose of construction, or for any other reason without first filing an application and obtaining written approval from the city manager and without replacing the removed tree(s). Such replacement shall meet the standards of size, species and placement as provided for in an approval issued by the city manager. The person or property owner may be required to bear the cost of replacement of all trees removed. Failure to plant replacements per city standards shall result in replacement performed by the city, its employees, or agents, and the city may bill to the person or property owner responsible for replacement the actual cost of the work incurred by the city. If such billed costs are not paid, the collection of such unpaid amount shall be as prescribed in C.O. § 907.02(D). 
(C)  The decisions and actions of the city manager pursuant to this section shall not be subject to appeal to the city tree commission or city council. 
(D)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city reserves the absolute and unconditional right to remove any tree, plant, or shrub from the treelawn, the city's right-of-way, or other public property, regardless of who purchased or planted the tree, plant, or shrub. 
(Ord. No. 114-2010, 3-16-2011; Ord. No. 89-2015, § 3, 2-22-2016 ) 
§ 907.05 - PLANTING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. 
(A)  Except as permitted by the city manager, the planting of trees or shrubs on public property, including the city's rights-of-way, shall be prohibited. 
(B)  The planting of grass or groundcover within a treelawn or the city's right-of-way does not require the prior approval of the city manager. However, the city manager may cause the removal of any grass, groundcover, or other herbaceous plant in a treelawn or the city's right-of-way without obligating the city to reimburse the property owner or to replace the grass, groundcover, or other herbaceous plant that was removed. 
(C)  Except as permitted by the city manager, the abutting property owner shall not allow nor fail to remove the natural propagation or volunteer growth of shrubs occurring within the treelawn or the city's right-of-way abutting his or her property. 
(D)  Whenever any tree, shrub, or other plant shall be planted or permitted by the abutting property owner to remain in conflict with the provisions of state law or the ordinances of the city, the city manager may cause removal of the same without obligating the city to reimburse the property owner or to replace the trees, shrubs, or plants that were removed. 
(E)  The decision and action of the city manager, pursuant to this section, shall not be subject to appeal to the city tree commission or city council. 
( Ord. No. 89-2015, § 3, 2-22-2016 ) 
§ 907.06 - ABUSE OR MUTILATION OF PUBLIC TREES. 
(A)  Unless specifically authorized by the city manager, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any public tree or shrub; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to any tree or shrub, allow any gaseous liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to such trees or shrubs to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any public tree or shrub. 
(B)  No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches or lay any drive or sidewalk within a radius of ten (10) feet from any public tree or shrub without first obtaining written approval from the city manager. 
§ 907.07 - PLACING MATERIALS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. 
No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public street or place of the city, any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing therein, except by written consent of the city manager. 
§ 907.08 - MAINTENANCE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. 
(A)  No person shall prune, cable, brace, spray, inject or otherwise perform work on a tree in a treelawn, the city's right-of-way, or other public property, or perform work on a plant in a park, unless the person has obtained the prior approval of the city manager or designee or is complying with an order issued by the city manager pursuant to subsection (C). 
(B)  Maintenance of all grass, weeds, groundcover and other plants within a treelawn or the city's right-of-way, except trees and city-maintained landscapes, shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner, and shall be trimmed, pruned or otherwise maintained by the abutting property owner unless the city has entered into a written agreement to maintain it. No grass, groundcover, or other plants in excess of ten (10) inches in height shall be permitted. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. 
(C)  (1)  The city manager may order any person or persons owning real property bordering on any street to prune or remove, or cause to be pruned or removed, any herbaceous plant, or shrubs located on the abutting right-of-way in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade the street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks or pathways, obstruct visibility of traffic signs, obstruct visibility of or from any driveway, street, or alley intersection, generally obstruct vehicular traffic, or as otherwise described in the order. 
(2)  The order shall be served via certified mail to the last known address of the abutting property owner or by hand delivery to the abutting property owner. The owner shall have twenty (20) days from the date of mailing or hand delivery to comply with the order. Notification by mail shall be considered complete upon deposit of the written notice in the mail. The failure of delivery or lack of receipt of such notice shall not relieve the owner of the obligation to comply with the order or the responsibility for paying for the cost of work incurred by the city. 
(3)  When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply within twenty (20) days, it shall be lawful for the city, its employees, or agents to prune such plants and to bill to the property owner the actual cost of the work incurred by the city. In addition to paying the actual cost of the work, the property owner shall pay a penalty equal to fifty percent (50%) of the actual cost of the work. An order under division (C) of this section is not appealable. Only the penalty may be appealed to the tree commission. Appeal may be initiated by the aggrieved party filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within thirty (30) days of service of notice of the penalty. An appeal before the tree commission shall proceed as provided in C.O. §§ 907.03(F)-907.03(I). 
(4)  If the abutting property owner fails to pay for the actual cost of the work and/or the penalty, city council may make a written return to the county auditor of its action with a statement of the charges of its services, the fees of the officers who made the service of the notice and return, and a proper description of the premises. Such amounts, when allowed, shall be entered upon the tax duplicate, shall be a lien upon such lands from the date of the entry, and shall be collected as other taxes and returned to the city with the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 114-2010, 3-16-2011; Ord. No. 89-2015, § 5, 2-22-2016 ) 
§ 907.09 - ADOPTION OF RULES. 
The tree commission, with the approval of city council, may adopt rules consistent with this chapter which provide detailed guidelines for administration of this chapter. 
§ 907.99 - PENALTY. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation, or be imprisoned for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or both in addition to any required restitution for damages incurred by the city. 
CHAPTER 931. - WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS 

§ 931.01 - OBSTRUCTING HYDRANTS. 
No person shall obstruct or cause to be obstructed any fire hydrant, or place or cause to be placed, within ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant, any material, dirt, snow or other substance so as to obstruct such hydrant. 
§ 931.02 - USE OF HYDRANTS. 
(A)  No person other than members of the fire division or the public service department shall connect any hose with or draw any water from, or in any way molest, tamper or interfere with, any of the fire hydrants of the city, without a permit issued by the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(B)  The city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall have the authority as may be necessary in the interest of public safety, health, and welfare to promulgate rules and regulations, to interpret and implement the provisions of this chapter, and to establish permit fees for the use of hydrants. 
(C)  No person authorized to use a fire hydrant pursuant to a permit issued under subsection (A) of this section shall violate any of the conditions, rules, or regulations of such permit. 
(D)  Except for employees of the City of Upper Arlington, or when authorized by a permit issued pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, no person shall paint, decorate, deface, or in any manner destroy any fire hydrant in the city. 
( Ord. No. 75-2015, § 8, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 931.03 - PUBLIC FIRE HYDRANTS. 
(A)  The number, location, design, and specifications of fire hydrants within the city shall be in accordance with plans that are consistent with design specifications set forth by the fire chief and approved by the city engineer. 
(B)  The public service department shall be responsible for maintaining fire hydrants within the corporate limits of the City of Upper Arlington, except for such fire hydrants as are installed on privately owned mains. 
( Ord. No. 75-2015, § 9, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 931.04 - PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANTS. 
(A)  Fire hydrants located on private mains shall be installed with the approval and under the supervision of the division of fire. The owners of such private mains shall notify the division of fire of planned installation at least five (5) business days prior to such installation. 
(B)  The owner of a private main on which fire hydrants have been installed shall be responsible for maintaining all such fire hydrants. This maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, winter inspections. 
(C)  The fire division may pump free of water and perform annual flushing of fire hydrants on private mains upon written request of the owner of the private main. 
(D)  All fire hydrants installed on private mains shall be pumped free of water above the valve prior to October 15 of each year. 
(E)  All fire hydrants installed on private mains shall be painted a distinctive color, as directed by the fire chief, to identify such hydrants as connected to a private main. 
§ 931.05 - AGREEMENT PRIOR TO TAPPING WATER MAINS. 
No person shall tap into the public water mains of this city, or draw water therefrom either directly or indirectly, without having entered into the standard agreement with the City of Columbus as provided for in the contract for water supply between this city and the City of Columbus, except upon the written authorization of the city manager. 
§ 931.06 - OBSTRUCTION OF VALVE BOX OR STOPCOCK. 
No person shall cover any valve box or stopcock which is a part of the public water supply system of this city with earth, stone or other material, or commit any other act with reference thereto tending to conceal such valve or stopcock, or obstruct the use thereof or impede its operation. No person shall in any manner injure any water main or fixture which is part of the public water system of this city. 
§ 931.07 - OBSTRUCTING MANHOLES OR SEWERS. 
No person shall cover any manhole which is a part of the public sewerage system of this city with earth, stone or other material or commit any other act tending to conceal such manhole or obstruct the use thereof or impede its operation. No person shall place any material into the sewerage system through any manhole, catch basin or otherwise, which would tend to obstruct the flow of sewage or damage the system in any way or otherwise tamper with or injure any part of the sewerage system. 
No person shall remove the cover from any sewer catch basin or manhole, or commit any act tending to cause stormwater or water from any pond, swimming pool or stream to enter any sanitary sewer, except with the permission of the city manager. 
§ 931.08 - EVIDENCE OF OBSTRUCTIONS. 
Proof that a water valve box or sewer manhole has been covered by grading or filling in of dirt, upon premises occupied by any person or on public property adjacent to such premises which is customarily maintained by such person, during the time that such premises were in the occupancy and control of such person, shall be prima-facie evidence of a violation of this chapter by such person. 
§ 931.09 - LIMITING USE OF WATER FOR NON-ESSENTIAL PURPOSES. 
The city manager is authorized, when in his opinion the circumstances require emergency action, to limit or prohibit the use of water supplied by the city or other public water system for watering lawns and gardens, or for any non-essential use. Such order limiting or prohibiting the use of water shall not continue in effect for more than thirty (30) days from the date of its issuance; provided, however, that if in the opinion of the city manager the circumstances require it, he may renew order for an additional period of not more than thirty (30) days. At the conclusion of the effective period of any such order issued by the city manager, the city manager may extend, renew or amend such order, with concurrence of city council, for like periods of thirty (30) days until such emergency conditions cease. 
§ 931.10 - ASSESSMENT FOR WATER OR SEWER CONNECTIONS. 
Where application is made by a person owning property in this city for permission to connect to and make use of a water or sewer line as to which such owner or his predecessors in title have not contributed to the cost of construction, either through special assessments or otherwise, and where no procedure for assessing the cost of the improvement against abutting and benefited properties is pending, a charge shall be made for the granting by the city of the right to tap such water or sewer line in an amount equal to the portion of the cost of sewer or water service normally assessed against similar property within this city. Such cost shall be determined by the city manager and the director of public service, who shall take into consideration the area, shape, frontage and use of the property to be benefited by the sewer or water connection, the estimated cost of the sewer or water line, the benefits to be received by the property and all other pertinent factors bearing on a fair determination of the charge. Such charge shall be in addition to any tapping charges and permits provided by the building code. 
( Ord. No. 75-2015, § 10, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 931.11 - COUNCIL TO APPROVE CERTAIN WATER OR SEWER CONNECTIONS. 
In the event that it should be determined by the city manager and the director of public service that another sewer or water line is available or contemplated to serve the property, for the construction of which the property should be assessed, then such connection to the existing sewer or water lines shall not be permitted without the prior approval of council, which shall prescribe such terms and conditions under which such approval shall be granted, as it deems advisable. 
( Ord. No. 75-2015, § 11, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 931.12 - CITY MAY REQUIRE EXTENSION OF SYSTEM. 
In connection with the approval of plans for any subdivision or construction of any improvement which includes the installation of any storm drainage, sewerage or water supply system, the city manager, with the approval of city council, may require the extension of such system to serve parcels of land which are in the immediate vicinity of the subject subdivision or improvement. Such extension shall be required only upon a finding that it serves the best interest of overall city planning. Such extension shall be accomplished in accordance with C.O. ch. 138. 
The city may, at its sole discretion, assess the costs of any such extension to the benefited parcels before it is completed, during construction or after completion. No connection may be made into such extension without payment for the benefit received. Assessments shall proceed in accordance with the procedure set forth in C.O. § 931.08 or ORC ch. 729, whichever is deemed appropriate. 
§ 931.13 - DISCHARGE OF HARMFUL SUBSTANCES INTO SEWERS. 
No person shall discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged into any sewer, or into any water course, ditch or drain leading into any sewer, any acid, chemical or other substance, or any trade waste containing any acid, chemical or other substance, which tends to or does destroy or in any way injures the sewers or which in any way interferes with the proper treatment or disposition of any sewage carried or drained through any sewers in the city. 
No person shall discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged into any sewer, any kerosene, gasoline, benzine, naphtha or any explosive or inflammable chemical, substance or thing. 
§ 931.14 - ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS TO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM. 
(A)  No person shall direct stormwater, roof water leaders or subfoundation drains into the sanitary sewer system or into any soil pipe, house drain or house sewer tributary to the sanitary sewer system. 
(B)  The director of public service or designee shall examine or cause to be examined by various methods, every sanitary sewer line in the city on a periodic basis consistent with resources available, to locate points of stormwater entering the sanitary sewer system. Upon locating an illegal connection permitting stormwater to enter the sanitary sewer system, the superintendent shall provide the property owner with a written notice of violation. The written notification shall be sent to the owner at his last known address by registered or certified mail, giving the owner sixty (60) days to correct the violation. If notice is refused or unclaimed, the notice shall be sent to the property owner by regular mail. Service is complete upon the sending of notice by regular mail. The notice shall list the address and location of the violation, a description of the violation and what corrective action needs to be taken to eliminate the violation. 
(C)  The property owner shall take action to correct the illegal connection as described in C.O. § 931.12(D) within sixty (60) days from receipt of the written notice, in the case of certified mail or date of mailing in the case of regular mail and immediately, upon correction, notify the director of public service or designee. 
(D)  All roof water and surface water drainage shall be disposed of as follows: 
(1)  Except as provided in C.O. § 931.12(D)(3), all roof water from any building, including detached accessory garages, in this city shall be carried from downspouts to the street gutter, storm ditch or storm sewer through vitrified tile, cast iron or approved composition pipe having approved sealed joints and a minimum diameter of four (4) inches, bedded in sand and laid to proper grade. 
(2)  Where the grade at an existing building is below the grade of street gutter, storm ditch or storm sewer, the director of public service or designee shall determine the method of drainage. Where the grade at new building construction is below the grade of street gutter, storm ditch or storm sewer, the building inspector shall determine the method of drainage. No such system shall be installed closer to the building than ten (10) feet, nor closer to a property line than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Where roof gutters are not installed, a trench shall be constructed at a point under the drip line of the roof and parallel to the roof overhang, having a minimum width of one (1) foot. The trench shall be graded to the street gutter, storm sewer or storm ditch and shall have three (3) inches of stone at the bottom upon which four (4) inches field tile shall be laid so as to drain as described above. The remainder of the ditch shall be filled with stone and at the discharge end of said trench, the field tile shall be connected to vitrified tile, cast iron or approved composition tile and carried to the final point of discharge as set forth in C.O. § 931.12(D)(1). 
(E)  Any building or property that does not conform to C.O. § 931.12(A) or (D)(1), (2) and (3) is presumed to be a nuisance regardless of the date said building was constructed. 
(F)  Property owners not correcting the illegal connection within sixty (60) days of notice to do so will be found in violation and subject to the penalty provided by C.O. § 931.99. 
( Ord. No. 75-2015, § 12, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 931.15 - APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF COLUMBUS SEWER USAGE ORDINANCES. 
So long as the city discharges its sewage, industrial waste, water and other liquid waste into the transportation, pumping and treatment system of the City of Columbus, all of the provisions of Columbus City Code Chapters 1145 and 1147, both as they exist and as they are hereafter amended, relating to the regulation of sewage use are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the city sewerage system. In the event of conflict between the provisions of this chapter, Columbus City Code Chapters 1145 and 1147 shall prevail. Officers and employees of the City of Columbus are hereby empowered to enforce such provisions of the Columbus City Code within the boundaries of this city. 
§ 931.16 - MAINTENANCE OF INTERCEPTORS. 
(A)  All establishments that are required to have an interceptor as defined and in accordance with the Plumbing Code of the Ohio Basic Building Code § 4101:2-63-02 as amended, shall report to the department of public service. 
(1)  Establishments having a contract for cleaning and disposal shall submit a copy of this contract. These establishments will be required to report each time a new contract is signed. 
(2)  Establishments that do not have a contract shall be required to report by January 1 and July 1 of each year. Documentation from a source not affiliated with the establishment shall be included to verify any cleaning and disposal that was performed. 
(B)  The department of public service may inspect, or cause to be inspected, any interceptor that is required by the Plumbing Code of the Ohio Basic Building Code § 4101:2-63-02, as amended, to ensure that proper maintenance is being performed. If determined during inspection that the interceptor is in need of maintenance, a written order will be issued and hand delivered by the public service director or designee. 
(C)  When a written order is issued by the public service director or designee, it will describe the action that is needed, and specify when the corrective action must be completed. 
(D)  Establishments not taking corrective action by the time specified in the written order, or establishments that fail to report in accordance with subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) will be found in violation and subject to penalty provided by C.O. § 931.99. 
( Ord. No. 75-2015, § 13, 11-23-2015 ) 
§ 931.17 - MAINTENANCE OF POST CONSTRUCTION WATER QUALITY CONTROL DEVICES. 
(A)  All parcels, subdivisions, or developments (properties) that are required to have a post construction water quality control device (PCWQCD) as result of being issued either a city stormwater management permit or having received coverage under a state general construction permit (or current rendition thereof), shall report by January 1 of each year to the city's engineering division of the department of public service. This report shall include documentation, from a source not affiliated with the property, verifying and detailing any operations and maintenance activities that were performed. It shall also include a copy of any contract for operations and maintenance of the PCWQCD. 
(B)  The engineering division of the department of public service may inspect, or cause to be inspected, any PCWQCD to ensure that proper maintenance is being performed. If determined during inspection that the PCWQCD is in need of maintenance, a written order will be issued either by hand delivery by a member of the city engineer's staff, or certified mail. 
(C)  When a written order is issued by the city engineer or designee, it will describe the action that is needed, and specify when the corrective action must be completed. 
(D)  Properties not taking corrective action by the time specified in the written order, or properties that fail to report in accordance with subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) will be found in violation and subject to the penalty provided by C.O. § 931.99. 
( Ord. No. 75-2015, § 14, 11-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 64-2017 , § 1, 11-27-2017) 
§ 931.18 - DESIGNATION OF AREAS FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF INFLOW AND INFILTRATION REDUCTION PROGRAM. 
The city engineer, subject to council approval, may designate areas within the sanitary sewer system to be included in the city's Inflow and Infiltration Reduction Program after consultation with the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. The designation may include more than one area at a time, and if so, the designation may include a prioritization of the areas for implementation of the Inflow and Infiltration Reduction Program. The city engineer shall determine the timetable for implementation in the designated areas after considering system wide impact on inflow and infiltration, available funding, cost efficiencies, and other sewer projects. 
(Ord. No. 72-2016 , § 1, 12-12-2016) 
§ 931.19 - IMPLEMENTATION OF INFLOW AND INFILTRATION REDUCTION PROGRAM. 
(A)  Investigation. Pursuant to C.O. § 931.20, the city engineer may access the exterior of the property of any person within an area designated by the city engineer pursuant to C.O. § 931.18 to perform necessary investigations and survey work, such as dye testing, smoke testing, or sewer videography. 
(B)  Corrective measures. The city engineer is authorized to implement or contract for the implementation of these corrective measures at private residences, dwellings, buildings, properties, or other structures only in the designated areas approved by council. Pursuant to C.O. § 931.20, this may include entry onto the property and/or building. 
(1)  The city may take the following corrective measures to reduce the contribution of inflow and infiltration from private properties: 
(a)  Rehabilitate private sanitary laterals; 
(b)  Replace damaged private sanitary laterals; 
(c)  Disconnect and redirect downspouts that directly or indirectly connect to private sanitary lateral. A downspout is considered indirectly connected to a foundation drain if it discharges within seven (7) feet of the foundation of the building. Said downspouts may be redirected to the street or at least seven (7) feet from the building; or 
(d)  Install cleanouts to the private sanitary laterals. 
(2)  Upon completion of any of the corrective measures set forth in subsection (1), the city will restore the property at the city's expense. 
(C)  Post-implementation inspection. Upon completion of required corrective measures, the city engineer is permitted to conduct a post-implementation inspection in accordance with C.O. § 931.20. If additional corrective measures are required to further reduce inflow and infiltration, the city engineer may undertake those measures. 
(D)  Payment of costs. The costs of all corrective measures shall be paid by the city. 
(E)  Maintenance. The owner of the property shall be responsible for the maintenance of any rehabilitated or replaced private sanitary lateral, redirected downspouts and/or sump pump installed pursuant to this section. Any costs of repair, replacement, or maintenance incurred after the corrective measures taken by the city shall be paid by the owner and shall not be subject to reimbursement by the city. 
(Ord. No. 72-2016 , § 2, 12-12-2016) 
§ 931.20 - RIGHT OF ENTRY; NO TRESPASS. 
Upon presentation of proper credentials and at reasonable times, the city engineer and the city engineer's duly authorized representatives shall have the right to enter the property of any person in the identified areas to perform investigative and survey work pursuant to C.O. § 931.19(A), to enter the property and/or building to perform corrective measures pursuant to C.O. § 931.19(B), and to enter the property and/or building to conduct a post-implementation inspection pursuant to C.O. § 931.19(C). The purpose of the entry is limited to the performance of the investigation, corrective measures, and/or post-implementation inspection outlined. The city engineer shall provide the owner written notice at least five (5) days in advance of the requested entry, by both leaving a notice at the property and mailing the notice to the billing address. Failure of the property owner to receive the notice shall not invalidate the city's right to enter the property. The property owner or occupant shall allow such access to the city engineer or the city engineer's duly authorized representatives. This entry is not a trespass. No person shall forbid the city engineer, or the city engineer's duly authorized representatives to enter, or interfere with their entry upon the property for those purposes. 
(Ord. No. 72-2016 , § 3, 12-12-2016) 
§ 931.99 - PENALTY. 
    Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 60-2014, § 2, 11-24-2014 ) 
CHAPTER 933. - REQUIREMENTS FOR THE USE OR OCCUPATION OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND PUBLIC PROPERTY 

§ 933.01 - DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE, SCOPE, DEFINITIONS. 
(A)  Findings and purpose. 
(1)  The City of Upper Arlington, Ohio (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, and welfare including the economic development of the city. 
(2)  Changes in the public utilities and communication industries have increased the demand and need for access to rights-of-way and placement of facilities and structures therein. 
(3)  It is necessary to comprehensively plan and manage access to, and structures and facilities in, the rights-of-way to promote efficiency, discourage uneconomic duplication of facilities, lessen the public inconvenience of uncoordinated work in the rights-of-way, and promote the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(4)  It is the policy of the city to obtain the reasonable fair market value for the sale or disposition of any property interest that is no longer needed for use as a right-of-way. 
(5)  The city has authority under the Laws and Constitution of the State of Ohio, including but not limited to Article 18, Sections 3, 4 and 7, to regulate public and private entities which use the rights-of-way. 
(B)  Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all users of the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(1)  C.O. ch. 611 provides the requirements for wireless communication facilities in the city. 
(2)  The procedures and fees outlined in this C.O. ch. 933 shall be applicable to all applications for facilities in the city rights-of-way. 
(3)  To the extent that anything in this C.O. ch. 933 conflicts with C.O. ch. 611, 901, 903 or 1304, then the provisions of this C.O. ch. 933 shall control. 
(C)  Definitions. The terms, phrases, words, and their derivations as set forth in article 2 shall apply to C.O. ch. 933, unless otherwise provided herein. For the purposes of C.O. ch. 933 the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein and in article 2. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
    Affiliate: means each person who falls into one (1) or more of the following categories: (i) each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in a provider, (ii) each person in which a provider has, directly or indirectly a controlling interest, (iii) each officer, director, general partner, limited partner or shareholder holding an interest of fifteen percent (15%) or more, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of a provider, and (iv) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the provider; provided that affiliate shall in no event mean any limited partner or shareholder holding an interest of less than fifteen percent (15%) of such provider, or any creditor of such provider solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliate by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management, or common control with, such provider. 
    Applicant: means any person who seeks to obtain a certificate of registration and/or a permit. 
    Application: means the process by which an applicant submits a request to obtain certificate of registration and/or a permit. 
    Application fee: means the fee paid to the city for application for a certificate of registration pursuant to C.O. § 933.03(A). 
    Bankruptcy code: means the United States Bankruptcy Code of 1978, as amended including regulations promulgated by Title 11 of the United States Code. 
    Best effort(s): means the best reasonable efforts under the circumstances, taking into consideration, among other appropriate matters, all applicable laws, regulations, safety, engineering and operational codes, available technology, human resources, and cost. 
    Cable franchise: means the same as "franchise" in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 98 Stat. 2779, 47 U.S.C.A. 522. 
    Cable operator: means any person or group of persons (A) who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system, or (B) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
    Cable service: means (A) the one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service, and (B) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
    Certificate of registration: means the document issued to each provider and its unique system to occupy the rights-of-way within the city that outlines the terms of that occupancy of the rights-of-way. 
    City: means the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
    City attorney: means the duly appointed City Attorney of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
    City of Columbus: means the City of Columbus, Ohio. 
    City council: means the governing body of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
    City engineer: means the duly appointed City Engineer of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
    City finance director: means the duly appointed Finance Director of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
    City manager: means the administrative head of the municipal government known as the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
    Code (or C.O. ): means the codified ordinances of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
    Co-location or co-locate: means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on a wireless support structure. 
    Confidential/Proprietary information: means all information that has been either identified or clearly marked as confidential/proprietary by the provider prior to any submission. Upon receipt of such clearly marked confidential/proprietary information from a provider, the city shall endeavor, in accordance with the requirements of ORC ch. 149 (the Ohio Public Records Act), to use all the same reasonable measures and exercise the same degree of care that the city uses to protect its own information of such a nature from disclosure to third parties. In the event that the city receives a request from a third party for disclosure of information a provider has clearly marked as confidential/proprietary information, then the city shall respond as required by ORC ch. 149, but will attempt to use all reasonable means to notify the provider as soon as possible. 
    Construct: means, but not be limited to, digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing wires, installing conduit, installing pipes, installing transmission lines, installing poles, installing signs or installing Facilities, other than landscaping, ornamental plantings in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
    Construction: means, but not limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing wires, installing conduit, installing pipes, installing transmission lines, installing poles, installing signs or installing facilities, other than landscaping, ornamental plantings in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is part of the right-of-way. 
    Construction bond: means a bond posted to ensure proper and complete construction and/or repair of a facility and the affected rights-of-way pursuant to a permit. 
    Construction and major maintenance plan: means a written plan including maps of the expected location, design, other related equipment and facilities of a provider which describes in full the construction intended to be accomplished by the provider in the rights-of-way over the next calendar year. 
    County: means Franklin County, Ohio (except for the purpose of the provision of sewer and water service within or through the city). County specifically excludes any and all contractors, agents or other Persons acting on behalf of said County. 
    Credible: means worthy of being believed. 
    Department of public service: means the department of public service of the city. 
    Design guidelines: means detailed guidelines and specifications promulgated by the city in accordance with ORC § 4939, as adopted by the city manager, for the design and installation of small cell facilities and wireless support structures in the right-of-way, with objective, technologically feasible criteria that reasonably match the aesthetics and character of the immediate area regarding: 
(1)  The location of any ground-mounted small cell facilities; 
(2)  The location of a small cell facility on a wireless support structure; 
(3)  The appearance and concealment of small cell facilities, including those relating to materials used for arranging, screening, or landscaping; 
(4)  The design and appearance of a wireless support structure including any height requirements adopted by the city in accordance with law. 
    Director of public service: means the director of the department of public service, or his or her designee. 
    Emergency: means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of property. 
    Facility(ies): means any tangible thing located in any rights-of-way within the city, and includes wireless facilities and wireless support structures; but shall not include boulevard plantings, ornamental plantings or gardens planted or maintained in the rights-of-way between a person's property and the street edge of pavement. 
    FCC: means the Federal Communications Commission, or any successor thereto. 
    Full: means unable to accommodate any additional facilities as determined by the director of public service in accordance with the principles of public health, safety and welfare, following a reasonable analysis taking into consideration all applicable Law; commonly accepted industry standards; and routine engineering practices. 
    Height: means the distance measured from the pre-existing grade level to the highest point on the structure, including the small cell facility, even if said highest point is an Antenna or lightening protection device. 
    Historic district: means a building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either of the following: 
(1)  Listed in the national register of historic places or formally determined eligible for listing by the keeper of the national register, the individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the national register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i-v of the nationwide programmatic agreement codified at 47 C.F.R. part 1, Appendix C; 
(2)  A historic district listed in the national register of historic places under 16 U.S.C. 470a, an historic district designated by a local government certified under 16 U.S.C. 470a (c), or a local historic district certified under 36 C.F.R. 67.8 and 67.9 
    In: when used in conjunction with rights-of-way, means in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through a rights-of-way. 
    Inspector: means any person authorized by the director of public service to carry out inspections related to the provisions of C.O. ch. 933. 
    Law: means any local, state and/or federal legislative, judicial or administrative order, certificate, decision, statute, constitution, ordinance, resolution, regulation, rule, tariff or other requirement in effect either at the time of execution of C.O. ch. 933 or at any time during the location of, and/or while a provider's facilities are located in the public rights-of-way. 
    Micro wireless permit: means a permit, which must be obtained before a person can construct, modify, collocate, or replace a small cell facility or wireless support structure, as set forth in C.O. § 933.24, in or on the rights-of-way. 
    Minor maintenance permit: means a permit, which must be obtained before a person can perform minor maintenance, as set forth in C.O. § 933.17, in or on the rights-of-way. 
    Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices: means the uniform system of traffic control devices promulgated by the Ohio Department of Transportation pursuant to ORC § 4511.09. 
    Ohio Utility Protection Service: means the utility protection service as defined in ORC § 153.64 and/or § 3781.26 or a statutory successor thereto. 
    Open video service: means any video programming services provided to any person through the use of rights-of-way, which person is certified by the FCC to operate an open video system pursuant to § 651 et seq. of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (codified at 47 U.S.C. Title VI, Part V), regardless of the facilities used. 
    Operator: means a wireless service provider, cable operator, or a video service provider that operates a small cell facility and provides wireless service. For purposes of this chapter, "operator" includes a wireless service provider, cable operator, or a video service provider that provides information services as defined in the "Telecommunications Act of 1996," 110 Stat. 59, 47 U.S.C. 153(20), as services that are fixed in nature or use unlicensed spectrum. 
    ORC: means the Revised Code of the State of Ohio. 
    Permit: means a right-of-way permit, micro wireless permit, or a minor maintenance permit, as the context requires. 
    Permit cost: means all direct, incidental and indirect costs actually incurred or realized by the city for permit issuance, permit oversight and pavement degradation resulting from construction activity. 
    Permit fee: means money paid to the city for a permit as required by C.O. ch. 933. 
    Permittee: means any person to whom a right-of-way permit and/or, minor maintenance permit has been granted by the city and not revoked. 
    Person: means any natural or corporate person, business association or other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity. 
    Property interest: means the city's fee simple estate or any lessor estate or interest in all of any part of a right-of-way. 
    Provider: means a person who owns or operates a system and has a valid certificate of registration. The city, county, City of Columbus, small cell facility operators, and cable television operators operating pursuant to a valid cable franchise, shall also be considered providers. 
    Public utility: means a wireless service provider or any company described in ORC § 4905.03 except in divisions (B) and (I) of that section, which company also is a public utility as defined in ORC § 4905.02; and includes any electric supplier. 
    PUCO: means the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio as defined in ORC § 4901.02. 
    Registration maintenance fee: means the money paid to the city to maintain a certificate of registration and compensate the city for all actual costs incurred by the city in the management, administration and control of the rights-of-way of the city, and which are not reasonably recoverable by the city through permit fees or other approved recovery mechanisms. 
    Removal bond: means a bond posted to ensure the availability of sufficient funds to remove a provider's facilities upon abandonment or disuse, or discontinuance of a provider's use or occupation of the rights-of-way, or damage to city property caused by an operator or its agent. 
    Residential purposes: means residential use of right-of-way for such uses as lawn sprinklers, sidewalks, or any curb cuts and driveways, and as may be further defined in the rules and regulations. 
    Restoration: means the process and the resultant effects by which a rights-of-way is returned to a condition as good as or better than its condition immediately prior to the construction. Restoration shall occur in accordance with the rules and regulations for making openings in a public way as amended from time to time. 
    Right(s)-of-way: means the surface of, and the space within, through, on, across, above, or below, any public street, public road, public highway, public freeway, public lane, public path, public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway, public drive, public easement, and any other land dedicated or otherwise designated for a compatible public use, which, on or after July 2, 2002, is owned or controlled by a municipal corporation. "Rights-of-way" excludes a private easement. 
    Right(s)-of-way cost: means all direct, incidental and indirect costs borne by the city for the management and administration of the rights-of-way and this chapter. 
    Rule(s) and regulation(s): means any rules or regulations adopted by the director of public service pursuant to C.O. § 933.06(E). 
    Service(s): means the offering of any service for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public. 
    Small cell facility: means a wireless facility that meets both of the following requirements: 
(1)  Each antenna is located inside of an enclosure of not more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of not more than six (6) cubic feet in volume. 
(2)  All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively not more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume. The calculation of equipment volume shall not include electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. 
    Supplementary application: means any application made to construct on or in more of the rights-of-way than previously allowed, or to extend a permit that had already been issued, or in response to the city's notice of an incomplete application for a small cell facility or wireless support structure. 
    Surety fund: means a formal pledge made to secure against loss, damage or default. 
    System: means any system of conduit, cables, ducts, small cell facilities, pipes, wires, lines, towers, antennae wave guides, optic fiber, microwave, laser beams and any associated converters, equipment or facilities or utilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, delivering or distributing services within the city. A system shall specifically include, but not necessarily be limited to: electric distribution and/or transmission systems, natural or artificial gas distribution and/or transmission systems, water distribution systems, storm sewer systems, sanitary sewer systems, cable television systems, telecommunications systems (whether voice, video, data, or other), fiber optic systems, wireless communications systems, and transit electrification systems. 
    System representative: means the specifically identified agent/employee of a provider who is authorized to direct field activities of that provider and serve as official notice agent for system related information. Any such system representative shall be required to be available at all times to receive notice of and immediately direct response to system related emergencies or situations. 
    Transfer: means the disposal by the provider, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, of fifty-one percent (51%) or more at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the system, or fifty-one percent (51%) cumulatively over the term of a certificate of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
    Trenchless technology: means, but not be limited to, the use of directional boring, horizontal drilling, microtunneling and other techniques in the construction of underground portions of facilities which result in the least amount of disruption and damage to rights-of-way as possible. 
    Underground facility(ies): means all lines, cables, conduits, pipes, posts, tanks, vaults and any other facilities which are located wholly or partially underneath rights-of-way. 
    Unused facility(ies) or Abandoned facility(ies): means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for twelve (12) months and for which the provider is unable to provide the city with a credible plan detailing the procedure by which the provider intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or that the availability of such facilities is required by the provider to adequately and efficiently operate its system. 
    Utility(ies): means any water, sewer, gas, drainage, sprinkler or culvert pipe and any electric power, telecommunication, signal, communication, or cable television conduit, fiber, wire, trackless trolley wires, cable, or operator thereof. 
    Utility corridor(s): means those specific areas of the rights-of-way designated as such by the director of public service pursuant to C.O. § 933.03(F)(1). 
    Video service authorization: means a "video service authorization" as issued to a video service provider by the Director of the Ohio Department of Commerce in accordance with O.R.C. § 1332.24(A)(1). 
    Video service network: means the same as "video service network" in O.R.C. § 1332.21(L). 
    Video service provider: means the same as "video service provider" in O.R.C. § 1332.21(M). 
    Wireless facility: means an antenna, accessory equipment, distributed antenna system, small cell facility, micro wireless facility, or other device or equipment used to provide wireless service, including such devices and equipment as provided for in ORC § 4939. 
    Wireless service: means any services using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using wireless facilities. 
    Wireless service provider: means a person who provides wireless service as defined in division (A)(19) of section 4927.01 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
    Wireless support structure: means a pole, such as a monopole, either guyed or self-supporting, street light pole, traffic signal pole, a fifteen-foot or taller sign pole, or utility pole capable of supporting small cell facilities. As used in this chapter, "wireless support structure" excludes all of the following: 
(a)  A utility pole or other facility owned or operated by a municipal electric utility; 
(b)  A utility pole or other facility used to supply traction power to public transit systems including railways, trams, streetcars, and trolleybuses. 
    Work permit: means a permit issued by the city that must be obtained in order to perform any work in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the public way, including, but not limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, or installing, as well as the act of opening and cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is part of the public way. 
    Working day: means any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, or Saturday but excluding legal holidays observed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 64-2016 , § 4, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 48-2018 , §§ 2, 3, 6-25-2018) 
§ 933.02 - RIGHTS-OF-WAYS ADMINISTRATION. 
(A)  Administration. The city manager shall be the principal city official responsible for the administration of C.O. ch. 933, except as otherwise provided herein. The city manager may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder to the director of public service or other designee. 
(B)  Rights-of-way occupancy. Each person who occupies, uses or seeks to occupy or use the rights-of-way to operate a system located in the rights-of-way, or who has, or seeks to have, a system located in any rights-of-way, shall apply for and obtain a certificate of registration pursuant to C.O. ch. 933. Any person owning, operating or maintaining a system in the rights-of-way without a certificate of registration, including persons operating under a permit, license or franchise issued by the city prior to the effective date of C.O. ch. 933 shall apply for and obtain a certificate of registration from the city, unless exempted by C.O. § 933.02(D). Application will consist of providing the information set forth in C.O. § 933.03 and as reasonably required by the city manager. 
(C)  No construction without a certificate of registration. Following the effective date of C.O. ch. 933, no person shall construct or perform any work on or in, or use any system or any part thereof located on or in any rights-of-way without first obtaining a certificate of registration. Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third (3 rd ) degree as provided for in C.O. § 933.99. 
(D)  Exceptions: 
(1)  The following entities are not obligated to obtain a certificate of registration: The city and resellers of services or persons that do not own any system or facilities in the rights-of-way. 
(2)  The following entities are required to participate in the certificate of registration process, but shall be exempt from the financial obligations of the application fee required by C.O. § 933.03(A) and the registration maintenance fee required by C.O. § 933.05(A): Cable Operators for the purpose of providing only cable service and operating pursuant to a valid cable franchise issued in accordance with C.O. ch. 777 of the Code, a video service provider for the purpose of providing only video service and operating pursuant to a valid video service authorization issued in accordance with O.R.C. § 1332.24, the City of Columbus, and the county, and a small cell facility operator for the purpose of providing wireless service. In addition, cable operators shall be exempt from any requirement of the certificate of registration process that is in direct conflict with the requirements of, and/or specifically exempted by, a valid cable franchise with the city. 
(E)  Systems in place without a certificate of registration. Any system or part of a system found in a right-of-way for which a certificate of registration has not been obtained or is not otherwise exempted under C.O. § 933.02(D) shall be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the right-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities and/or non-complying portion of such system; and/or prosecuting the violator. 
(F)  Future uses. In allowing providers and permittees to place facilities in the rights-of-way, the city shall not be liable for any damages caused thereby to any provider's facilities that are already in place or that shall be placed in the rights-of-way unless those damages arise out of the sole negligence, gross negligence, willful misconduct, or fraud of the city. No provider is entitled to rely on the provisions of this chapter as creating a special duty to any provider. 
(G)  Discontinuance of operations, abandoned and unused facilities. 
(1)  A provider who has discontinued or is discontinuing its operations of any system in the city shall: 
(a)  Provide information satisfactory to the city that the provider's obligations for its system in the rights-of-way under this section and any other sections in the Code have been lawfully assumed by another applicant and/or provider; or 
(b)  Submit a written proposal to re-use its facilities in a manner that promotes the city's goals of providing innovative and economic solutions to efficiently and economically utilize limited rights-of-way capacity. Such proposal must be approved by the director of public service; or 
(c)  Submit a written proposal for abandonment of facilities in place indicating why good engineering practice would support this type of solution. The director of public service must approve said proposal; or 
(d)  Completely remove all specifically identified portion(s) of its system in a manner acceptable to the city within a reasonable amount of time if the city believes that there exists a reasonable justification for such removal; or 
(e)  Submit to the city within a reasonable amount of time and in accordance with ORC §§ 4905.20 and 4905.21, a proposal for transferring ownership of its facilities to the city. If a provider proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option where lawful: 
(i)  Purchase the facilities; or 
(ii)  Unless a valid removal bond has already been posted pursuant to C.O. § 933.19(B), require the provider to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. 
(2)  Facilities of a provider who fail to comply with this section and which remain unused facilities shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  Abating the nuisance; 
(b)  Taking possession of the facilities and restoring them to a useable condition subject to a finding of the PUCO pursuant to the requirements of ORC §§ 4905.20 and 4905.21; or 
(c)  Requiring removal of the facilities by the provider or by the provider's surety. 
(3)  If the city requires a provider to remove unused facilities in any rights-of-way, the city shall use reasonable efforts to direct that this removal occur in conjunction with other scheduled excavations of the rights-of-way. If the city abates the nuisance it may take all action necessary to recover its costs and to abate said nuisance, including but not limited to, those methods set forth in ORC § 715.261. 
(H)  Nature of issuance. A certificate of registration shall not convey equitable or legal title in the rights-of-way. A certificate of registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city, for the limited purposes and for the limited period stated in the certificate of registration and in accordance with C.O. ch. 933 of the Code. The rights to occupy the right-of-way may not be subdivided or subleased; provided, however, that two (2) or more providers may collocate locate facilities in the same area of the rights-of-way so long as each such provider complies with the provisions of C.O. ch. 933. Collocating providers may file a joint application for a right-of-way permit. A certificate of registration does not excuse a provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before collocating its facilities on facilities of others, including the city's facilities. A certificate of registration does not prevent a provider from leasing space in or on the provider's system, so long as the sharing of facilities does not cause a violation of law, including the provisions of C.O. ch. 933. A certificate of registration does not excuse a provider from complying with any provisions of the code or other applicable law. 
(I)  Other approvals, permits, and agreements. In addition to a certificate of registration, providers shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations, or licenses necessary for the offering or provision of such services from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities and upon the city's reasonable request, shall provide copies of such documents to the city. Further, a certificate of registration issued pursuant to C.O. ch. 933 shall not entitle a provider to use, alter, convert to, or interfere with, the facilities, easements, poles, conduits, lines, pipelines, wires, fiber, cable or any other real or personal property of any kind whatsoever under the management or control of the city. 
(Ord. No. 64-2016 , § 5, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 48-2018 , §§ 4-6, 6-25-2018) 
§ 933.03 - CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION APPLICATIONS. 
(A)  Certificate of registration applications. To obtain a certificate of registration to construct, own, or maintain any system within the city, or to obtain a renewal of a certificate of registration issued pursuant to C.O. ch. 933, an application must be filed with the city on the form adopted by the department of public service which is hereby incorporated by reference. For all applications the city shall collect an application fee. The application fee shall be equal to the actual and direct costs incurred by the city that are associated with receiving, reviewing, processing and granting (or denying) an application. At the time of its decision to either grant or deny an application the city shall calculate and assess all actual and direct costs involved in receiving, reviewing, processing and granting (or denying) the application and provide a written invoice to the applicant for the appropriate amount. The city shall require that the applicant remit all application fee amounts invoiced within thirty (30) days of its decision to either grant or deny a certificate of registration. Any applicant who fails to timely remit such invoiced application fee amounts shall be subject to the penalties of this chapter, the imposition of any other legal or equitable remedies available to the city, the penalties of C.O. § 933.99, and the immediate revocation of any certificate of registration having been issued. 
(B)  Information required for application to obtain a certificate of registration. 
(1)  The applicant shall keep all of the information required in this section current at all times, provided further that applicant or provider shall notify the city of any changes to the information required by this section within thirty (30) days following the date on which the applicant or provider has knowledge of such change. The information provided to the city at the time of application shall include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  Each applicant's name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers; and 
(b)  The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a system representative. The system representative shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the system representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of application and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; and 
(c)  A certificate of insurance provided to meet the requirements of this section shall: 
(i)  Verify that an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Ohio has issued an insurance policy to the applicant; 
(ii)  Verify that the applicant is insured on an occurrence basis against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of the: 
(A)  Use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by the applicant, its officers, agents, employees and contractors; and 
(B)  Placement and use of facilities in the rights-of-way by the applicant, its officers, agents, employees and contractors, including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from any and all operations, damage of underground facilities and collapse of property. 
(iii)  Name the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, agents and volunteers as an additional insured as to whom the comprehensive general liability and completed operation and products liability insurance required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages; 
(iv)  Require that the city be notified thirty (30) days in advance of cancellation of, or coverage changes in, the policy. The liability insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement: 
(A)  "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be diminished in value, canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated, until thirty (30) days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the city manager or her/his designee of such intent to cancel, diminish or not to renew." 
Within thirty (30) days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event later than five (5) days prior to said cancellation, the provider (or applicant) shall obtain and furnish to the director of public service a certificate of insurance evidencing replacement insurance policies. 
(v)  Satisfy the requirements for comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage and umbrella coverage as follows: 
(A)  Comprehensive general liability insurance: Comprehensive general liability insurance to cover liability, bodily injury, and property damage must be maintained. Coverage must be written on an occurrence basis, with the following minimum limits of liability and provisions, or their equivalent: 
(1)  Bodily injury: 
Each occurrence-One million dollars (US $1,000,000.00) 
Annual aggregate-Three million dollars (US $3,000,000.00) 
(2)  Property damage: 
Each occurrence-One million dollars (US $1,000,000.00) 
Annual aggregate-Three million dollars (US $3,000,000.00) 
(3)  Personal Injury: 
Annual aggregate-Three Million Dollars (US $3,000,000.00) 
(4)  Completed operations and products liability shall be maintained for six (6) months after the termination of a certificate of registration. 
(5)  Property damage liability insurance shall include coverage for the following hazards: E - explosion, C - collapse, U - underground. 
(B)  Comprehensive auto liability insurance: Comprehensive auto liability insurance to cover owned, hired, and non-owned vehicles must be maintained. Applicant may maintain comprehensive auto liability insurance as part of applicant's comprehensive general liability insurance, however, said insurance is subject to approval by the city manager or her or his designee. Coverage must be written on an occurrence basis, with the following limits of liability and provisions, or their equivalent: 
(1)  Bodily injury: 
Each occurrence-One million dollars (US $1,000,000.00) 
Annual aggregate-Three million dollars (US $3,000,000.00) 
(2)  Property damage: 
Each occurrence-One million dollars (US $1,000,000.00) 
Annual aggregate-Three million dollars (US $3,000,000.00) 
(2)  Additional insurance: The city reserves the right to require any other insurance coverage it deems necessary after review of any proposal submitted by applicant. 
(3)  Self-insurance: Those applicants maintaining a book value in excess of fifty million dollars (US $50,000,000.00) may submit a statement requesting to self-insure. If approval to self-insure is granted, applicant shall assure the city that such self-insurance shall provide the city with no less than would have been afforded to the city by a third party insurer providing applicant with the types and amounts of coverage detailed in this section. This statement shall include: 
(a)  Audited financial statements for the previous year; and 
(b)  A description of the applicant's self-insurance program; and 
(c)  A listing of any and all actions against or claims made against applicant for amounts over one million dollars (US $1,000,000.00) or proof of available excess umbrella liability coverage to satisfy all total current claim amounts above fifty million dollars (US$ 50,000,000.00). 
(d)  The city manager may modify or waive these requirements if they are not necessary in determining the sufficiency of the self-insurance. The city manager may request applicable and pertinent additional information if it is necessary in determining the sufficiency of the self-insurance. 
(4)  City's examination of, or failure to request or demand, any evidence of insurance in accordance with C.O. ch. 933 shall not constitute a waiver of any requirement of this section and the existence of any insurance shall not limit applicant's obligations under C.O. ch. 933. 
(5)  Documentation that applicant or provider maintains standard workers' compensation coverage as required by law. Similarly, provider shall require any subcontractor to provide workers' compensation coverage in amounts required by law for all of the subcontractor's employees. 
(6)  If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate of incorporation (or its legal equivalent) as recorded and certified to by the secretary of state (or legal equivalent) in the state or country in which incorporated. 
(7)  A copy of the person's certificate of authority from the PUCO and/or the FCC, if the person is lawfully required to have or actually does possess such certificate from said commission(s) and any other approvals, permits, or agreements as set out in C.O. § 933.02(I). 
(8)  Upon request of the city, a narrative (or if applicable PUCO/FCC application information) describing applicant's proposed activities in the city including, but not limited to, credible information detailing applicant's financial, managerial, and technical ability to fulfill applicant's obligations under C.O. ch. 933 and carry on applicant's proposed activities, and other information as described or required in this chapter and/or any rules or regulations. 
(C)  Criteria for issuance of a certificate of registration. 
(1)  In deciding whether to issue a certificate of registration, the city shall consider: 
(a)  Whether the issuing of the certificate of registration will protect or contribute to the health, safety, and welfare of the city and its citizens. 
(b)  Whether issuing of the certificate of registration will be consistent with C.O. ch. 933. 
(c)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law in order to construct and operate a system in the manner proposed by the applicant. 
(d)  Whether the applicant is delinquent on any taxes or other obligations owed to the city, county or State of Ohio. 
(e)  Whether the applicant has the requisite financial, managerial, and technical ability to fulfill all its obligations under this chapter, the city's rules and regulations, and the issuance of a certificate of registration. 
(f)  Any other applicable law. 
(D)  Grant or denial of an application for a certificate of registration. 
(1)  The city, not later than sixty (60) days after the date of filing by an applicant of a completed application, shall grant or deny the application. 
(2)  If an application for a certificate of registration is denied, the city shall provide to the applicant, in writing, the reasons for denying the application and such other information as the applicant may reasonably request to obtain consent. 
(E)  Obligations of a Provider Upon Receipt of a Certificate of Registration. In addition to the other requirements set forth herein and in the rules and regulations each provider shall: 
(1)  Use its best efforts to cooperate with other providers and users of the rights-of-way and the city for the best, most efficient, and least obtrusive use of rights-of-way, consistent with safety, and to minimize traffic and other disruptions including street cuts; 
(2)  When possible, participate in joint planning, construction and advance notification of rights-of-way work, as may be required by the city; 
(3)  Upon reasonable written notice, and at the direction of the director of public service, promptly remove or rearrange facilities as necessary for public safety; 
(4)  Perform all work, construction, maintenance or removal of facilities within the rights-of-way, in accordance with good engineering, construction and arboricultural practice (if applicable), including any appropriate state building codes, safety codes and law and use best efforts to repair and replace any street, curb or other portion of the rights-of-way, or facilities located therein, to a condition to be determined by the director of public service to be adequate under current standards and not less than materially equivalent to its condition prior to such work and to do so in a manner which minimizes any inconvenience to the public, the city and other providers, all in accordance with all applicable provisions of this chapter, any rules and regulations the city may adopt and the Code; 
(5)  Construct, install, operate and maintain its facilities and system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards and governmental requirements including, but not limited to, the National Electric Safety Code, National Electric Code and applicable FCC or other federal, state and/or local regulations; 
(6)  Be on notice that removal of trees within the rights-of-way of the city requires prior written approval by the city manager or his/her designee. Any such tree that is removed without the director of public service's written permission shall be replaced, at the sole expense of the responsible person, with a healthy tree of like kind; 
(7)  Warrant that all worker facilities, conditions and procedures that are used during construction, installation, operation and maintenance of the provider's facilities within the rights-of-way shall comply with all applicable standards of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration; 
(8)  Use its best efforts to cooperate with the city in any emergencies involving the rights-of-way; 
(9)  Provider shall, weather permitting, remove all graffiti within twenty-one (21) calendar days of notice. Provider shall use all reasonable efforts to remove any and all graffiti on any of the provider's facilities located within the city rights-of-way. Should the Provider fail to do so, the city may take whatever action is necessary to remove the graffiti and invoice the Provider for the cost thereof; 
(10)  Providers shall use all reasonable efforts to field identify their facilities in the rights-of-way whenever Providers are notified by the city that the city has determined that such identification is reasonably necessary in order for the city to begin planning for the construction, paving, maintenance, repairing, relocating or in any way altering any street or area in the rights-of-way as defined in this chapter. The city shall notify the providers of the city's date to begin the process at least sixty (60) days prior to the commencement of said activities. In field identifying facilities: 
(a)  Providers shall identify all facilities that are within the affected rights-of-way using customary industry standards and distinct identification; and 
(b)  Facilities will be so marked as to identify the provider responsible for said facilities; and 
(c)  Should any such marking interfere with the facilities function, create a safety problem or violate any safety code, alternative methods of marking the facilities may be approved by the director of public service; and 
(d)  All marking should be clearly readable from the ground and include the product name or logo only. No advertising will be permitted. 
(11)  A provider that is replacing an existing utility pole shall be responsible to coordinate with all other providers to insure the orderly transfer of all lines or cables to the replacement utility pole, the removal of the existing utility pole, and the restoration of the rights-of-way within ninety (90) days after the replacement utility pole is installed. Upon request, the director of public service may grant the provider additional time for good cause. 
(F)  Establishment of utility corridors. 
(1)  The director of public service may assign specific corridors within the rights-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities that are, or that the director of public service expects, may someday be, located within the rights-of-way. 
(2)  Any provider whose facilities are in the rights-of-way and are in a position at variance with utility corridors established by the director of public service shall at the time of the next construction of the area, excluding normal maintenance activities, move such facilities to their assigned position within the rights-of-way. Existing underground facilities located within a designated utility corridor shall not be required to relocate into adjacent or alternative portions of the rights-of-way unless they are in conflict with an actual or proposed public improvement project. The above requirements may be waived by the director of public service for good cause shown including, but not limited to, consideration of such factors as: the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer service needs, and hardship to the provider. If a provider is denied a requested waiver from the above requirements, the provider may appeal the denial of the Director of Public Service to the city manager. 
(3)  The director of public service shall make every good faith attempt to accommodate all existing and potential users of the rights-of-way as set forth in this chapter. 
(4)  Providers may enter into written agreements to use existing poles and conduits with the owners of same and shall use best efforts to install their facilities within the rights-of-way. 
(5)  No facility placed in any rights-of-way shall be placed in such a manner that interferes with normal travel on such rights-of-way. 
(6)  Unless otherwise stated in a certificate of registration or permit, all facilities within the rights-of-way shall be Constructed and located in accordance with the Code and with the following provision: 
(a)  Unless otherwise technologically infeasible, whenever all existing facilities that have been traditionally located overhead are located underground in a certain area within the city, a provider who desires to place its facilities in the same area must also locate its facilities underground. 
(G)  Historic districts. 
(1)  The city shall have the authority to prohibit the use or occupation of the right-of-way by a provider if the right-of-way for which the provider seeks use and occupancy lies within a historic district. 
(2)  As a condition for approval for the co-location or installation of small cell facilities or wireless support structures in an area of the city designated as a historic district, the city may do any of the following: 
(a)  Require reasonable, technically feasible, and nondiscriminatory design or concealment measures for the small cell facilities and wireless support structures in any historic district. 
(b)  Request that a provider comply with the design and aesthetic standards of the historic district, as provided for in the city's design guidelines. 
(c)  Request that a provider explore the feasibility of using certain camouflage measures to improve the aesthetics of the small cell facilities and wireless support structures to minimize the impact to the aesthetics in a historic district. 
(3)  This section may not be construed to limit the city's authority to enforce local codes, administrative rules, rules and regulations, design guidelines, or regulations adopted by ordinance, which are applicable to a historic area designated by the state or city and historic preservation zoning regulations consistent with the preservation of local zoning authority under 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7), the requirements for facility modifications under 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a), or the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (54 U.S.C. Section 300101 et seq.), and the regulations adopted to implement those laws. 
(Ord. No. 48-2018 , § 7-11, 6-25-2018) 
§ 933.04 - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  Construction and major maintenance plan. Each provider shall, at the time of initial application and by January 1 of each following year, file a construction and major maintenance plan with the department of public service. Such construction and major maintenance plan shall be provided for all geographical areas requested by the director of public service, up to and including the entire geographical area of the city. It shall be submitted using a format(s) mutually agreeable to the provider and the city and shall contain the information determined by the director of public service to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of construction in the rights-of-way. The construction and major maintenance plan shall include, but not be limited to, all currently scheduled and/or anticipated construction projects for the next calendar year, if none are scheduled or anticipated then the plan shall so state. The provider shall use its best efforts in supplying this information and shall update the construction and major maintenance plan on file with the director of public service whenever there is a material change in scheduled and/or anticipated construction projects. In an effort to assist providers with the completion of their annual construction and major maintenance plan, the department of public service, on or before November 1 st of each year, will send each provider's system representative a descriptive narrative (and any mapping information reasonably available) for all the planned right-of-way improvements and/or scheduled maintenance that the city then currently intends to undertake during the next calendar year. 
(B)  Mapping data. With the filing of its application for a certificate of registration, a provider shall be required to accurately inform the city of the number of miles (rounded up to the nearest mile) of right-of-way the provider's system then currently occupies and begin submitting to the city all information that currently exists and which can be provided regarding the location of its facilities in the right-of-way in hard copy or in the most advanced format (including, but not limited to, electronic and/or digital format) then currently being used by the provider that is then currently capable of technologically being read (or readily converted to a readable form) by the city. Unless otherwise required by C.O. § 933.15(B), a provider shall have up to one (1) year from the date of the Provider's initial filing of an application for a certificate of registration to completely submit all the mapping data for a provider's system in the entire geographical area of the city which it owns or over which it has control that are located in any rights-of-way of the city in the most advanced format (including, but not be limited to electronic and/or digital format) then currently being used by the provider that is then currently capable of technologically being read (or readily converted to a readable form) by the city. The mapping data is only required to be at the "Atlas" level of detail necessary for the city to reasonably determine the location of the provider's facilities in the rights-of-way. The provider shall supply the mapping data on paper if the director of public service determines that the format currently being used by the provider is not capable of being read by the city. Any time after the issuance of a certificate of registration, and upon the reasonable request of the director of public service, a provider shall be required to provide to the city any additional location information for any facilities which it owns or over which it has control that are located in any rights-of-way of the city required by the city. Unless otherwise required by law, any and all actual direct, incidental and indirect costs incurred by the city during the process of reviewing, inputting and/or converting a provider's mapping information to comport with the city's then current standard format (whether electronic or otherwise) shall be directly billed to, and must be timely remitted by, the provider. Failure to pay such mapping costs within sixty (60) days of receipt of an invoice shall subject an applicant or provider to revocation of its certificate of registration and the penalties of C.O. § 933.99. Further, each provider that has been issued a certificate of registration shall accurately inform the city on or before each subsequent January 1 st of the number of miles (rounded up to the nearest mile) of right-of-way the provider's system then occupied as of the immediately previous December 1 st . The director of public service may, in the future, adopt additional specifications and further define or modify the mapping data requirements under this section for reasons including, but not limited to, changes in technology or the law regarding public disclosure of a provider's mapping information. When the city modifies and/or amends the mapping data requirements, the city shall use best efforts to avoid unreasonably increasing the burden to the providers that may be associated with satisfying the amended mapping requirements. When the mapping requirements of C.O. § 933.04(B) are amended, each provider shall be served with a copy of the new specifications or modifications by regular U.S. Mail to the system representative identified in each certificate of registration and in accordance with C.O. § 933.23(D); provided, however, that any failure of any provider to actually receive such notice shall not in any way affect the validity or enforceability of said specifications or modifications. 
(C)  Exemption from disclosure. A Provider shall notify the city if the provider believes that any specific document or portion of a document being submitted to the city is exempt from the public records disclosure requirements of ORC § 149.43. The notification shall be in writing and indicate the specific document or portion of a document that the provider believes is exempt from disclosure. The notification shall include the legal basis for the claimed exemption, including the applicable statutory reference and any additional information necessary to make a determination of exemption for each specific document or portion of a document. If a public records request is made for documents submitted by a provider, the city will consider the written notification in making its own independent determination of whether a specific document or a portion of a document is exempt from the disclosure requirements of ORC § 149.43. To the extent permitted by law, the city will endeavor to use reasonable Best Efforts to notify the provider of the request prior to making the document available for inspection or copying. 
(Ord. No. 48-2018 , § 12, 6-25-2018) 
§ 933.05 - COMPENSATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION. 
(A)  Compensation. Unless otherwise required by law, as compensation for the city's costs to administer C.O. ch. 933, manage, administer and control the rights-of-way and maintain each certificate of registration issued, every provider or any person operating a system shall pay to the city the annual registration maintenance fee set forth in C.O. ch. 401. 
(B)  The fees specified in § 933.05(A) may be modified or adjusted or waived by regulation; provided, however, that such fees shall be calculated in accordance with ORC ch. 4939 to only recover the city's actual and incurred costs of planning, regulating, purchasing, maintaining and governing the rights-of-way, including any costs of joint planning, joint utility and telecommunications facilities placed in the right-of-way by the city for the future use of permittees, enforcement of this chapter, and related costs and overheads, including but not limited to an appropriate allocation of the costs of any geographic information systems utilized by the city, unless otherwise required by law. 
(C)  The city manager may enter into agreements with permittees under which permittees may provide facilities or services, or both, to the city in lieu of all or a portion of such fees. All such agreements shall be approved by council. 
(D)  Timing. Registration maintenance fees shall be paid in advance by January 1st of each calendar year. Registration maintenance fees shall be paid in full for the first year of the registration as a condition of the certificate of registration becoming effective. Fees may be prorated from the effective date of the certificate of registration to the end of the calendar year if less than one (1) full year. 
(E)  Taxes and assessments. To the extent taxes or other assessments are imposed by taxing authorities on the use of city property as a result of a provider's use or occupation of the rights-of-way, the provider shall be responsible for payment of such taxes. Such payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to C.O. ch. 933 and shall not be considered an offset to, or in lieu of, the fees and charges listed in C.O. ch. 933. The registration maintenance fee is not in lieu of any tax, fee, or other assessment except as specifically provided in C.O. ch. 933, or as required by applicable law. 
(F)  Interest on late payments. In the event that any registration maintenance fee is not paid to the city by January 31, the provider shall pay a monthly late charge of one percent (1%) of the unpaid balance for each month or any portion thereof for which payment is not made. 
(G)  No accord and satisfaction. No acceptance by the city of any registration maintenance fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such registration maintenance fee payment be construed as a release of any claim the city may have for additional sums payable. 
(Ord. No. 64-2016 , § 6, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 48-2018 , § 13, 6-25-2018) 
§ 933.06 - OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION. 
(A)  Reports. Upon reasonable request of the director of public service, a provider shall provide the city with a list of any and all material communications, public reports, petitions, or other filings, either received from or submitted to any municipal, county, state or federal agency or official (and any response thereto submitted by or received by a provider), and any other information or report reasonably related to a provider's obligations under C.O. ch. 933 which in any way materially affects the operation of the system or a provider's representations and warranties set forth herein, but not including tax returns or other filings which are confidential. Upon request, a provider shall promptly, but in no case later than thirty (30) business days following the request, deliver to the city a complete copy of any item on said list. Upon the request of the city, a provider shall promptly submit to the city any information or report reasonably related to a provider's obligations under C.O. ch. 933, its business and operations with respect to the system or its operation, in such form and containing such information as the city shall specify. Such information or report shall be accurate and complete and supplied within thirty (30) days. 
(B)  Confidentiality. All information submitted to the city that is considered Confidential Information, trade secret and/or proprietary information or information that upon public its disclosure would be highly likely to place critical portions of the Provider's System in real danger of vandalism, sabotage or an act of terrorism, must be clearly marked as such when submitted. The city shall exercise all reasonable legal protections so as not to publicly disclose to any third party such information unless required by law. The city shall, following receipt of a request for public disclosure of clearly marked trade secret and/or proprietary information submitted by a provider, endeavor to use reasonable best efforts to timely place the provider's system representative on notice that such a request for public disclosure has been made. 
(C)  Provider's expense. All reports and records required under C.O. ch. 933 shall be furnished at the sole expense of a provider. 
(D)  Right of inspection and audit. The city's designated representatives shall have the right to inspect, examine, or audit during normal business hours and upon reasonable notice to a provider under the circumstances; documents, records, or other information which pertain to a provider's operation of a system within the city that are related to its obligations under C.O. ch. 933. All such documents shall be made available within the city or in such other place that the city may agree upon in writing in order to facilitate said inspection, examination, or audit. 
(E)  Rules and regulations. The director of public service may propose and adopt (and from time to time amend) the rules and regulations regarding C.O. ch. 933, design guidelines, construction standards and occupancy requirements of the right-of-way. Prior to the adoption or amendment of the rules and regulations or design guidelines, the director of public service shall provide written notice and a copy of the proposed language of such adoption or amendment, via United States Regular Mail, to each provider who holds a then current certificate of registration. Each provider shall then have thirty (30) days following the date of the city's mailing to provide written comment regarding the proposed language to the director of public service. At least forty-five (45) days, but not more than sixty (60) days following the date of the city's mailing, the director of public service shall schedule and hold a meeting, to make available a forum at which all then current providers may address any questions, concerns and make reasonable suggestions regarding the proposed new rules and regulations to the director of public service. The director of public service shall, following said meeting and the review of the providers' comments and suggestions, adopt or amend the rules and regulations in a manner that best serves the city. 
(Ord. No. 48-2018 , § 14, 6-25-2018) 
§ 933.07 - REGISTRATION TERM. 
The term of each certificate of registration granted under C.O. ch. 933 shall be valid from the date of issuance until such time as it is revoked, terminated, has lapsed or is properly amended. 
§ 933.08 - INDEMNITY. 
(A)  Indemnity required. Each certificate of registration issued pursuant to C.O. ch. 933 shall contain provisions whereby providers agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its agents, officers, elected officials, employees, volunteers, and subcontractors harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses or expenses: 
(1)  For the repair, replacement, or restoration of city property, equipment, materials, structures and facilities which are damaged, destroyed or found to be defective as a result of such provider's acts or omissions; and 
(2)  From and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments: 
(a)  For damage to or loss of the property of any person, and/or the death, bodily injury, illness, disease, worker's compensation, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any person; 
(b)  Arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the act or omissions of such provider, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities pursuant to such certificate of registration, no matter how, or to whom, such loss may occur. 
(3)  In any event, all persons using or occupying the rights-of-way agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city as set forth above as a condition of their use and occupancy of the rights-of-way. 
(B)  For small cell facilities and wireless support structures, in addition to C.O. § 933.08(A), any operator who owns or operates small cell facilities or wireless support structures in the public way shall indemnify, protect, defend, and hold the municipal corporation and its elected officials, officers, employees, agents, and volunteers harmless against any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, fees to include reasonable attorney fees and costs of defense, proceedings, actions, demands, causes of action, liability and suits of any kind and nature, including personal or bodily injury or death, property damage or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought, to the extent that it is caused by the negligence of the operator who owns or operates small cell facilities and wireless service in the public way, any agent, officer, director, representative, employee, affiliate or subcontractor of the operator, or their respective officers, agents, employees, directors, or representatives while installing, repairing, or maintaining facilities in a public way. 
(Ord. No. 48-2018 , § 15, 6-25-2018) 
§ 933.09 - CIVIL FORFEITURES. 
In addition to any other penalties set forth in this C.O. ch. 933 and the remedy of specific performance, which may be enforced in a court of competent jurisdiction, the director of public service may assess an additional penalty of civil forfeiture for failure to comply with any provision of C.O. ch. 933. Such penalty shall be a monetary sum, payable to the city, in the amount of five hundred dollars (US $500.00) per twenty-four-hour day of violation and any subsequent portion of a day less than twenty-four (24) hours in length. Prior to assessing said penalty, the city will provide written notice to the provider detailing the failure to comply with a specific provision of C.O. ch. 933. Such notice shall also indicate that said penalty shall be assessed in fifteen (15) calendar days subsequent to the date of receipt if compliance is not achieved. If a provider desires to challenge such penalty, provider must request a public hearing before the city manager within ten (10) days of service of the notice. Such public hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of the provider's request. If provider requests such hearing before the city manager, such penalty shall be temporarily suspended. However, if, after the public hearing, the city manager determines that provider failed to comply with the specific provision(s) of C.O. ch. 933 referenced in the notice, such penalty shall be assessed starting with the fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notice referenced in this section and continuing each day thereafter until compliance is achieved. The determination of the city manager shall be final. The provider may file an administrative appeal pursuant to ORC ch. 2506. The penalty shall continue to accrue during the appeal unless the provider obtains a stay and posts a supersedeas bond pursuant to ORC § 2505.09 or the provider comes into full compliance with C.O. ch. 933. 
§ 933.10 - TERMINATION OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION. 
(A)  Default notice provided. The city through its department of public service shall give written notice of default to a provider if the city, in its sole discretion, determines that a provider has: 
(1)  Violated any material provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a certificate of registration or any Law and failed to cure as may be required; 
(2)  Attempted to evade any provision of the issuance of a certificate of registration or the acceptance of it; 
(3)  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon city; or 
(4)  Made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a certificate of registration. 
(B)  Cure required. If a provider fails to cure a default within thirty (30) calendar days after such notice is served by the city then such default shall be a material default and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the certificate of registration. If the director of public service decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve a provider with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a provider a minimum of ten (10) calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the provider fails to cure within ten (10) calendar days, the director of public service may declare the certificate of registration terminated. 
(3)  The provider shall have ten (10) calendar days to appeal the termination to the city manager. All such appeals shall be in writing. If the city manager determines there was not a breach, then the city manager shall overturn the decision of the director of public service. Otherwise, the city manager shall affirm the decision of the director of public service to terminate. The determination of the city manager shall be final. 
§ 933.11 - UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. 
(A)  No use without authorization. No person shall use the rights-of-way to operate a system that has not been authorized by the city in accordance with the terms of C.O. ch. 933 and been issued a certificate of registration. 
(B)  No use without certificate of registration. No person shall place or have placed any facilities in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through the rights-of-way, unless allowed under C.O. ch. 933 or having been issued a certificate of registration. 
(C)  Unauthorized use a violation. Each and every unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a violation and a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of C.O. ch. 933 continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(D)  Distinct and separate offense. No person shall fail to comply with the provisions of C.O. ch. 933. Each and every failure to comply shall be deemed a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of C.O. ch. 933 continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(E)  Penalty assessed. The violation of any provision of C.O. ch. 933 shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense. The penalty for any violation of C.O. ch. 933 shall be as provided in C.O. § 933.99. 
§ 933.12 - RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS. 
(A)  No discrimination. No provider shall deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against any other person on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, disability, age, gender or sexual preference. A provider shall comply at all times with all other applicable law relating to nondiscrimination. 
(B)  Equal employment. A provider shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of law, as now written or as amended from time to time. 
(C)  Privacy. A provider shall adhere to subscriber privacy Laws and shall take reasonable steps to prevent the invasion of any other person's right of privacy or other personal rights through the use of the system as such rights are delineated or defined by applicable law. A provider shall not, without lawful court order or other legal authority, utilize any system's capability for unauthorized personal surveillance of any person. 
§ 933.13. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 48-2018 , § 16, adopted June 25, 2018, repealed § 933.13, which pertained to PEG requirements for open video systems and derived from the original codification of this Code. 
§ 933.14 - ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP AND RENEWAL. 
(A)  Assignment or transfer approval required. A certificate of registration shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, other than to an affiliate, without the prior written consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. Any assignment or transfer of certificate of registration, including an assignment or transfer by means of a fundamental corporate change, requires the written approval of the city. 
(B)  Procedure to request assignment or transfer approval. The parties to the assignment or transfer of certificate of registration shall make a written request to the city for its consent in the form of the certificate of registration application. The city shall reply in writing within sixty (60) days of actual receipt of the request and shall indicate its approval of the request or its determination that a public hearing is necessary. City may conduct a public hearing on the request within thirty (30) days of such determination if it determines that a sale or transfer of the certificate of registration adversely affects the city. 
(C)  Notice and hearing. Notice of a hearing shall be given fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing by publishing notice thereof once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall contain the date, time and place of the hearing and shall briefly state the substance of the action to be considered by city. 
(D)  Review by city. City will review the qualifications (including, but not limited to legal, technical and financial where appropriate) of the proposed assignee or transferee and terms of the existing certificate of registration. City will make its decision in writing setting forth any conditions for assignment or transfer. Within one hundred and twenty (120) days of actual receipt of the request for assignment or transfer, the city shall approve or deny such assignment or transfer request in writing. 
(E)  Fundamental corporate change. For purposes of this section, fundamental corporate change means the sale or transfer of a controlling interest in the stock of a corporation or the sale or transfer of all or a majority of a corporation's assets, merger (including a parent and its subsidiary corporation), consolidation or creation of a subsidiary corporation. For the purposes of this section, fundamental partnership change means the sale or transfer of all or a majority of a partnership's assets, change of a general partner in a limited partnership, change from a limited to a general partnership, incorporation of a partnership, or change in the control of a partnership. 
(F)  Certificate of registration and assignee/transferee replacement issuance required. In no event shall a transfer or assignment of ownership or control be ultimately acceptable to the city without transferee or assignee requesting and being issued a replacement certificate of registration within ninety (90) days of transfer or assignment. 
(G)  Not a transfer. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no such consent or approval shall be required for a transfer or assignment to any person controlling, controlled by or under the same common control of the original holder of the certificate of registration. 
§ 933.15 - RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS. 
(A)  Right-of-way permit requirement. Except as otherwise provided in the Code, no person may construct in any rights-of-way without first having obtained a right-of-way permit as set forth below. This requirement shall be in addition to any requirement set forth in C.O. § 901.01 et seq. 
(1)  A right-of-way permit allows the permittee to construct in that part of the rights-of-way described in such permit and to obstruct travel over the specified portion of the rights-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. 
(2)  A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates and the area of rights-of-way specified in the permit. 
(3)  No permittee may construct in the rights-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless such permittee: 
(a)  Submits a supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial right-of-way permit; and 
(b)  Is granted a new right-of-way permit or right-of-way permit extension. 
(4)  Original right-of-way permits issued pursuant to C.O. § 933.15 shall, when possible, be conspicuously displayed at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by inspectors and authorized city personnel. If the original right-of-way permit involves work conducted simultaneously at multiple locations, each location shall display a photocopy of the original right-of-way permit. If the original right-of-way permit is not conspicuously displayed at the indicated work site, then upon request, the original right-of-way permit must be produced within twelve (12) hours or the first earliest business hour, whichever is later. For purposes of this section, business hour shall mean the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. during a business day. 
(B)  [Types of right-of-way permits.] The following types of right-of-way permits are available: 
(1)  Pavement disturbance right-of-way permit. Right-of-way permit granted to persons who are required to obtain a certificate of registration pursuant to C.O. § 933.02 or are otherwise granted authority to utilize rights-of-way generally for business purposes including the provision of utility, cable television, communications or other services to the city, its residents and taxpayers who intend to disturb the improved surface of the right-of-way including but not limited to cutting the pavement of the roadway, gutter, curb, sidewalk, or boring under the roadway; 
(2)  Special right-of-way permit. Right-of-way permit granted to a person for a specific, limited use of the rights-of-way or a specific portion thereof as further delineated in such permit. A special right-of-way permit shall not be available to any person for use of more than one (1) mile of right-of-way. However, special right-of-way permits may be granted for any amount of right-of-way to agencies of the government of the United States, the State of Ohio, or its political subdivisions for governmental purposes; 
(3)  Minor maintenance right-of-way permit; and 
(4)  Right-of-way permit for residential purposes. Right-of-way permit granted for residential purposes not exempted pursuant to section 933.15(C) to the owner of the adjacent property for a specific, limited use of a specific portion of the right-of-way as further delineated in such permit, including the following specific types of permits for residential purposes: 
(a)  Sidewalk permit. 
(b)  Curb and gutter permit. 
(c)  Driveway approach permit. 
(d)  The director of public service may determine that right-of-way permits shall not be required for certain residential purposes, so long as, in the opinion of the director of public service, such use: 
(i)  Has received or will receive all other necessary permits, including any under Chapters 901, 903, and 907, and 905 Codified Ordinances; 
(ii)  Is not inconsistent with the policy of the city; 
(iii)  Does not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare; and 
(iv)  Does not materially interfere with the other lawful use of the right-of-way. 
(e)  The director of public service shall adopt regulations controlling and further defining residential purposes and to otherwise implement the determinations to be made under this section. 
(C)  [Use of specified pubic property.] Any right-of-way permit may also allow the use of specified public property for the uses set forth in the right-of-way permit and in this chapter. 
(D)  [Specifying use or uses.] Each right-of-way permit shall specify the use or uses for which it is granted and contain such other nondiscriminatory terms and conditions as are appropriate and as are set forth in the regulations. 
(E)  Permit applications. 
(1)  Application for a permit shall be made to the director of the department of public service. 
(2)  All permit applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions: 
(a)  Credible evidence that the applicant (where required) has been issued a certificate of registration or proof that the applicant has written authority to apply for a permit on behalf of a party that has been issued a certificate of registration; 
(b)  Submission of a completed permit application in the form required by the director of public service, including, but not limited to, all required attachments, and scaled, dated drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project, number and location of street cuts, and the location of all then known existing and proposed facilities of the applicant or provider within the proposed project area. All drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application shall comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations, and design guidelines and be certified as to being in such compliance by trained technical personnel acceptable to the director of public service. The mapping data is only required to be at the "Atlas" level of detail necessary for the city to reasonably determine the location of the provider's facilities in the rights-of-way. The city reserves the right, in circumstances that the director of public service considers unique, complex or unusual, to request that certain submitted drawings, plans and specifications be accompanied by the certification of a registered licensed professional engineer; 
(c)  A city approved traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
(d)  If the applicant wants to install new facilities that are not small cell facilities or wireless support structures, evidence that there is no surplus space and evidence that the applicant has received an appropriate permit and is adhering to the city's rules and regulations; 
(e)  If applicant is proposing an above ground installation on existing poles within the rights-of-way, the applicant shall provide credible information satisfactory to the city to sufficiently detail and identify: 
(i)  The size and height of the existing poles, which are not to exceed forty (40) feet in height above ground level for a new wireless support structure, including any collocated antennas; and 
(ii)  Based on the facilities currently on the existing poles, the excess capacity currently available on such poles before installation of applicant's facilities; and 
(iii)  Based on the facilities currently on the existing poles, the excess capacity for like or similar facilities that will exist on such poles after installation of applicant's facilities. 
(f)  If the applicant proposes to install new poles within the rights-of-way that are not small cell facilities or wireless support structures, the applicant shall provide: 
(i)  Credible evidence satisfactory to the city that there is no excess capacity on existing poles or in existing underground systems; 
(ii)  Credible evidence to the city that it is not financially and/or technically practicable for the applicant to make an underground installation or locate its facilities on existing poles; 
(iii)  The location, size, height, color, and material of the proposed poles; and 
(iv)  Credible evidence satisfactory to the city that the applicant will adhere to all the applicable laws concerning the installation of new poles. 
(g)  If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the rights-of-way, the applicant shall provide credible information satisfactory to the city to sufficiently detail and identify: 
(i)  Based on the existing facilities, the excess capacity for like or similar facilities currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's facilities; and 
(ii)  Based on existing facilities, the excess capacity for like or similar facilities that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's facilities. 
(h)  If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the rights-of-way, the applicant must provide credible information satisfactory to the city to sufficiently detail and identify: 
(i)  The location, depth, size, and quantity of proposed new ducts or conduits; and 
(ii)  The excess capacity for like or similar equipment that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's facilities. 
(i)  A preliminary construction schedule and completion date. 
(j)  Payment of all money due to the city for: 
(i)  Permit fees; 
(ii)  Any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city as a result of applicant's prior construction in the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city; 
(iii)  Any certificate of registration issued to the applicant/person whose facilities are being constructed; and/or 
(iv)  Any other money due to the city from the applicant/person whose facilities are being constructed. 
(k)  When a right-of-way permit is requested for purposes of installing additional systems or any part of a system, the posting of a construction bond and removal bond, acceptable to the city and subject to C.O. ch. 933, for the additional systems or any part of a system is required; 
(l)  Upon request, the city manager may modify or waive the information requirements if they are not necessary in evaluating the right-of-way permit application. As permitted by law, the city manager may request applicable and pertinent additional information if it is necessary in evaluating the right-of-way permit application. 
(F)  Issuance of permit; conditions . 
(1)  If the city determines that the applicant has satisfied the requirements of C.O. ch. 933 and the right-of-way permit process, the director of public service shall issue a right-of-way permit subject to the provisions of C.O. § 933.15(F)(2) upon a determination that: 
(a)  The granting of the right-of-way permit will protect or contribute to the public health, safety or welfare in the city; 
(b)  The granting of the right-of-way permit will be consistent with the findings and purposes as set forth in C.O. § 933.01; and 
(c)  The applicant is not delinquent on any taxes or other obligations to the city or Franklin County and has the requisite financial, managerial and technical ability to fulfill all its obligations hereunder. 
(G)  Right-of-way permit fees. 
(1)  The fees for right-of-way permits shall be set forth in C.O. ch. 401. 
(2)  The permit fees specified in C.O. ch. 401 may be modified or adjusted or waived by regulation, however, provided that such fees shall be calculated in accordance with ORC ch. 4939 to only recover the city's actual and incurred right-of-way permit issuance, inspection, oversight, enforcement and regulation costs including the value of the degradation and reduction in the useful life of the rights-of-way that will result from construction that takes place therein, unless otherwise required by law. "Degradation and the reduction in the useful life" for the purpose of this section means the accelerated depreciation of the rights-of-way caused by construction in or disturbance of the rights-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct or repair such rights-of-way earlier than would be required if the construction did not occur. 
(3)  Any permit requests pending on the date of any permit fee modification shall be subject to all new permit fees as modified. 
(4)  Except as provided in subsection (G)(5), no right-of-way permit shall be issued without payment of right-of-way permit fees except to the city (exclusive of its enterprise fund agencies which shall be required to obtain right-of-way permits) which shall be exempt. Right-of-way permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city has revoked due to breach and in accordance with the terms of C.O. § 933.10 are not refundable. 
(5)  The city finance director may permit a provider to make quarterly payments of right-of-way permit fees based upon the provider's financial condition and past payment history. The quarterly payment shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days after the end of the quarter. The city finance director may revoke this permission due to a change in financial condition, late payment, or other just cause. 
(H)  Special right-of-way permit maintenance fee. In addition to the right-of-way permit fee, every holder of a special right-of-way permit shall pay to the city the annual special right-of-way maintenance fee set forth in C.O. ch. 401. The fee may be modified or adjusted or waived by regulation; provided, however, that such fees shall be calculated in accordance with ORC ch. 4939 to only recover the city's actual and incurred costs of planning, regulating, purchasing, maintaining and governing the rights-of-way, including any costs of joint planning, joint utility and telecommunications facilities placed in the right-of-way by the city for the future use of permittees, enforcement of this chapter, and related costs and overheads, including but not limited to an appropriate allocation of the costs of any geographic information systems utilized by the city, unless otherwise required by law. 
(I)  Joint applications. Applicants are encouraged to submit joint applications for right-of-way permits to work in the rights-of-way at the same place and time. Joint applicants shall have the ability to divide amongst themselves, in proportions the parties find appropriate, any applicable right-of-way permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 64-2016 , § 7, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 48-2018 , §§ 17-21, 6-25-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 64-2016 , § 7, adopted Nov. 28, 2016, changed the title of section § 933.15 from "Construction permits" to "Right-of-way permits." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
§ 933.16 - CONSTRUCTION, RELOCATION AND RESTORATION. 
(A)  Utility engineering study required. 
(1)  Prior to commencement of any initial construction, extension, or relocation of facilities in the rights-of-way, except for repair, maintenance or replacement with like facilities or relocations requested or caused by a third party (excluding the city) or another permittee, a permittee shall conduct a utility engineering study on the proposed route of construction expansion or relocation if requested by the director of public service. Where such construction and/or relocation is requested or caused by a third party, every permittee located within the rights-of-way at issue or involved with the work shall use all best efforts to cooperate and assist any other permittee or person who is directed by the city to perform the required utility engineering study. A utility engineering study consists of, at minimum, completion of the following tasks: 
(a)  Secure all available "as-built" plans, plats and other location data indicating the existence and approximate location of all facilities along the proposed construction route. 
(b)  Visibly survey and record the location and dimensions of any facilities along the proposed construction route, including, but not limited to, manholes, valve boxes, utility boxes, posts and visible street cut repairs. 
(c)  Determine and record the presence and precise location of all underground facilities the applicant or person on whose behalf the permit was applied for owns or controls in the rights-of-way along the proposed system route. Upon request of the director of public service, a permittee shall also record and identify the general location of all other facilities in the rights-of-way along the proposed system route. For the purposes of this section, general location shall mean the alignment of other facilities in the rights-of-way, but shall not necessarily mean the depth of other facilities in the rights-of-way. 
(d)  Plot and incorporate the data obtained from completion of the tasks described in C.O. § 933.16(A)(1)(a)-(c) on the right-of-way permittee's proposed system route maps and construction plans. 
(e)  Where the proposed location of facilities and the location of existing underground facilities appear to conflict on the plans drafted in accordance with C.O. § 933.16(A)(1)(d), permittee has the option of either utilizing non-destructive digging methods, such as vacuum excavation, at the critical points identified to determine as precisely as possible, the horizontal, vertical and spatial position, composition, size and other specifications of the conflicting underground facilities, or re-designing the construction plans to eliminate the apparent conflict. Unless waived by the director of public service, a permittee shall not excavate more than a three (3) feet by three (3) feet square hole in the rights-of-way to complete this task. 
(f)  Based on all of the data collected upon completion of the tasks described in this section, adjust the proposed system design to avoid the need to relocate other underground facilities. 
(2)  The director of public service may modify the scope of the utility engineering study as necessary depending on the proposed construction plans. 
(B)  Copy to city. Upon completion of the tasks described in C.O. § 933.16(A), the right-of-way permittee shall submit the proposed system route maps and construction plans, with the results of the utility engineering study, in the most advanced format (including, but not be limited to electronic and/or digital format) then currently being used by the provider that is then currently capable of technologically being read (or readily converted to a readable form) by the city. The mapping data is only required to be at the "Atlas" level of detail necessary for the city to reasonably determine the location of the provider's facilities in the rights-of-way. The provider shall supply the mapping data on paper if the director of public service determines that the format currently being used by the provider is not capable of being read by the city. 
(C)  Qualified firm. All utility engineering studies conducted pursuant to this section shall be performed by the permittee if in the discretion of the director of public service the right-of-way permittee is qualified to complete the project itself, alternatively utility engineering studies shall be performed by a firm specializing in utility engineering that is approved by the city. 
(D)  Cost of study. The Permittee shall bear the cost of compliance with C.O. § 933.16(A)-(C). 
(E)  Construction schedule. Unless otherwise provided for in C.O. ch. 933 or in the rules and regulations, or unless the director of public service waives any of the requirements of this section due to unique or unusual circumstances, a permittee shall be required to submit a written construction schedule to the city five (5) working days before commencing any work in or about the rights-of-way, and shall further notify the city not less than one (1) working day in advance of any excavation in the rights-of-way. This section shall apply to all situations with the exception of circumstances under C.O. § 933.18(D)(1) (emergency situations) and C.O. § 933.17 (minor maintenance). 
(F)  Location of facilities. 
(1)  The placement of new facilities and replacement of old facilities, either above ground or underground, shall be completed in conformity with applicable laws, the city's design guidelines, and the city's rules and regulations. 
(2)  The city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities within the rights-of-way if the right-of-way is full. In making such decisions, the city shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the rights-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public health, safety and welfare, the condition of the rights-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the rights-of-way, future city and county plans for public improvements, development projects which have been determined to be in the public interest and nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral treatment among providers. 
(G)  Least disruptive technology. All construction or maintenance of facilities shall be accomplished in the manner resulting in the least amount of damage and disruption of the rights-of-way. Specifically, every permittee when performing underground construction, if technically and/or technologically feasible and not economically unreasonable, shall utilize trenchless technology, including, but not limited to, horizontal drilling, directional boring, and microtunneling. In addition, all cable, wire or fiber optic cable installed in the subsurface rights-of-way pursuant to C.O. ch. 933 may be required to be installed in conduit, and if so required, no cable, wire or fiber optic cable may be installed pursuant to C.O. ch. 933 using "direct bury" techniques. 
(H)  Special exceptions. 
(1)  The city may grant a special exception to the requirements of C.O. § 933.16(F) and 933.16(G) if a permittee, upon application, demonstrates with written evidence that: 
(a)  The exception will not create any threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Permittee demonstrates that the increased economic burden and the potential adverse impact on the permittee's construction schedule resulting from the strict enforcement of the requirement actually or effectively inhibits the ability of the permittee to provide services in the city. 
(c)  The permittee demonstrates that the requirement unreasonably discriminates against the permittee in favor of another person. 
(2)  The city shall grant a special exception to the requirements of C.O. § 933.16(F) and 933.16(G) if a permittee, upon application, demonstrates with written evidence that the requirements requested by the city herein create an unreasonable economic burden for the permittee that outweighs any potential benefit to the city. 
(I)  Relocation of facilities. 
(1)  A provider shall as promptly as reasonably possible and at its own expense, permanently remove and relocate its facilities in the rights-of-way whenever necessary to accomplish construction and maintenance activities directly related to improvements for the health, safety, and welfare of the public, as long as the request similarly binds all users in or on the right-of-way and, except for providers of small cell facilities and wireless support structures, whenever the city finds it necessary to request such removal and relocation. In instances where the city requests removal and/or relocation, the city shall waive all applicable right-of-way permit fees. Upon removal and/or relocation, the provider shall restore the rights-of-way to the same or better condition it was in prior to said removal or relocation. If existing poles are required to be removed and/or relocated, then the existing poles shall be replaced with poles of the same or similar size, or smaller. In accordance with law, the director of public service may request relocation and/or removal in order to prevent unreasonable interference by the provider's facilities with: 
(a)  A public improvement undertaken or approved by the city. 
(b)  When the public health, safety, and welfare requires it, or when necessary to prevent interference with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the rights-of-way. 
(c)  The sale, conveyance, vacation, or narrowing of all or any part of a right-of-way. 
(2)  If, in the reasonable judgment of the city, a provider fails to commence removal and/or relocation of its facilities as designated by the city, within thirty (30) days after the city's removal order, or if a provider fails to substantially complete such removal, including all associated repair of the rights-of-way of the city, within twelve (12) months thereafter, then, to the extent not inconsistent with applicable law, the city shall have the right to: 
(a)  Declare that all rights, title and interest to the facilities belong to the city with all rights of ownership, including, but not limited to, the right to connect and use the facilities or to effect a transfer of all right, title and interest in the facilities to another person for operation; or 
(b)  Authorize removal of the facilities installed by the provider in, on, over or under the rights-of-way of the city at provider's cost and expense, by another person; however, the city shall have no liability for any damage caused by such action and the provider shall be liable to the city for all reasonable costs incurred by the city in such action; and 
(c)  To the extent consistent with applicable law, any portion of the provider's facilities in, on, over or under the rights-of-way of the city designated by the city for removal and not timely removed by the provider shall belong to and become the property of the city without payment to the provider, and the provider shall execute and deliver such documents, as the city shall request, in form and substance acceptable to the city, to evidence such ownership by the city. 
(J)  Pre-excavation facilities location. 
(1)  Before the start date of any rights-of-way excavation, each provider who has facilities located in the area to be excavated shall, to the best of its ability, mark the horizontal and approximate vertical placement of all its facilities. 
(2)  All providers shall notify and work closely with the excavation contractor in an effort to establish the exact location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation. 
(K)  Rights-of-way restoration. 
(1)  The work to be done under the permit, and the restoration of the rights-of-way as required herein, weather permitting, must be completed within the dates specified in the permit. In addition to its own work, the permittee must restore the general area of the work, and the surrounding areas, including trench backfill, paving and its foundations in accordance with the code and rules and regulations. If a permittee is unable to timely complete the restoration of rights-of-way due to unreasonable inclement weather conditions, the permittee shall complete the restoration of the rights-of-way as soon as weather conditions make it possible to do so and upon said completion notify the city. 
(2)  In approving an application for a right-of-way permit, the city may choose either to have the permittee restore the rights-of-way or alternatively to restore the rights-of-way itself if the permittee has in the past not abided by requirements of C.O. ch. 933. 
(3)  If the city chooses to allow permittee to restore the rights-of-way, the permittee shall at the time of application for a right-of-way permit post a construction bond in an amount determined by the city to be sufficient to cover the cost of restoring the rights-of-way to its approximate pre-excavation condition. If, twelve (12) months after completion of the restoration of the rights-of-way, the city determines that the rights-of-way have been properly restored, the surety on the construction bond shall be released. 
(4)  The permittee shall perform the work according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city. The city shall have the authority to prescribe the manner and extent of the restoration, and may do so in written procedures of general application or on a case-by-case basis. The city in exercising this authority shall be guided by the following standards and considerations: the number, size, depth and duration of the excavations, disruptions or damage to the rights-of-way; the traffic volume carried by the rights-of-way; the character of the neighborhood surrounding the rights-of-way; the pre-excavation condition of the rights-of-way; the remaining life-expectancy of the rights-of-way affected by the excavation; whether the relative cost of the method of Restoration to the permittee is in reasonable balance with the prevention of an accelerated depreciation of the rights-of-way that would otherwise result from the excavation, disturbance or damage to the rights-of-way; and the likelihood that the particular method of restoration would be effective in slowing the depreciation of the rights-of-way that would otherwise take place. Methods of restoration may include, but are not limited to, patching the affected area, replacement of the rights-of-way base at the affected area, and in the most severe cases; milling, overlay and/or street reconstruction of the entire area of the rights-of-way affected by the work. 
(5)  By restoring the rights-of-way itself, the permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain it for twelve (12) months following its completion. During this twelve-month period, it shall, upon notification from the department of public service, correct all restoration work to the extent necessary using the method required by the department of public service. Weather permitting, said work shall be completed within five (5) calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the department of public service, unless otherwise extended by the director of public service. 
(6)  If the permittee fails to restore the rights-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all repairs required by the city, the city, at its option, may do such work. In that event, the permittee shall pay to the city, within thirty (30) days of billing, the restoration cost of restoring the rights-of-way and any other costs incurred by the city. Upon failure to pay, the city may call upon any bond or letter of credit posted by permittee and/or pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies. 
(7)  If the work to be done under the permit is being done at the same location and the same period of time as work by the city and/ or another permitee(s), then the director of public service may reasonably apportion the restoration responsibility among the city, providers and/or other persons. 
(L)  Damage to other facilities. 
(1)  In the case of an emergency, and if possible after reasonable efforts to contact the provider seeking a timely response, when the city performs work in the rights-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move a provider's facilities to protect those facilities, the costs associated therewith will be billed to that provider and shall be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of billing. Upon failure to pay, the city may pursue all legal and equitable remedies in the event a provider does not pay or the city may call upon any bond or letter of credit posted by the permittee and pursue any and all legal or equitable remedies. Each provider shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another provider caused during the city's response to an emergency occasioned by that provider's facilities. 
(2)  Each provider shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any city-owned facilities in the rights-of-way which the provider or its facilities damage. 
(M)  Rights-of-way vacation. 
(1)  If the city sells or otherwise transfers a rights-of-way which contains the facilities of a provider, such sale or transfer shall be subject to any existing easements of record and any easements granted pursuant to C.O. § 933.21. 
(2)  If the sale or transfer requires the relocation of the provider's facilities; and 
(a)  If the sale or transfer is for the primary benefit of the provider, the provider must pay the relocation costs; or 
(b)  If the sale or transfer is for the primary benefit of the city, the provider or permittee must pay the relocation costs unless otherwise agreed to by the city, the provider or permittee. 
(c)  If the sale or transfer is for the primary benefit of a person other than the provider or the city, such person must pay the relocation costs unless otherwise agreed to by the city, the provider or permittee. 
(N)  Installation requirements. The excavation, backfilling, restoration, and all other work performed in the rights-of-way shall be performed in conformance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations, design guidelines, and other standards as may be promulgated by the city engineer. 
(O)  Inspection. When the construction under any permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall notify the department of public service. 
(1)  The permittee shall make the construction site available to the inspector and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(2)  At the time of inspection, the inspector may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety or well-being of the public, violates any law or which violates the term and conditions of the permit and/or C.O. ch. 933. 
(3)  The inspector may issue an order to the permittee for any work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. The order may be served on the permittee as provided in C.O. § 933.23(D). An order may be appealed to the director of public service. The decision of the director of public service may be appealed to the city manager whose decision shall be final. If not appealed, within ten (10) days after issuance of the order, the provider shall present proof to the director of public service that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the director of public service may revoke the permit pursuant to C.O. § 933.18(E). 
(P)  Other obligations. 
(1)  Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by any other city, county, state or federal laws. 
(2)  Permittee shall comply with all requirements of all laws, including the Ohio Utility Protection Service. 
(3)  Permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable laws and standards, including design guidelines, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who performs the work. 
(4)  No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in C.O. § 933.18(D)(1). 
(5)  Permittee shall not obstruct a rights-of-way so that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. The director of public service may waive this requirement if it is technically or economically unreasonable in the circumstances. 
(6)  Private vehicles other than necessary construction vehicles may not be parked within or adjacent to a permit area. The loading or unloading of trucks adjacent to a permit area is prohibited unless specifically authorized by the permit. 
(Q)  Undergrounding required. Any owner of property abutting upon a street or alley where service facilities are now located underground and where the service connection is at the property line, shall install or cause others to install underground any service delivery infrastructure from the property line to the buildings or other structures on such property to which such service is supplied. Where not otherwise required to be placed underground by C.O. ch. 933, and where legally and technologically feasible, a provider shall locate facilities underground at the request of an adjacent property owner, provided that such placement of facilities underground is consistent with the provider's normal construction and operating standards and that the additional costs of such undergrounding over the normal aerial or above ground placement costs of identical facilities are borne directly by the property owner making the request. A provider, under any circumstance shall, upon the reasonable request of the city, always use best efforts to place facilities underground. Where technically possible and not economically unreasonable or unsafe (based upon the technology employed and facilities installed), all facilities to be installed by a provider under the right-of-way, shall be installed in conduit. 
(Ord. No. 64-2016 , § 8, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 48-2018 , §§ 22-27, 6-25-2018) 
§ 933.17 - MINOR MAINTENANCE PERMIT. 
(A)  Right-of-way minor maintenance permit requirement. No person shall perform minor maintenance of its facilities in the rights-of-way without first having obtained a right-of-way minor maintenance permit as set forth in this chapter. 
Minor maintenance means: (i) the routine repair or replacement of facilities with like facilities not involving construction and not requiring traffic control for more than two (2) hours at any one location; (ii) or the routine repair or replacement of facilities with like facilities not involving construction and taking place on thoroughfares and arteries between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.; (iii) or the routine repair or replacement of facilities with like facilities not involving construction on all rights-of-ways, other than thoroughfares and arterials, that does not impede traffic and is for a period of less than eight (8) contiguous hours; (iv) or construction other than on thoroughfares and arterials that takes less than eight (8) contiguous hours to complete, does not impede traffic and does not involve a pavement cut. The director of public service may adopt rules and regulations pursuant to § 933.06(E) that clarify the definition of minor maintenance and/or provide a process for a provider to determine whether particular activity constitutes minor maintenance. 
(1)  A right-of-way minor maintenance permit allows the right-of-way minor maintenance permittee to perform all minor maintenance in any part of the rights-of-way as required. 
(2)  A right-of-way minor maintenance permit is valid from the date of issuance until revoked by the director of public service. 
(3)  A right-of-way minor maintenance permit must be displayed or upon request produced within twelve (12) business hours. 
(4)  A right-of-way minor maintenance permit by itself shall under no circumstances provide a permittee with the ability to cut pavement without seeking additional authority from the director of the public service. 
(B)  Right-of-way minor maintenance permit applications. Application for a right-of-way minor maintenance permit shall be made to the director of the public service. In addition to any information required by the director of public service, all right-of-way minor maintenance permit applications shall contain, and will only be considered complete upon compliance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Credible evidence that the applicant has obtained a certificate of registration or proof that the applicant has written authority to apply for a right-of-way minor maintenance permit on behalf of a party that has been issued a certificate of registration. 
(2)  Submission of a completed right-of-way minor maintenance permit application in the form required by the director of public service. 
(3)  A statement that the applicant will employ protective measures and devices that, consistent with the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, will prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to the efficient movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(C)  Issuance of right-of-way minor maintenance permits; conditions. 
(1)  If the director of public service determines that the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this chapter and the right-of-way minor maintenance permit process, the director of public service shall issue a right-of-way minor maintenance permit subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  The city may impose reasonable conditions, in addition to the rules and regulations enacted by the director of public service, upon the issuance of the right-of-way minor maintenance permit and the performance of the right-of-way minor maintenance permittee thereunder in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, to insure the structural integrity of the rights-of-way, to protect the property and safety of other users of the rights-of-way, and to minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public. 
(D)  Right-of-way minor maintenance permit fees; revocation. The fee for the right-of-way minor maintenance permit shall be set forth in C.O. ch. 401. The director of public service may revoke the right-of-way minor maintenance permit as any other permit may be revoked under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 64-2016 , § 9, 11-28-2016) 
§ 933.18 - ENFORCEMENT OF PERMIT OBLIGATION. 
(A)  Mandatory denial of permit. Except in the case of an emergency, no permit will be granted: 
(1)  To any person who has not yet made an application; or 
(2)  To any person who has outstanding debt owed to the city unless payment in full has been placed in an escrow account approved by the city finance director and the city attorney; or 
(3)  To any person as to whom there exists grounds for the revocation of a permit; or 
(4)  If, in the discretion of the director of public service, the issuance of a permit for the particular date and/or time would cause a conflict or interfere with an exhibition, celebration, festival, or any other event. The director of public service, in exercising this discretion, shall be guided by the safety and convenience of ordinary travel of the public over the rights-of-way, and by considerations relating to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(B)  Permissive denial of permit. The director of public service may deny a permit in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to prevent interference with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the rights-of-way, or when necessary to protect the rights-of-way and its users. 
(1)  The director of public service, in his/her discretion and in accordance with law, may consider one (1) or more of the following factors: 
(a)  The extent to which rights-of-way space where the permit is sought is available; and/or 
(b)  The competing demands for the particular space in the rights-of-way; and/or 
(c)  The availability of other locations in the rights-of-way or in other rights-of-way for the proposed facilities; and/or 
(d)  The applicability of C.O. ch. 933 or other regulations of the rights-of-way that affect location of facilities in the rights-of-way; and/or 
(e)  The degree of compliance of the provider with the terms and conditions of its certificate of registration, C.O. ch. 933, and other applicable ordinances and regulations; and/or 
(f)  The degree of disruption to surrounding communities and businesses that will result from the use of that part of the rights-of-way; and/or 
(g)  The condition and age of the rights-of-way, and whether and when it is scheduled for total or partial re-construction; and/or 
(h)  The balancing of the costs of disruption to the public and damage to the rights-of-way, against the benefits to that part of the public served by the expansion into additional parts of the rights-of-way; and/or 
(i)  Whether such applicant or its agent has failed within the past three (3) years to comply, or is presently not in full compliance with, the requirements of C.O. ch. 933 or, if applicable, any other law. 
(2)  Under no circumstances will open cutting take place on a newly constructed or newly reconstructed street except where: 
(a)  An absolute emergency situation constitutes that an open cut is necessary; and/or 
(b)  Vital services to resident(s) or business(es) are needed or have been cut off and there is no reasonable alternative (such as jacking or boring) in supplying or restoring such services; and/or 
(c)  The director of public service determines it is in the best interests of the city that such an open cut take place. 
(C)  Discretionary issuance of permit. 
(1)  Notwithstanding the provisions of C.O. §§ 933.18(A)(1) and 933.18(A)(2), the director of public service may issue a permit in any case where the permit is necessary; 
(a)  To prevent substantial economic hardship to a customer of the permit applicant, if established by credible evidence satisfactory to the city; or 
(b)  To allow such customer to materially improve its service; or 
(c)  To allow a new economic development project to be granted a permit under this section. 
(2)  To be granted a permit under this section, the permit applicant must not have had knowledge of the hardship, the plans for improvement of service, or the development project when it was required to submit its list of next year projects. 
(D)  Work done without a permit in emergency situations. 
(1)  Each provider shall, as soon as is practicable, immediately notify the director of public service of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The provider may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. Within five (5) business days, unless otherwise extended by the director of public service, after the occurrence or discovery of the emergency (whichever is later), the provider shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with C.O. ch. 933 for any and all actions taken in response to the emergency. In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a provider's facilities, the city shall use best efforts to contact the provider or the system representative of each provider affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the provider whose facilities caused the emergency. 
(2)  Except in the case of an emergency, any provider who constructs in, on, above, within, over, below or through a rights-of-way without a valid permit must subsequently obtain a permit, pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by the Code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the rights-of-way and comply with all of the requirements of C.O. ch. 933. 
(E)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Permittees hold permits issued pursuant to the Code as a privilege and not as a right. The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any Permit, without refunding any fees, in the event of a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any Law, or any provision or condition of the permit. A substantial breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  The violation of any provision or condition of the permit; or 
(b)  An evasion or attempt to evade any provision or condition of the permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens; or 
(c)  Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a permit; or 
(d)  The failure to maintain the required construction or removal bonds and/or insurance; or 
(e)  The failure to obtain and/or maintain, when required, a certificate of registration; or 
(f)  The failure to complete the construction in a timely manner; or 
(g)  The failure to correct a condition of an order issued pursuant to C.O. § 933.16(O)(3). 
(2)  If the director of public service determines that the permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any law or any condition of the permit, the director of public service shall serve a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. Upon a substantial breach, as stated above, the director of public service may place additional or revised conditions on the permit. 
(3)  By the close of the next business day following receipt of notification of the breach, permittee shall contact the director of public service with a plan, acceptable to the director of public service, for its correction. Permittee's failure to so contact the director of public service, or the permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. 
(4)  If a permittee commits a second substantial default as outlined above, permittee's permit will automatically be revoked and the permittee will not be allowed further permits for up to and including one (1) full year, except for emergency repairs. 
(5)  If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 48-2018 , § 28, 6-25-2018) 
§ 933.19 - CONSTRUCTION AND REMOVAL BONDS. 
(A)  Construction bond. Prior to the commencement of any construction, a construction permittee, excluding the city and the county, shall deposit with the director of public service an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit and/or surety bond in an amount determined by the director of public service to be appropriate based upon fair and reasonable criteria. Unless a construction default, problem or deficiency involves an emergency or endangers the safety of the general public, the director of public service shall serve written notice to the construction permittee detailing the construction default, problem or deficiency. If the director of public service determines that correction or repair of the construction default, problem or deficiency has not occurred or has not been substantially initiated within ten (10) calendar days after the date following service and notification and detailing the construction default, problem or deficiency, then the city may attach the letter of credit or surety bond. Upon attachment, written notice shall be served on the construction permittee by the director of public service. 
(B)  Removal bond. Upon issuance of a certificate of registration and continuously thereafter, and until one hundred twenty (120) days after a provider's facilities have been removed from the rights-of-way, (unless the director of public service notifies the provider that a reasonably longer period shall apply), a provider shall deposit with the director of public service and maintain an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit or surety bond in an amount equal to or greater than one hundred thousand dollars (US $100,000.00), the director of public service shall make all reasonable efforts to allow provider a period of five (5) calendar days after serving notification in writing to correct or repair any default, problem or deficiency prior to the director of public service attachment of the letter of credit or surety bond regarding the removal of facilities. Upon attachment, written notice shall be provided to the provider by the director of public service. 
(C)  Blanket bond. 
(1)  In lieu of the construction bond required by C.O. § 933.19(A) and the removal bond required by § 933.19(B), provider may deposit with the director of public service an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit and/or surety bond in the amount of five million dollars (US $5,000,000.00). Unless a construction default, problem or deficiency involves an emergency or endangers the safety of the general public, the director of public service shall make all reasonable effort to allow permittee a period of five (5) calendar days after sending notification in writing to correct or repair any default, problem or deficiency prior to director of public service's attachment of the letter of credit or surety bond. 
(D)  Self bonding. In lieu of the construction bond required by § 933.19(A), the removal bond required by § 933.19(B) and the blanket bond required by C.O. § 933.19(C), those providers maintaining a book value in excess of fifty million dollars (US $50,000,000.00) may submit a statement to the director of public service requesting to self-bond. If approval to self-bond is granted, a provider shall assure the city that such self-bonding shall provide the city with no less protection and security than would have been afforded to the city by a third party surety providing provider with the types and amounts of bonds detailed in the above named sections. This statement shall include: 
(1)  Audited financial statements for the previous year; and 
(2)  A description of the applicant's self-bonding program. 
(3)  The city manager may modify or waive these requirements if they are not necessary in determining the sufficiency of the self-bonding. The city manager may request applicable and pertinent additional information if it is necessary in determining the sufficiency of the self-bonding. 
(E)  Purposes. 
(1)  The bonds required by this section, and any self bonding to the extent it has been permitted, shall serve as security for: 
(a)  The faithful performance by the permittee or provider of all terms, conditions and obligations of C.O. ch. 933; and 
(b)  Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by the permittee or provider's violation of C.O. ch. 933 or its failure to comply with all rules, regulations, orders, Permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to C.O. ch. 933; and 
(c)  The payment of all compensation due to the city, including permit fees; and 
(d)  The payment of premiums (if any) for the liability insurance required pursuant to C.O. ch. 933; and 
(e)  The removal of facilities from the rights-of-way pursuant to C.O. ch. 933; and 
(f)  The payment to the city of any amounts for which the permittee or provider is liable that are not paid by its insurance or other surety; and 
(g)  The payment of any other amounts which become due to the city pursuant to chapter 933 or the Law. 
(F)  Form. The bond documents required by this section and any replacement bond documents shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled or not renewed by the surety nor the intention to cancel or not to renew be stated by the surety until ninety (90) days after completion of Construction of the Facilities and, notwithstanding the foregoing, shall in no case be canceled or not renewed by the surety until at least ninety (90) days' written notice to City of surety's intention to cancel or not renew this bond." 
§ 933.20 - INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY. 
(A)  City does not accept liability. 
(1)  By reason of the acceptance of an application, the grant of a permit or the issuance of a certificate of registration, the city does not assume any liability: 
(a)  For injuries to persons, damage to property, or loss of service claims; or 
(b)  For claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the installation, presence, maintenance or operation of facilities. 
(B)  Indemnification. 
(1)  By applying for and being issued a certificate of registration with the city a provider is required, or by accepting a permit a permittee is required to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city's agents, elected officials, officers, employees, volunteers and subcontractors from all costs, liabilities, claims, and suits for damages of any kind arising out of the construction, presence, installation, maintenance, repair or operation of its facilities, or out of any activity undertaken in or near a rights-of-way, whether any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by a permit. A provider or permittee shall not bring, nor cause to be brought, any action, suit or other proceeding claiming damages, or seeking any other relief against the city's agents, elected officials, officers, employees, volunteers, and subcontractors for any claim nor for any award arising out of the presence, installation, maintenance or operation of its facilities, or any activity undertaken in or near a rights-of-way, whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by a permit. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the provider, permittee or to the city; and the provider or permittee, in defending any action on behalf of the city, shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense or immunity that the city could assert in its own behalf. Any and all exercise of the above shall be consistent with, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  To the fullest extent permitted by law, all providers and permittees shall, at their sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, agents, officers, employees, volunteers and subcontractors from and against any and all lawsuits, claims (including without limitation worker's compensation claims against the city or others), causes of actions, actions, liability, and judgments for injury or damages (including, but not limited to, expenses for reasonable legal fees and disbursements assumed by the city in connection therewith); and 
(i)  Persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the acts or omissions of provider or permittee, its subcontractors, agents or employees attributable to the occupation by the provider or permittee of the rights-of-way, to which provider's or permittee's negligence shall in any way contribute, and regardless of whether the city's negligence or the negligence of any other party shall have contributed to such claim, cause of action, judgment, injury or damage; 
(ii)  Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy, for defamation of person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent or any other right of any person, firm and corporation by the Provider, but excluding claims arising out of or related to city programming; and 
(iii)  Arising out of provider or permittee's failure to comply with the provisions of law applicable to provider or permittee in its business hereunder. 
(2)  The foregoing indemnification is conditioned upon the city: 
(a)  Giving provider or permittee prompt notice of any claim or the commencement of any action, suit or proceeding for which indemnification is sought; and 
(b)  Affording the provider or permittee the opportunity to participate in any compromise, settlement, or other resolution or disposition of any claim or proceeding subject to indemnification; and 
(c)  Cooperate in the defense of such claim and making available to the provider or permittee all pertinent information under the city's control. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to employ separate counsel in any such action or proceeding and to participate in the investigation and defense thereof, and the provider or permittee shall pay all reasonable fees and expenses of such separate counsel if employed. 
(Ord. No. 48-2018 , § 29, 6-25-2018) 
§ 933.21 - CONVEYANCE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY. 
(A)  Requirements for conveyance. 
(1)  Any sale, transfer, or other conveyance of a property interest shall require a determination by the city engineer that the property interest is no longer needed by the city for use as a right-of-way. 
(2)  Except as provided in C.O. § 933.21(B), the city manager shall obtain an independent appraisal and a survey of the rights-of-way prior to the sale, transfer, or other conveyance of a Property Interest. 
(3)  Except as provided in C.O. § 933.21(B), the sale, transfer, or other conveyance of a property interest shall require the approval of a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of city council. The ordinance shall describe the property interest to be conveyed and any interests to be retained by the city. The ordinance may also describe any easements or other interests to be granted by the city to providers having facilities in the rights-of-way or to property owners abutting the rights-of-way. 
(4)  Any contract, deed, lease, easement, right of entry, or other conveyance instrument shall be approved to form by the city attorney and executed on behalf of the city by the city manager. 
(B)  Exceptions. 
(1)  The city manager may sell, transfer, or otherwise convey the following property interests without obtaining an independent appraisal or city council approval: 
(a)  A permanent or temporary non-exclusive utility easement in the rights-of-way. 
(b)  A lease of the rights-of-way for a term of less than one (1) year. 
(c)  A temporary construction easement or right of entry in the rights-of-way for less than one (1) year. 
(d)  A property interest involving less than 0.05 acres. 
(e)  A property interest that has an estimated fair market value of less than five thousand dollars (US $5,000.00) as certified by the city finance director. 
(2)  City council may by ordinance waive any of the requirements of this section or provide additional requirements for the sale, transfer, or other conveyance of a particular property interest. 
(C)  Sale to abutting owners. 
(1)  The property interest may be offered for sale to the abutting owners at its fair market value as determined by the appraisal. If there is more than one abutting owner, the property interest shall be offered for sale to all abutting owners by competitive bid. The minimum bid shall be not less than one hundred percent (100%) of the fair market value of the property interest. If none of the abutting owners submits a bid equal to or greater than the fair market value of the property interest, the property interest may be offered for sale to the general public by competitive sealed bid or by public auction. 
(2)  The city reserves the right to reject all bids in the event the city manager determines that no bids submitted are acceptable. 
(D)  Sale to general public. 
(1)  The property interest may be offered for sale to the general public by competitive bid or by public auction. The sale of the property interest shall be advertised once a week for a period of two (2) weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipal corporation. The minimum bid for the first time a property interest is offered to the general public shall be not less than ninety percent (90%) of its fair market value. 
(2)  A property interest that is not sold the first time it is offered to the general public may be offered for sale to the general public at a second competitive bid or public auction without further action of the city council. The sale of the property interest shall be advertised once a week for a period of two (2) weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipal corporation. The city manager may waive the minimum bid requirement for the second time a property interest is offered for sale to the general public by competitive bid or public auction. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to reject all bids in the event the city manager determines that no bids submitted are acceptable. 
(E)  Obligations of buyer. 
(1)  In addition to payment of the purchase price, the city manager may require the highest bidder to reimburse the city for some or all of the city's costs associated with the sale of the property interest, including but not limited to the appraiser and surveyor fees, advertising costs, auctioneer fees, real estate commissions, title insurance fees, transfer fees, document preparation costs, taxes and closing costs. 
(2)  The highest bidder shall not be exempt from compliance with the city's Unified Development Code, Building Codes or any other federal, state or local law. 
(F)  Proceeds of sale. Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the proceeds of the sale of a property interest shall be deposited into the city's general fund without restriction on future use. 
(G)  Termination of public rights. City council may by ordinance terminate the public rights in a property interest upon the conveyance of the property interest pursuant to C.O. § 933.21. 
§ 933.22 - VACATION. 
(1)  The vacation of a property interest pursuant to ORC § 723.04 or 723.05 shall require a determination by city council that the property interest is no longer needed by the city for use as a Right-of-way and that the sale of the property interest is unlikely to yield a sufficient purchase price to cover the city's anticipated costs of sale. The ordinance approving the vacation of the property interest shall describe the property interest to be vacated and any interests to be retained by the city. The ordinance may also describe any easements or other interests to be granted by the city to providers having facilities in the rights-of-way or to property owners abutting the rights-of-way. 
(2)  The vacation of a property interest pursuant to ORC 723.09 shall require a determination by the court of common pleas that the property interest is no longer needed by the city for use as a Right-of-way and that the sale of the property interest is unlikely to yield a sufficient purchase price to cover the city's anticipated costs of sale. The order approving the vacation of the property interest shall describe the property interest to be vacated and any interests to be retained by the city. The order may also describe any easements or other interests to be granted to providers having facilities in the rights-of-way or to property owners abutting the rights-of-way. 
(3)  The sale, transfer, or other conveyance of a property interest pursuant to C.O. § 933.21 shall not be considered a vacation of the property interest for any purpose. 
§ 933.23 - GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
(A)  Non-exclusive remedy. The remedies provided in ORC ch. 933 are not exclusive or in lieu of other rights and remedies that the city may have at law or in equity. The city is hereby authorized at any time to seek legal and equitable relief for actual or threatened injury to the public rights-of-way, including damages to the rights-of-way, whether caused by a violation of any of the provisions of ORC ch. 933 or other provisions of the Code. 
(B)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of ORC ch. 933 is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. If a regulatory body or a court of competent jurisdiction should determine by a final, non-appealable order that any permit, right or any portions of this section are illegal or unenforceable, then any such permit or right granted or deemed to exist hereunder shall be considered as a revocable permit with a mutual right in either party to terminate without cause upon giving sixty (60) days written notice to the other. The requirements and conditions of such a revocable permit shall be the same requirements and conditions as set forth in the permit, right or registration, respectively, except for conditions relating to the term of the Permit and the right of termination. If a permit or right shall be considered a revocable permit as provided herein, the permittee must acknowledge the authority of the city to issue such revocable permit and the power to revoke it. 
(C)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city, by the granting of a permit or by issuing a certificate of registration pursuant to ORC ch. 933, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Ohio and under the Charter of the City of Upper Arlington to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The permittee by its acceptance of a permit, or provider by applying for and being issued a certificate of registration, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as now are or the same as may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A permittee or provider is deemed to acknowledge that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. 
(D)  Method of service. Any notice or order of the director of public service or city manager shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
(1)  Delivered personally; or 
(2)  Successfully transmitted via facsimile transmission to the last known fax number of the person to be served; or 
(3)  Left at the usual place of business of the person to whom it is to be served upon and with someone who is 18 years of age or older; or 
(4)  Sent by certified, preposted U.S. mail to the last known address; or 
(5)  If the notice is attempted to be served by certified, preposted U.S. mail and then returned showing that the letter was not delivered, or the certified letter is not returned within fourteen (14) days after the date of mailing, then notice may be sent by regular, preposted, first-class U.S.; or 
(6)  If the notice is attempted to be served by regular, first class U.S. mail, postage prepaid, and the letter is then returned showing that the letter was not delivered, or is not returned within fourteen (14) days after the date of mailing, then notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure, building, premises or property affected by such notice. 
(E)  Applies to all providers. C.O. ch. 933 shall apply to all providers and all permittees unless expressly exempted. 
(F)  Police powers. All persons' rights are subject to the police powers of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public. All persons shall comply with all applicable laws enacted by the city pursuant to its police powers. In particular, all persons shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities, unless such facilities are small cell facilities or wireless support structures as defined herein. 
(G)  Compliance. No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of C.O. ch. 933 by reason of any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance. 
(H)  Foreclosure and receivership. 
(1)  Upon the filing of any voluntary or involuntary petition under the Bankruptcy Act by or against any provider and/or permittee, or any action for foreclosure or other judicial sale of the provider and/or permittee facilities located within the rights-of-way, the provider and/or permittee shall so notify the director of public service within fourteen (14) calendar days thereof and the provider and/or permittee's certificate of registration or permit (as applicable) shall be deemed void and of no further force and effect. 
(2)  The city shall have the right to revoke, pursuant to the provisions of the Code, any certificate of registration or permit granted pursuant to C.O. ch. 933, subject to any applicable provisions of law, including the Bankruptcy Act, one hundred and twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the provider and/or permittee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred and twenty (120) days or unless: 
(a)  Within one hundred and twenty (120) days after election or appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of the relevant certificate of registration, any outstanding permit, C.O. ch. 933, and remedied all defaults thereunder; and 
(b)  Said receiver or trustee, within said one hundred and twenty (120) days, shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by a court having jurisdiction over the facilities, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provisions of the relevant certificate of registration, permit and C.O. ch. 933. 
(I)  Choice of law and forum. This C.O. ch. 933 and the terms and conditions of any certificate of registration or permit shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of the city, State of Ohio and United States, in that order. As a condition of the grant of any permit or issuance of any certificate of registration all disputes shall be resolved in a court of competent jurisdiction in Franklin County, Ohio. 
(J)  Force majeure. In the event any person's performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by C.O. ch. 933 is prevented by a cause or event not within such person's control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of a provider shall include, without limitation, acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires. 
(K)  No warranty. The city makes no representation or warranty regarding its right to authorize the construction of facilities on any particular rights-of-way. The burden and responsibility for making such determination shall be upon the person installing facilities in the rights-of-way. 
(L)  Continuing obligation and holdover. In the event a provider or permittee continues to operate all or any part of the facilities after the termination, lapse, or revocation of a certificate of registration, such provider or permittee shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and other laws throughout the period of such continued operation, provided that any such continued operation shall in no way be construed as a renewal or other extension of the certificate of registration, nor as a limitation on the remedies, if any, available to the city as a result of such continued operation after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and restitution. Any conflict between the issuance of a certificate of registration or of a permit and any other present or future lawful exercise of the city's regulatory or police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter. 
(M)  Appeals. All appeals provided for by this chapter and any notification to the city required by this chapter shall be in writing and sent via certified U.S. mail to the city manager or director of public service as specified in this C.O. ch. 933. 
(N)  City facilities. As part of city required standards wherever rights-of-way are under construction, if deemed advisable and practicable by the director of public service, the city may install all such facilities deemed necessary to accommodate future provider needs. Any such installed facilities shall be city property and may be conveyed to any person under such terms and conditions as are deemed advisable by the city manager. 
(O)  Section headings. Section headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 48-2018 , § 30, 6-25-2018) 
§ 933.24 - SMALL CELL FACILITIES AND WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURES. 
(A)  In accordance with ORC § 4939, this section establishes terms and conditions for the use of the right-of-way by an operator to collocate small cell facilities and construct, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless support structures to distribute wireless service in the city. 
(B)  The application procedures, permit fees, and auditing procedures outlined in this chapter shall be applicable to applications to establish wireless facilities. However, wireless facilities that are not small cell facilities or wireless support structures as defined in this chapter are not subject to this section. 
(C)  In accordance with this chapter, and unless otherwise prohibited by law, each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use the rights-of-way to operate a small cell facility or wireless support structure in the right-of-way, or who has, or seeks to have, a small cell facility or wireless support structure located in any right-of-way, shall apply for and obtain a certificate of registration for the system pursuant to this chapter. 
(D)  All applications for the construction or modification of a small cell facility or wireless support structure shall comply with the right-of-way permit and minor maintenance permit requirements set forth in this chapter and any other applicable law. 
(E)  In addition to the requirements in (C) and (D) of this section, a micro wireless permit shall be submitted by any person that seeks to construct, modify, collocate, or replace a small cell facility or wireless support structure in any right-of-way. The city's consent shall not be required for the replacement of a small cell facility and/ or wireless support structure with a small cell facility and/ or wireless support structure, respectively, that is consistent with the city's design guidelines and is substantially similar to the existing small cell facility and/ or wireless support structure, or the same size or smaller than the existing small cell facility and/ or wireless support structure and complies with the requirements for right-of-way permits as provided in this chapter. 
(1)  For processing a micro wireless permit, the city may charge a fee for each small cell facility and/or wireless support structure in accordance with law and as listed on the micro wireless permit forms. 
(2)  The city shall grant or deny a micro wireless permit in accordance with any required timelines under law. 
(a)  For applications for small cell facilities, the city, not later than ninety (90) days after filing of an application for a micro wireless permit shall grant or deny its consent, or deem the application to be incomplete. 
(b)  For applications for wireless support structures, the city, not later than one hundred and twenty (120) days after the filing of an application for a micro wireless permit shall grant or deny its consent, or deem the application to be incomplete. 
(c)  If the city fails to approve or deny a micro wireless permit within the required time period, provided that the time period is not otherwise tolled in accordance with the provisions of this section, the micro wireless permit shall be deemed granted upon the requesting entity notifying the city that the time period for granting or denying the request of consent has lapsed. 
(d)  Requests for consent that do not meet the requirements listed on the application or stated herein or in the city's design guidelines shall be deemed incomplete or shall otherwise denied by the city. 
(i)  If a micro wireless permit is deemed incomplete, the city shall provide written notice to the applicant that clearly and specifically delineates all missing documents or required information. 
A.  Once the applicant submits the documents or information in response to the city's notice of incompleteness, the city shall, within sixty (60) calendar days, grant, deny, or deem the micro wireless permit to be incomplete due to not providing the information identified in the original notice of incompleteness. 
B.  For a micro wireless permit that is deemed incomplete for a second or subsequent time, the city shall continue to follow the process in 2(d)(i)(A) of this section until such time that a complete application is received from the applicant. At such time, the city shall, within sixty (60) calendar days, grant or deny the micro wireless permit. 
(ii)  If a micro wireless permit is denied, the city shall provide in writing its reasons for denying the request, supported by substantial, competent evidence, and such information at the applicant may reasonably request to obtain consent. Denial of consent shall not unreasonably discriminate against the applicant requesting consent. 
A.  Except in the case of a public utility subject to the jurisdiction and recognized on the rolls of the public utilities commission or a cable operator possessing a valid franchise awarded pursuant to the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 98 Stat. 2779, 47 U.S.C.A. 541, the city, for good cause shown, may withhold, deny, or delay its consent to any person based upon the person's failure to possess the financial, technical, and managerial resources necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(e)  The city shall permit a person seeking to construct, modify, collocate, or replace more than one (1) small cell facility or more than one (1) wireless support structure within the right-of-way to file a consolidated application for consent. 
(i)  No more than thirty (30) small cell facilities or thirty (30) wireless support structures can be proposed within a single application to receive a single permit for the construction, modification, collocation, or replacement of small cell facilities or wireless support structures in the right-of-way. 
(ii)  A single application may only address multiple small cell facilities or wireless support structures if they each involve substantially the same type of small cell facility and/or substantially the same type of wireless support structure. 
(iii)  The city may separately address applications for which incomplete information has been received or which are denied. 
(f)  If the number of requests for consent is likely to result in difficulty processing applications within the time limits set forth in law due to the lack of resources of the city, then the city may toll the time limits as follows: 
(i)  The time period may be tolled for up to twenty-one (21) days for the first fifteen (15) small cell facility or wireless support structure requests received by the city above the thresholds provided in the table below within any consecutive thirty-day period: 
Population of city at time Small Cell Facility or Wireless Support Structure Applications are 
received: Number of 
Applications: 30,000 persons or less 15 applications or more 30,001 to 40,000 persons 20 applications or more 40,001 to 50,000 persons 25 applications or more 50,001 to 60,000 persons 30 applications or more 60,001 to 100,000 persons 60 applications or more  
(ii)  For every additional fifteen (15) requests that the city receives above the thresholds provided in the table above the city may toll the time period for those requests for up to fifteen (15) days in addition to the time period provided in division (E)(2)(f)(i) of this section. 
(iii)  In no instance shall the city toll the time period for any small cell facility or wireless support structure micro wireless permit by more than ninety (90) consecutive days. 
(iv)  Upon request by the applicant, the city shall provide written notice of the time limit for a small cell facility or wireless support structure micro wireless permit. 
(g)  In response to an application for a new wireless support structure, the city may propose either of the following alternate locations and the applicant shall use the alternate location proposed by city as long as the applicant has the right to use the alternate location on reasonable terms and conditions and the alternate location does not impose technical limits or additional costs: 
(i)  An alternate location within one hundred (100) feet of the location requested by the applicant; or 
(ii)  An alternate location within a distance equal to the width of the right-of-way in or on which the new wireless support structure is being proposed. 
(h)  The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the right-of-way permit and the performance of the permittee thereunder in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to ensure the structural integrity of the rights-of-way, to protect the property and safety of other users of the rights-of-way, and to minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public. 
(3)  The total annual charge to reimburse the city for collocation of a small cell facility by an operator to a wireless support structure owned by the city and located in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with law. 
(4)  The city's approval term of a collocation to a wireless support structure shall be for a period of not less than ten (10) years, with a presumption of renewal for successive five-year terms, unless otherwise terminated or not renewed for cause or by mutual agreement between the operator and the city. 
(a)  An operator may remove its small cell facilities at any time subject to applicable permit requirements and may stop paying annual charges or fees established by law. 
(b)  In the event that use of a small cell facility or wireless support structure is discontinued, the owner shall submit written notice to the city to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. If the small cell facility or wireless support structure is not removed within three hundred sixty-five (365) days of discontinued use, the small cell facility or wireless support structure shall be considered abandoned in accordance with ORC § 4939 and the city may remove the small cell facility or wireless support structure at the owner's expense. 
(5)  The city manager is authorized to establish, implement, and amend, from time to time, design guidelines regarding, among other things: (1) the location of any ground-mounted small cell facilities; (2) the location of a small cell facility on a wireless support structure; (3) the appearance and concealment of small cell facilities, including those relating to materials used for arranging, screening, or landscaping; and (4) the design and appearance of a wireless support structure, including any height requirements adopted by the city. 
(a)  The city, as opposed to the construction of a new wireless support structure in the right-of-way, shall prefer locating small cell facilities on existing wireless support structures without increasing the height of the wireless support structure by more than five (5) feet, including the antenna and any associated shroud or concealment material. 
(b)  The city shall permit, consistent with law and for the purpose of providing wireless service, collocation of a small cell facility by an operator to a wireless support structure owned by the city and located in the right-of-way, provided that the operator comply with the design guidelines under division (E)(5)(b) of this section and any reasonable terms and conditions for such collocation that are adopted by the city and consistent with the design guidelines and this chapter. 
(i)  The city may condition approval of the collocation on replacement or modification of the wireless support structure at the operator's cost if the city determines that replacement or modification is necessary for compliance with its construction or safety standards. 
(ii)  A replacement or modification of the wireless support structure shall conform to the applicable design guidelines and the city's applicable specifications for the type of structure being replaced. 
(iii)  The city may retain ownership of a replacement wireless support structure. 
(iv)  They city may require removal and relocation of a small cell facility or wireless support structure, at the permittee's sole expense, in order to accommodate construction of a public improvement project by the city. 
(Ord. No. 48-2018 , § 31, 6-25-2018) 
§ 933.99 - PENALTIES. 
In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter, and the remedy of specific performance which may be enforced in a court of competent jurisdiction the following penalties shall apply: 
(A)  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for the third (3 rd ) degree. Each day such violation continued shall be deemed a separate offense. 
CHAPTER 935. - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 

§ 935.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Bulk items: means large items such as mattresses, furniture, non-Freon containing appliances, other items commonly referred to as white goods, or any other household item too large to fit into an acceptable "container" as provided for in C.O. § 935.02. Chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) or Freon containing appliances must have proper certification of CFC removal attached. Bulk items does not include items set out for collection involving judicial set-out orders or evictions 
    Hazardous waste: means materials which cause damage or injury to personnel, equipment or the environment and which are further defined in C.O. § 935.10(B). 
    Householder: means the head of a family or one maintaining his or her separate living room or quarters in the city and shall include owners, tenants and occupants of all residential premises, upon which solid waste, recyclables, and/or yard waste are created. 
    Premises: means land or buildings or both or parts of either or both, occupied by a householder. 
    Residential unit: means residential dwellings within the city consisting of single family homes or multi-unit dwellings of four (4) units or less. Residential unit does not include condominiums, unless the condominium association has entered into an agreement with the city for solid waste services. 
    Recyclables: means items collected for the purpose of recovering and reusing the marketable materials in accordance with the solid waste contract approved by the city manager. 
    Solid waste: means garbage, household waste, rubbish or refuse, but excluding sewage or body waste, industrial by-products and construction debris. 
    Yard waste: means solid waste that includes only leaves, grass clippings, brush, garden waste, holiday trees, tree trimmings and/or prunings. 
(Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 1, 11-27-2017) 
§ 935.02 - CONTAINERS. 
(A)  It shall be the duty of each householder to use containers as set forth by the city manager rule-making authority in order to provide for the proper storage and disposal of solid and yard wastes. The city manager is authorized to require that separate containers be provided for solid waste, recyclables, and yard waste and to provide further specifications as to the type of such containers. 
(B)  It shall be the duty of each householder to store all solid waste, recyclables, and yard waste created between collection dates in a safe and sanitary manner in a location screened from view from the street in compliance with the City of Upper Arlington's Unified Development Ordinance (U.D.O.), Art. 11, § 7.15. All solid waste, recyclables, and yard waste created upon the premises must be placed in the containers prescribed in C.O. § 935.02(A). This section does not apply to dumpster temporarily in use by residential units for remodeling, construction, special events, or other short-term activities. 
(C)  Containers or materials shall not be placed at the street for pickup earlier than 6:00 p.m. the day prior to the regularly scheduled pickup day. All containers must be removed from their pickup location by 7:00 a.m. the day after the regularly scheduled pickup date. All solid waste, recyclables, and yard waste must be ready for collection no later than 7:00 a.m. of the regularly scheduled pickup day. The householder must provide unobstructed access to the pickup location. 
(D)  In the case of multi-unit apartments of four (4) units or less, it shall be the duty of the owner of the building to ensure that the requirements of this chapter are met upon the property. In the case of multi-unit condominiums that have entered into an agreement with the city for solid waste services, it shall be the duty of the condominium association to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 2, 11-27-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 2, adopted Nov. 27, 2017, amended § 935.02 to read as set out herein. The former § 935.02 title pertained to duty to provide containers. 
§ 935.03 - UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE, RECYCLABLES, AND YARD WASTE. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, place or deposit solid waste, recyclables, or yard waste on any ground or premises whatsoever, except in the manner designated herein. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit solid waste, recyclables or yard waste in containers intended for the use of others without the express permission of the owner of said container. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any garbage or rubbish, or cause the same to be thrown or deposited upon any street, park or other public place, or upon the property of another, where rats, mice, dogs, cats or other animals can feed thereon. 
All property shall be kept free of infestation by rodents, vermin, insects, and other pests, as well as conditions which may encourage such infestation. Where rodents, vermin, insects, or other pests are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes not injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
In no event shall any composting activities be conducted in a manner which creates an odor, litter, dust or noise nuisance or attracts vermin or pests. Such conditions are hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
Composting containers shall be entirely within a fully enclosed container with no opening having a dimension greater than 1/4-inch in any direction. Failure to use such container is hereby declared a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 3, 11-27-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 3, adopted Nov. 27, 2017, amended § 935.03 to read as set out herein. The former § 935.03 title pertained to unlawful disposal of garbage or rubbish. 
§ 935.04 - UNLAWFUL ACCUMULATION OF SOLID WASTE. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow solid waste to accumulate upon his premises for a longer period of time than that expiring between two (2) consecutive collection dates, unless composting restrictions as outlined in § 935.03 are met or other specific provisions are made to eliminate noxious odors, rodents and insects. 
(Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 4, 11-27-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 4, adopted Nov. 27, 2017, amended § 935.04 to read as set out herein. The former § 935.04 title pertained to unlawful accumulation of garbage and rubbish. 
§ 935.05 - COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE, RECYCLABLES AND YARD WASTE. 
(A)  The city shall provide for the collection of solid waste, recyclables, and yard wastes from all residential units within the city. Residential units are obligated to use the collection services provided by the city. The city manager may excuse multi-unit residential dwellings from this obligation through contractual agreement with the owner of the multi-unit residential unit. The city shall only be responsible for collecting solid waste, recyclables, and yard wastes created upon the premises. The city shall deny collection services for household waste, recyclables, bulk items, and yard wastes transported from other political jurisdictions or locations within or outside the city. 
(B)  (1)  Solid waste shall be picked up at the street in front of all premises, or for those householders contracting for premium service and those receiving service pursuant to subsection (D), outside the garage or carport or adjacent to the driveway. 
(2)  The city shall collect solid waste, recyclables, bulk items and yard waste adjacent street in accordance with a schedule and system prescribed by the city manager and in accordance with the solid waste contract approved by the city manager. This section applies to public streets only, unless otherwise authorized by the city manager. 
(C)  The city's public service department shall collect loose leaves raked to the adjacent street in piles during the fall season in accordance with a schedule prescribed by the city manager. This section applies to public streets only, unless otherwise authorized by the city manager. 
(D)  The city manager may waive these requirements in accordance with the terms of the solid waste contract, including the premium service fee, upon certification that none of the occupants of the premises are physically able to move or place the solid waste, recyclables, or yard waste generated on the premises to the required pick up location. Such terms and conditions for a waiver or exemption shall be determined by the city manager and consistent with contract terms for solid waste management. Requests for a medical waiver or exemption must include a certification from a health care provider that the resident is a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk. 
( Ord. No. 75-2015, § 15, 11-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 5, 11-27-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 5, adopted Nov. 27, 2017, amended § 935.05 to read as set out herein. The former § 935.05 title pertained to collection of household and yard wastes. 
§ 935.06 - PRIVATE SOLID WASTE COLLECTION. 
    No person shall engage in the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste, recyclables, or yard waste within the city except as provided in C.O. § 935.13 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 6, 11-27-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 6, adopted Nov. 27, 2017, amended § 935.06 to read as set out herein. The former § 935.06 title pertained to private garbage and refuse collection. 
§ 935.07 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
The city manager shall make such rules and regulations with reference to the handling, collection and disposal of solid waste, recyclables, or yard waste as may be necessary, proper or convenient to facilitate their collection and disposal. 
(Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 7, 11-27-2017) 
§ 935.08 - CHARGES FOR SERVICE. 
(A)  To provide necessary funds for operation, maintenance and other expenses associated with the collection and disposal of solid waste, recyclables, and yard wastes as set forth in this chapter, the city shall collect service fees from all residential units and a premium service fee from units requesting premium services. For multi-unit residential dwellings, the owner of the building shall be separately billed the service fee for each unit. 
(B)  Method of payment for solid waste services shall be determined by the city manager and in accordance with the solid waste contract. 
(C)  The city manager shall annually review the rate schedule for collection and disposal of solid waste, bulk items, recyclables, and yard waste as set forth in this chapter and present any changes to the rate schedule to city council during the budget hearings. The rate schedule shall become effective on a date set by the city manager or January 1 st of the next year unless city council adopts an ordinance establishing a different rate schedule or effective date. 
(D)  The city manager is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with condominium associations and the owners of multi-unit dwellings with five (5) or more dwelling units for the collection of solid waste, recyclables, and yard waste from such associations or owners. The city manager shall determine the rate to be charged for the collection of solid waste, recyclables, and yard waste from such associations and owners, based on the city's cost and capability to provide such collection. Pursuant to C.O. §§ 935.01 and 935.05, the city will only provide collection services to condominium associations that enter into agreements with the city. 
(E)  Unpaid fees shall be collected pursuant to C.O. ch. 227. 
(Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 8, 11-27-2017) 
§ 935.09 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FUND. 
All revenues generated by or on behalf of service fees, collection of premium service fees, and interest earnings shall be deposited in the solid waste management fund, hereby created, and used exclusively for carrying out the purpose of C.O. ch. 935. 
(Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 9, 11-27-2017) 
§ 935.10 - MATERIALS NOT COLLECTED BY THE CITY. 
(A)  Construction and property renovation wastes: Dead trees, tree limbs, trunks or stumps, accumulation of bricks, concrete, plaster, stones, roofing shingles, sand, gravel, earth or other rubbish from construction, remodeling or repairing of buildings or grounds, are not considered solid waste of the type to be collected by the city but must be disposed of by the owner at his own expense. 
(B)  Judicial set-out orders and eviction: Solid wastes and bulk items set out for collection as a result of judicial set-out orders or evictions must be disposed of by the owner of the unit at his or her own expense. 
(C)  Hazardous solid wastes: Materials which may cause damage or injury to personnel, equipment or the environment shall not be collected by the city. These materials shall be disposed of as prescribed by the Solid Waste Management Authority of Central Ohio, Franklin County Board of Health and/or the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. These materials shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Corrosives: Acids and caustics, strong chemicals, pool chemicals or bleach. 
(2)  Flammables: Lighter fluids, turpentine, gasoline, polish, paints, paint thinner, adhesives, propane and gas cylinders, kerosene, hot fireplace or grill ashes. 
(3)  Reactive materials: Cyanides, strong fertilizers, pool chlorine or ammunition/gun powder. 
(4)  Toxics: Poisons, antifreeze, mercury, herbicides or insecticides. 
(5)  Medical wastes: Body tissues, infectious dressings, prescription drugs, improperly packaged sharps, bodily fluids or excretions. 
(D)  Other materials: Any materials not accepted by the Solid Waste Management Authority of Central Ohio or the City of Columbus Solid Waste Disposal Facilities. 
(Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 10, 11-27-2017) 
§ 935.11 - SPECIAL PROVISIONS. 
(A)  The city manager is authorized to determine the conditions under which the city may collect and dispose of waste materials which do not constitute solid waste, recyclables, or yard waste and to fix the charges for said service, taking into consideration the availability of equipment, personnel and disposal facilities and the cost of same to the city. 
(B)  The city manager is authorized to establish limits on the amount of brush, tree and shrub trimmings that will be collected without additional charge. 
(C)  The city manager may contract with individual householders for the collection and disposal of excess materials hereinabove provided. 
(Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 11, 11-27-2017) 
§ 935.12 - REFUSAL OF SERVICE. 
The city manager may refuse service for violation by a householder of any provision of this chapter or any of the rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager, provided that notice of such violation is first given to the householder. Service will not be resumed until the next regularly scheduled pickup day after the violation has been corrected to the satisfaction of the city manager or his designee. 
§ 935.13 - PRIVATE CONTRACTORS. 
    A private contractor that intends to collect solid waste, recyclables, or yard waste from premises or commercial establishments that are not being serviced by the city or its contractor must register with Franklin County and the city manager and comply with all federal, state and local laws and regulations, including all regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 12, 11-27-2017) 
§ 935.14 - SCAVENGING. 
(A)  No person shall scavenge, remove, overturn or tamper with any solid waste, recyclables, bulk items, or yard waste or the container when such solid waste, recyclables, bulk items, or yard waste or container is set out on a public street or highway, sidewalk, alley, or on private premises, and when such solid waste, recyclable materials, yard waste or container is placed for the purpose of collection. 
(B)  This section shall not apply to any federal, state or local law enforcement authorities who are involved in any investigative activities. 
(Ord. No. 69-2017 , § 12, 11-27-2017) 
§ 935.99 - PENALTY. 
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor and fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
CHAPTER 937. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

§ 937.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases shall be defined as follows, unless the content clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
    Abatement: means any action taken to remedy, correct or eliminate a condition within, associated with, or impacting a drainage system which condition has been declared a hazard or public nuisance pursuant to C. O. § 937.22. 
    Area Range Number (ARN): means for the purpose of calculating stormwater drainage service charges, the total square footage of lots or parcels of real property, described in C.O. § 937.14(B) as Class B parcels, shall be grouped into ranges to be designated with ARNs. Lots or parcels of between one (1) and two thousand (2,000) square feet shall be assigned ARN 1. ARN 2 shall be used for those lots or parcels between two thousand one (2,001) and four thousand (4,000) square feet; ARN 3 for lots or parcels between four thousand one (4,001) and six thousand (6,000) square feet; and so on. 
    For the purpose of assigning an ARN to a lot or parcel of real property, the total square footage of lots or parcels of real property shall mean the square footage of surface area of a lot or parcel measured or estimated by using the outside boundary dimensions in feet to obtain the total enclosed square footage, without regard for topographic features of the enclosed surface. The boundary dimensions in feet of the enclosed surface area may be established by any of the following methods: 
(1)  On-site or photogrammetric measurements of the apparent outside boundary dimensions of the lot or parcel of real property made by the city or on its behalf. 
(2)  Computation of the area using dimensions of lot or parcel of real property and/or existing area measurements which are set forth and contained in the records of the office of the Recorder or Auditor of Franklin County, Ohio. 
    Developer: means a person, firm or corporation that presumes to excavate or fill, build structures or otherwise improve a specific parcel or tract of land. 
    Drainage facilities: means various drainage works that may include conduits, manholes, energy dissipation structures, channels, outlets, retention/detention basins and other structure components. 
    Equivalent runoff unit (ERU): means a value based on the parameters used in the stormwater management utility rate structure which represents a unit of stormwater runoff. This value is used to facilitate comparison of the number of billing units of various properties. 
    Impervious surface: means surfaces on or in a lot or parcel of real property which reduce the rate of infiltration of stormwater into the earth. 
    Intensity of development factor: means the runoff coefficient or percentage of impervious coverage on or in a lot or parcel of real property. Eight (8) land uses are identified for purposes of this chapter, with an accompanying intensity of development factor ranging from 0.00 for undeveloped lands to 0.85 for commercial development. The numerical value for each such land use is based upon generally accepted engineering standards and review of and application of said standards to local conditions. 
    Stormwater system: means all man-made drainage facilities, structures and natural watercourses used for collecting and conducting stormwater, surface runoff, street wash water and drainage but which excludes sanitary sewage and industrial waste, other than unpolluted cooling water to, through and from drainage areas to the points of final outlet including, but not limited to, any and all of the following: conduits and appurtenance features, canals, creeks, channels, catch basins, ditches, streams, gulches, gullies, flumes, culverts, siphons, retention or detention basins, dams, floodwalls, levees and pumping stations. 
§ 937.02 - ORGANIZATION OF UTILITY. 
The stormwater management utility shall be within a Division of the Department of Public Service of the City of Upper Arlington. The utility shall be administered by an administrator under the supervision of the director of public service. 
§ 937.03 - RESPONSIBILITY. 
The utility shall monitor the design, operation, maintenance, inspection and construction of all stormwater systems in the city. The utility shall be responsible for the design and construction of public stormwater systems in the city and shall inspect, operate and maintain them as prescribed in C.O. §§ 937.04, 937.10 and 937.15. For purposes of this Code, public stormwater drainage facilities begin at the grating or opening where water enters from a curb and gutter or swale, and ends at the outlet structure where water flows into a channel or natural watercourse. 
The utility shall be responsible for controlling siltation and sedimentation that will adversely affect storm sewers, drainage ditches, watercourses and other drainage facilities or that will pollute public waters and watercourses. 
§ 937.04 - OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER SYSTEMS. 
The responsibility for operation and maintenance of all stormwater systems within the city is as follows: 
(A)  The utility shall be responsible for operation and maintenance of public drainage facilities on public land, street rights-of-way and easements. 
(B)  The developer/owner shall be responsible for operation and maintenance associated with stormwater drainage facilities on private property. 
(C)  Where public facilities are in easements, the owner of the property is responsible for aesthetic maintenance such as lawn mowing, litter pickup, etc. The owner shall also place no structures or plantings that interfere with the drainage facility's proper operation and maintenance in accordance with C.O. § 537.03. 
§ 937.05 - LAND AND FACILITIES AFFECTED FROM OUTSIDE THE CITY. 
Where stormwater drains from lands outside the city, facilities within the city shall be designed in accordance with this Code as if the entire drainage area was within the city. 
§ 937.06 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
(A)  In order to accomplish the purpose of a stormwater management utility; to protect the drainage facilities, improvements and properties owned by the city; to secure the best results from the construction, operation and maintenance thereof; and to prevent damage and misuse of any of the drainage facilities, improvements or properties within the city, the administrator may make and enforce rules and regulations that are approved by the city manager and are necessary and reasonable: 
(1)  To prescribe the manner in which storm sewers, ditches, channels and other stormwater drainage facilities are to be designed, installed, adjusted, altered or otherwise changed. 
(2)  To prescribe inspection and other fees permitted by this Code. 
(3)  To prescribe the manner in which drainage facilities are operated. 
(4)  To facilitate the enforcement of this Code. 
(5)  To prescribe the collection procedures and timing of service charge bills. 
(6)  To protect the public drainage facilities, improvements and properties controlled by the division and to prescribe the manner of their use by any public or private person, firm or corporation. 
(7)  To protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
§ 937.07 - COOPERATION WITH FEDERAL, STATE AND OTHER AGENCIES AND POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS. 
The city, upon the recommendation of the administrator and approval by council, may enter into agreements with other political subdivisions including the cities, county, State of Ohio, federal government and other agencies having power to regulate stormwater as provided by law where required. The city shall have the right to enter into agreements to make drainage improvements, where required, and as provided by law. 
§ 937.08 - NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM. 
The utility shall assist the community development department in the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program, pursuant to Article 6, § 6.05 Floodplain Design Standards of the Unified Development Code. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 937.09 - MASTER PLAN. 
The administrator is responsible for establishing and maintaining a master plan for the rehabilitation of existing facilities and the establishment of new facilities for stormwater drainage where required. C.O. §§ 937.10 and 937.11 will not be implemented until a master plan is completed for a particular drainage basin. In the meantime, Article 6 § 6.04 Stormwater and Drainage Standards of the Unified Development Code will apply. 
§ 937.10 - PERMITS PROCESS. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, relocate, or demolish a storm sewer, natural watercourse or other drainage facilities without first obtaining a proper permit from the Administrator and paying the prescribed fee. Permits are required for the following improvement categories: 
(1)  Connection into the public stormwater system. 
(2)  Improvements, which are or will become public facilities. 
(3)  Improvements within dedicated but unimproved street rights-of-way. 
(4)  Improvements, which require retention or detention facilities. 
An application shall be made by the owner of the property involved or his authorized agent employed in connection with the proposed work. 
A permit shall expire by limitation when no work is started within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance. However, one (1) renewal, which shall be valid for one hundred eighty (180) days commencing upon expiration of the original permit, shall be granted upon written application made prior to the expiration of the original permit. 
§ 937.11 - PLAN REVIEW PROCESS. 
Plans for improvements made within the city that require stormwater drainage facilities and/or changes or alterations to existing stormwater drainage facilities must be submitted to the administrator for review and approval. Plans and applications may be submitted directly to the utility or through the development permit process. All drainage improvements must conform to Article 6 § 6.04, stormwater and drainage standards and Article 6, § 6.05, floodplain design standards of the Unified Development Code, as well as the city's master plan upon development, in accordance with C.O. § 937.09-Master Plan. The administrator shall have thirty (30) days after the date of receipt of application to review each plan submitted. Plans that are not approved may be resubmitted after revisions are made. No permit shall be issued until a plan is approved, or the need for a permit is waived, by the administrator. 
All applications for permits shall be accompanied by three (3) sets of plans and two (2) sets of specifications. In addition to the plans and specifications, the applicant shall provide all statements, calculations, drawings and other supporting data regarding the manner in which stormwater runoff from the project site on the proposed development area will be controlled. 
Every improvement shall be provided with a stormwater system capable of handling stormwaters flowing onto the improvement site from other areas as well as stormwater from the site itself. The drainage system shall be designed to discharge into a watercourse, drainage channel or other existing stormwater facility without producing any adverse effect on adjacent or downstream properties. 
A storm drainage facility shall be constructed when the stormwater flow from the tributary area, as determined by the administrator, is a hazard to adjoining property. 
The stormwater drainage system shall not be combined with any part of the sanitary sewer system, nor shall sanitary water be discharged thereto. 
§ 937.12 - PERMIT REVIEW. 
It shall be the responsibility of the administrator to examine the application as described in the plan review process. If the examination reveals no objections to the proposed plan and it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance with the master plan, codes, laws and ordinances applicable thereto and the proposed construction or work will be in conformance with this Code, the application shall be approved and a permit issued, as soon as practicable. If the examination reveals otherwise, the application shall be rejected and the findings shall be communicated in writing to the applicant. 
§ 937.13 - PERMIT FEES. 
The owner/developer shall pay a permit fee and an inspection fee as detailed herein for all stormwater facilities and erosion and sedimentation controls to be constructed. These fees shall be determined by the administrator in accordance with the guidelines set herein. 
Permit, inspection and plan review fees for new or renovated stormwater facilities shall be based on the value of the construction work for the storm drainage facilities and erosion and sedimentation controls. A minimum permit fee shall be established and shall vary according to the estimated construction cost. If the owner/developer provides for his own construction, the utility shall estimate the value of the construction work for the purposes of this section, if the developer does not provide the cost. The owner/developer is responsible for the payment of all fees in accordance with § 1.10 of the Unified Development Code. 
§ 937.14 - PERMIT REVOKED. 
(A)  The administrator may revoke the permit or stop work for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Whenever there is a violation of any provision of this Code, any ordinance of the city or statute of the state relating to the project. 
(2)  Whenever the continuance of any work becomes dangerous to life or property. 
(3)  Whenever there is a violation of any condition on which the issuance of the permit was based. 
(4)  Whenever, in the opinion of the administrator or his authorized agent, the person having charge of the work is incompetent. 
(5)  Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been made upon the application, plans or specifications on which the issuance of the permit or approval was based. 
(6)  Whenever work is discontinued for a period of one (1) year or when, in the opinion of the administrator, the completion of the work has been unduly delayed. 
(B)  No revoked permit may be reissued until the plans and uncompleted work are made to comply with all the requirements of all laws, codes, regulations and ordinances then in effect. 
§ 937.15 - INSPECTION AND SURVEILLANCE. 
After an application is approved and a permit is issued, construction can begin. It shall be the responsibility of the administrator, or his/her duly authorized representative, to inspect (or designate others to inspect) the premises for which permits have been issued. 
When the administrator or his/her duly authorized representative agent finds the drainage facility and/or the erosion and sedimentation control components, or the construction thereof, is contrary to the approved plans, or presents an unsafe or dangerous condition in connection with the provisions of this Code or of any law or ordinance relating to the same subject matter, the administrator shall give written notice to the owner of the premises or the contractor responsible for the work. The notice shall state where and in what respect the work does not conform to the approved plans, or state the defective condition and law violated, and shall specify a reasonable period of time in which to conform to the plans or the Code. 
Notice, as required by this provision, is to be served on the owner, agent, contractor or other person responsible for the work or violation related to this Code, by personal delivery or by certified mail addressed to his last known place of residence or place of business. If the owner, agent or contractor fails to comply with said notice within the time period specified, such failure shall result in a revocation of the permit. 
In every instance, a revocation notice of the permit shall be in writing and shall be served upon the owner, his agent or the person having charge of the work. A revocation notice shall also be posted alongside the permit. After the notice is received or posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to proceed with any operation for which such permit was issued. No part of the fees for such permit shall be returned. 
Inspection of the construction shall continue through the stabilization of the disturbed area, in accordance with the most current Ohio Environmental Protection Agency's "Authorization for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activity under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System" (Permit Number OHC000002). 
§ 937.16 - RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR SURVEY AND EXAMINATION. 
The employees of the Utility, or its agents including contractors and their employees, consultants and their employees, may enter upon lands within the city to make surveys and examinations to accomplish the necessary preliminary findings to establish a Master Plan and for detailed analysis to prepare final plans and specifications for the proposed improvements. 
Where improvements are made that require periodic maintenance or inspection upon the lands by the utility, the owner of such lands must grant the city a perpetual easement and right of entry around and access to any stormwater channel or facility, including storm sewers. 
Where improvements are required upon lands, the owner of such lands must grant the city a temporary easement and right of entry for construction and specification purposes where required. This consent shall provide the city with the right of access only during the period of construction. 
§ 937.17 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FUND. 
All revenues generated by or on behalf of the utility including stormwater drainage service charges, permit and inspection fees, direct charges and interest earnings shall be deposited in the stormwater fund, hereby created, and used exclusively for carrying out the purpose of C.O. ch. 937. 
§ 937.18 - ESTABLISHMENT OF STORM DRAINAGE SERVICE CHARGES. 
(A)  Application: A stormwater drainage service charge is imposed on each and every lot or parcel of land within the city and on the owner thereof, excepting only public streets, boulevards, alleys, viaducts, sidewalks, curbing, street crossings, grade separations and other public ways, highway structures and appurtenances belonging to the city. 
(1)  Undeveloped land shall be exempted from stormwater drainage service charges until the first capital improvement program is funded through mortgage revenue bonds. The charges will then be evaluated for all undeveloped land. 
(2)  Road and freeway rights-of-way shall be exempted from the stormwater drainage service charge because they function as part of the stormwater collection and conveyance system. Railroads and other rights-of-way will be charged as described herein. 
(3)  Properties that have existing stormwater detention facilities, or those planning such facilities, may have their stormwater drainage service charges reduced as determined by the administrator. The detention facilities must be in accordance with the hydrologic, hydraulic and structural design requirements of the rules and regulations developed by the utility under C.O. § 937.06. Facilities of a temporary nature will not be allowed a decrease in their charges. 
(B)  Classification: There shall be two (2) classifications of property: 
(1)  Class A: One (1) and two (2) family residential properties. A flat rate or value of 2.25 ERU shall be applied to all one- and two-family residential properties. 
(2)  Class B: Multifamily (three (3) families and more) residential property and nonresidential property. The gross area, total square footage, of each Class B property will be determined by any one (1) or more means as defined in C.O. § 937.01(B)(2) and assigned an ARN grouped in two thousand-square-foot ranges. 
(C)  Land use intensity of development factors (IDF): Land uses are identified in Figure 7, page 41 of the city's Stormwater Management Utility Feasibility Study, dated March 6, 1990, on file in the director of public service office and city clerk's office and recognized for purposes of this chapter, each of which has an assigned IDF. The administrator shall annually update Figure 7 with current land uses. The land use of each Class B property shall be assigned based on the records of the Recorder or Auditor of Franklin County, Ohio or the records of the city of Upper Arlington, or through field examination or photogrammetric analysis. 
Land Use IDF Commercial .85 Industrial .75 Multifamily .60 Institutional .40 Residential .25 Agriculture .08 Park .05 Undeveloped .00  
(D)  Monthly charge per equivalent runoff unit (ERU): The monthly charge per ERU shall be $1.67. The monthly charge per ERU shall be reviewed annually and adjusted to meet the utility's budget for the next year's operations and capital improvements. Any increase to the ERU charge noted above shall be approved by council during each year's budget development process. 
(E)  Rates: The administrator shall annually prepare a list of all lots or parcels within the city and the area thereof and assign a classification to each. All properties included in Class B shall be assigned an ARN and IDF. The rates for the two (2) classes of property shall be as follows: 
(1)  Class A: The stormwater drainage service charge for Class A lots and parcels as defined in C.O. § 937.14(B) is as follows: 
Billing Period Rate Annually $45.00 Quarterly 11.25 Monthly 3.75  
(2)  Class B: The stormwater drainage service charge for each lot and parcel within Class B described in C.O. §§ 937.18(B) and 937.18(C) shall be calculated as follows: 
Multiply the ARN of each lot or parcel times the IDF of each lot or parcel, which equals the ERU. Multiply this figure times the monthly charge per ERU. This calculation may be phrased as follows: 
ARN × IDF = ERU 
ERU × ($) charge per ERU = ($) Stormwater Drainage Service Charge, Class B. 
Billing Period Rate Annually $20.00 (ERU) Quarterly 5.00 (ERU) Monthly 1.67 (ERU)  
(Ord. No. 95-2010, 12-13-2010) 
§ 937.19 - COLLECTION OF STORMWATER DRAINAGE SERVICE CHARGE. 
The stormwater drainage service charge shall be paid by the owner of each lot or parcel, which is subject to this charge when billed. 
§ 937.20 - ADJUSTMENT OF CHARGE, APPEAL. 
The administrator shall report any applications of the provisions of C.O. §§ 937.18(A) through 937.18(C), which he considers unjust or inequitable, and the matter shall be resolved in accordance with this section. Further, any person who considers the charges applicable to his/her Class B property or parcel to be unjust or inequitable may apply to the administrator for adjustment thereof, stating in writing the grounds of the complaint. The administrator shall cause appropriate investigation thereof and report the findings and recommendations to the director for review. The director shall consider the complaint and the report and recommendation of the administrator; determine whether an adjustment of the charges for any such lot or parcel is necessary to provide for the just and equitable application of the stormwater drainage service charge; and adjust such charge, if appropriate. 
Notice and substance of the appeal with payment shall be sent to the Utility within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the bill. The administrator shall have thirty (30) days to investigate the matter. The director shall review the appeal in a timely manner and reimburse the unjust or inequitable portion of the charge or give notice of denial of the appeal within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the appeal notice. 
An appeal of the director's decision may be filed pursuant to provisions contained within C.O. § 937.23. 
§ 937.21 - DELINQUENT CHARGES. 
All stormwater drainage service charges shall be paid by the due date shown on the bill. 
Unpaid charges shall be collected pursuant to C.O. ch. 227. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008, 2-25-2008) 
§ 937.22 - DRAINAGE CORRECTIONS. 
(A)  Notice to correct drainage: Whenever the administrator finds that a tract of land is inadequately drained or that there is an obstruction to a culvert, covered drain, or other natural or man-made watercourse that interferes with water naturally flowing therein or that such culvert, drain or watercourse is of insufficient capacity to reasonably accommodate the flow of water; or that a condition which alters, impairs, reduces, restricts or otherwise damages any part of the stormwater system or which may do so in the event of a severe rainstorm constitutes a public hazard or nuisance, the administrator or his/her duly authorized representative shall notify the owner or person having possession, charge or management of such land to remove the obstruction or provide the necessary drainage. Such notice shall be served on such persons by personal delivery, by mail at the last known place of residence or by posting on the premises. 
The owner must comply with the administrator's orders within the time specified, not to exceed thirty (30) days. Failure to comply with such order shall constitute an unlawful act. Each and every day thereafter during which the owner fails to carry out the order of the administrator or his/her duly authorized representative, shall constitute a separate offense as specified in C.O. § 937.99. 
(B)  Emergencies and abatement: In case of an emergency, the city manager may direct that action be taken immediately to correct the condition or abate the activity to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The utility may perform the required work and charge the owner the abatement costs. 
In any case, where a condition described in C.O. § 937.22 exists for more than thirty (30) days after service of notice, council may by resolution direct the owner to fill or drain such land, remove any obstruction; and, if necessary, enlarge the culverts, drains or watercourse to meet the requirements of this Code. 
After service of a copy of such resolution or after publication in a paper of general circulation in the city for two (2) consecutive weeks, the owner, or his agent or attorney, shall comply with the directions of the resolution within the time therein specified. In the event an owner fails or refuses to comply with council's resolution, the city may perform the required work and charge the owner the abatement costs. Such costs shall constitute a lien on the real property from the time of the adoption of the resolution, which may be enforced by suit in the court of common pleas. 
(C)  Abatement Costs: The administrator shall account for all costs associated with an emergency or abatement including, but not limited to, administration, notification, inspection, serving of papers or documents, legal counsel, force account labor, enforcement, operational services and outside contracted services. These costs shall be added to the owner's stormwater drainage service charge. 
This section shall not be construed to relieve the owner of any penalties prescribed by C.O. § 937.99. 
§ 937.23 - APPEALS AND VARIANCES. 
(A)  Composition of the board: A board consisting of the chairman of the board of zoning and planning, director of community development, the city manager and the finance director, or representatives appointed by them, shall serve as the board of appeals to hear and determine any petition filed under this section of the drainage code. 
(B)  Authority of the board: The board of appeals shall have full authority to affirm, modify, reverse or set aside the interpretation, ruling or order appealed from or to grant a variance, and its decision shall be final. 
(C)  General: Any person who has a bona fide controversy with the administrator as to the interpretation or application of a provision of the drainage code or related laws or ordinances pertaining to stormwater management and subject to the administration of the administrator may apply, in writing, to the administrator for a written interpretation or ruling, setting forth in his application the requirements of C.O. § 937.19(D). 
When the administrator has rendered a written interpretation or ruling within thirty (30) days of receipt or request for interpretation or ruling, or has issued a written order to make repairs, maintenance or alterations, the complainant shall be allowed thirty (30) days from the date of the receipt of the same within which to file a written appeal to the board of appeals (see C.O. § 937.23(A)). 
The appeal shall be based on one of the following grounds: 
(1)  That the interpretation, ruling or order is erroneous or constitutes an erroneous application of the particular provisions of the drainage code or other related laws or ordinances pertaining to stormwater management and finance, or is otherwise contrary to law. 
(2)  That a variance is necessary and feasible whereby the board of appeals shall make the following findings: 
(a)  Good and sufficient cause based on an unreasonable burden or hardship has been proven. 
(b)  The granting of the variance would not result in any increase in quantity or velocity of flow, degradation of water quality, or negative impacts upon adjoining or downstream properties, or upon the stormwater system. 
(c)  The degree of variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief from the unreasonable burden or hardship imposed by the drainage code or standards, specifications, requirements, regulations and procedures adopted pursuant to this Code. 
(d)  The variance may be granted without defeating the public health, safety and welfare purposes and intent of the drainage code or related laws or ordinances pertaining to stormwater management and finance. 
(D)  Contents of petition: The complainant shall set forth in his petition for appeal, the interpretation, ruling, or order appealed from, and the provisions of the drainage code or related laws or ordinances, and shall state wherein the interpretation, ruling or order is erroneous. If the appeal is based on a request for variance, the petition shall point out the provision or provisions from which the variance is sought and how the request satisfies the requirements of C.O. § 937.23(C)(2). 
(E)  Emergency situations: Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent immediate action by the city manager in emergency situations. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 937.99 - PENALTY. 
Any person being the owner, agent, or having control of the premises, architect, engineer, contractor, builder, subcontractor, foreman, mechanic, employee, or any other person who pleads guilty or is convicted of a violation of the provisions of this Code, or of any certificate, order, or permit issued thereunder, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each and every day on which such person continues to violate the provisions of this Code, after having once been notified of such violation, shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
CHAPTER 939. - NEIGHBORHOOD LIGHTING MANAGEMENT 

§ 939.01 - ORGANIZATION OF UTILITY. 
(A)  The neighborhood lighting utility shall be within a division of the Department of Public Service of the City of Upper Arlington. The utility shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the president of city council subject to the approval of council none of the members shall be sitting members of city council. 
(B)  Terms of office shall be for three (3) years and shall expire on the last day of February. Appointments shall commence on the date the appointment is approved by council or such other date provided by council. Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of said term. 
(C)  All meeting and agenda items of the Utility shall be approved in advance by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 5-2012) 
§ 939.02 - RESPONSIBILITY. 
(A)  The utility shall monitor the design, operation, maintenance, inspection and construction of neighborhood lights in the city. Neighborhood lights shall include all lights presently on residential streets or are subsequently installed on residential streets. 
(B)  The utility shall be self-sustaining and responsible for all installation, maintenance and replacement of neighborhood lights. 
(C)  No action shall be taken by the Utility without prior approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 5-2012) 
§ 939.03 - NEIGHBORHOOD LIGHTING UTILITY FUND. 
There is hereby created a neighborhood lighting utility fund which shall serve as an enterprise fund to finance the construction and maintenance of neighborhood lights. In order to provide working capital to undertake construction and maintenance, funds may be requested from the general fund. Any funds advanced to the fund for construction and maintenance shall be reimbursed as appropriate by the residents to the neighborhood lighting utility fund. All expenditures shall be in accordance with the city's administrative code. 
(Ord. No. 5-2012) 
§ 939.04 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
(A)  In order to accomplish the purpose of a neighborhood lighting utility; to protect the neighborhood lights, their installation, maintenance and operation and to provide for a uniform program of neighborhood lights within the city, the neighborhood lighting utility may make, subject to the approval of council, and enforce rules and regulations that are necessary and reasonable and consistent with this Chapter and the City Charter. 
(1)  To prescribe the manner in which neighborhood lights are to be designed, installed, adjusted, altered or otherwise changed. 
(2)  To prescribe inspection and other fees. 
(3)  To prescribe the manner in which neighborhood lights are operated. 
(4)  To facilitate enforcement. 
(5)  To prescribe the collection procedures and timing of service charge bills. 
(6)  To protect the neighborhood lights, their installation, improvements and to prescribe the manner of their use by any public or private person, firm or corporation. 
(7)  To protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(B)  Any action taken to administer or enforce the rules and regulations shall be subject to approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 5-2012) 
§ 939.05 - MASTER PLAN. 
The utility is responsible for establishing and maintaining a master plan for the rehabilitation of existing neighborhood lights, the installation of new neighborhood lights and the operation and maintenance of all neighborhood lights. 
§ 939.06 - MAINTENANCE CHARGES. 
(A)  A maintenance charge of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per annum is imposed on each and every parcel of land within the city served by the neighborhood lighting utility system with the exception of the Kensington/Southway Project area. Until such point in time the city assumes ownership of the poles in the Kensington/Southway Project area, a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) per annum shall be assessed to owners with poles residing in the Kensington/Southway Project area, which represents a fifteen dollar ($15.00) credit for payment of electricity going from the pole to the home. Funds derived from the maintenance fee and all earnings on such funds are to be maintained in a separate account and may only be used for the maintenance of the neighborhood lighting utility system. 
(B)  All neighborhood lighting utility system maintenance charges shall be paid by the owner of the lot or parcel that is subject to the charge. 
§ 939.07 - DELINQUENT CHARGES. 
All streetlight maintenance charges shall be paid by the due date shown on the bill. Unpaid charges shall be collected pursuant to C.O. ch. 227. 
(Ord. No. 8-2008, 2-25-2008) 
Part 11 - UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

§ 1.01 - TITLE. 
This Unified Development Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Unified Development Ordinance of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio, the UDO, the Unified Development Ordinance, or just the ordinance. 
§ 1.02 - AUTHORITY. 
The authority to adopt this UDO within the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio, is derived from the authority provided under Section 15 of the Charter of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio and from the powers granted and limitations imposed by the Ohio Revised Code. Whenever the Charter or other laws referenced in this UDO have been amended or superseded, this UDO shall be deemed to have been amended in reference to the new or revised Charter or other laws. 
§ 1.03 - JURISDICTION. 
This UDO shall apply to all land and land development within the incorporated area of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. The City may exercise extraterritorial jurisdiction for a distance of up to three (3) miles of its corporate limits if county or township zoning is not in effect within the area as provided in ORC § 711.09 and the City has adopted a major thoroughfare, parks, and public open space plan for the territory within the City limits and within three (3) miles of the City. The Board of Zoning and Planning may receive advice from the county or regional planning commission upon all subdivisions plats located within three (3) miles of the corporate limits. 
§ 1.04 - EFFECTIVE DATE. 
This UDO was enacted by Ordinance No. 29-2002, passed by the Upper Arlington City Council on April 22, 2002, and shall become effective on May 22, 2002. 
§ 1.05 - REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCE. 
The City of Upper Arlington Planning and Zoning Code, passed December 18, 1961 (Ordinance No. 88-61) and the City of Upper Arlington Subdivision Regulations, passed on February 13, 1967 (Ordinance No. 85-66), as amended, are hereby repealed. This UDO and the referenced official zoning map replace the repealed planning and zoning code and subdivision regulations. 
§ 1.06 - INTENT AND PURPOSE. 
This ordinance is enacted in accordance with the Master Plan for the City of Upper Arlington and for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, convenience, and general welfare; establishing land use classifications; dividing the City into districts; imposing regulations, restrictions and prohibitions upon the use, subdivision and occupancy of real property; limiting the height, area and mass of buildings and other structures; providing for standards of performance and subdivision design; recognizing the City's residential character while enhancing community redevelopment and revitalization, including town centers, community focal points, mixed uses, open/green space and quality residential and commercial development that serves the community's needs; and providing for the administration and enforcement thereof. This ordinance is also enacted to assure the redevelopment of certain commercial areas of the City, including those identified in the master plan-study area plan, is in accordance with the design guidelines set forth in Article 7. 
§ 1.07 - RELATIONSHIP TO EXISTING ORDINANCES. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this UDO shall be the minimum requirements, unless otherwise noted, and shall be deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted to the City under its charter and ordinances or under state statutes. 
It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with any existing ordinances or provisions of law, or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law, relating to the use of buildings and land, except as provided for in C.O. Section 1.05 herein. 
Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction on the use of buildings or premises, or on the heights of buildings, or requires larger yards, courts, or other open spaces than are imposed or required by such existing provisions, the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail and control to the extent permitted by law. 
§ 1.08 - RELATIONSHIP TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. 
The Master Plan for the City of Upper Arlington, or Master Plan as referenced in the UDO, consists of Volumes I, II, and III, adopted on March 11, 2013, and as amended. It establishes the goals, objectives and strategies that serve as a basis for the UDO. All regulations or amendments adopted pursuant to this Ordinance shall be consistent with the master plan as adopted and revised or updated. In cases of inconsistency with other regulations or amendments, the UDO regulations shall prevail. 
§ 1.09 - CONFORMANCE. 
Except as specified herein, no land shall be subdivided, no building, structure, premises, or part thereof shall be used, occupied, located, moved, erected, constructed, reconstructed, converted, extended, enlarged, or altered except in conformity and full compliance with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
§ 1.10 - FEES. 
City Council shall establish by ordinance a schedule of fees for all permits and applications required by the UDO. In so doing, the City Council shall consider the recommendations of the Director of Community Development with respect to actual administrative costs. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 1.11 - SEVERABILITY. 
Each chapter, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or other divisible part of the UDO is hereby declared to be severable. If any such chapter, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or other divisible part of the UDO is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid (by any court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree), such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining chapters, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases, or other divisible parts of the UDO. 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 

§ 2.01 - INTERPRETATION. 
For the purposes of this Unified Development Ordinance (UDO), certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  The word person includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
(2)  The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. 
(3)  The word shall or will is a mandatory requirement, the word may is a permissive requirement, and the word should is a preferred requirement. 
(4)  The words used or occupied include the words intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied. 
(5)  The word lot includes the words plot or parcel . 
(6)  Any reference to days shall mean, unless expressly provided otherwise, calendar days. 
(7)  Any reference to an article or section shall mean an article or section of this Ordinance, unless otherwise specified. 
(8)  The words Director of Community Development shall also mean his/her designated representative. 
(9)  TRC shall mean technical review committee. 
(10)  BZAP shall mean Board of Zoning and Planning. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 3, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 2.02 - DEFINITIONS (A-B). 
The following words and phrases when used in the UDO or any zoning ordinance of the City shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them unless otherwise stated. 
    Above ground level: means the height measured by the distance from the average grade level to the highest point on the structure, including any antenna and additional height required for co-location. 
    Accessory structure: means a subordinate structure detached from, but located on the same lot as the principal structure, and is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory structures include but are not limited to: sheds, play sets, outdoor kitchens or fireplaces, pet shelters, and mechanical units. 

Accessory and Principle Structure
    Accessory use: means a subordinate use detached from, but located on the same lot as the principal use of the property. 
    Accessory use, major: means an accessory use that, because of its size, location, or intensity of activity, may have impact on adjacent property and is listed in Table 5-A. Accessory uses and buildings may be erected upon a lot on which a principal structure already exists. The use of the accessory building must be secondary and incidental to the principal use. The Director of Community Development shall determine if the accessory use is a major or minor accessory use. Major accessory uses and buildings are considered for approval by BZAP. See Section 6.09 for standards. 
    Accessory use, minor: means an accessory use that will not have significant impact on adjacent property and is listed as a minor accessory use in Table 5-A. Accessory uses and buildings may be erected upon a lot on which a principal structure already exists. The use of the accessory building must be secondary and incidental to the principal use. Minor accessory uses and buildings are considered for approval by the Director of Community Development. See Subsection 6.09 for standards. 
    Adult book store: means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
    A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult book store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult book store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult booth: means any area of a sexually oriented business establishment set off from the remainder of such establishment by one (1) or more walls or other dividers or partitions and used to show, play or otherwise demonstrate any adult materials or to view any live performance that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
    Adult cabaret: means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment that features live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities, or adult materials, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, computer displays, or other photographic reproductions in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material that is characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult care facility: means an adult family home or an adult group home, as defined in the ORC § 3722 and licensed by the Ohio Department of Health which provides accommodations and supervision for three (3) to sixteen (16) unrelated adults, at least three (3) of whom are provided personal care services. 
    Adult day care facility: means a facility providing care for the elderly and/or functionally impaired adults in a protected setting for a portion of a twenty-four-hour day. 
    Adult family home: means an adult care facility licensed by the Ohio Department of Health which provides accommodations for three (3) to five (5) unrelated adults, with supervision, and provides personal care services to at least three (3) individuals. Adult family homes are permitted by law in any residentially zoned district. 
    Adult foster home: means a residence certified by the Ohio Department of Aging which will provide accommodations, supervision, personal care services to one (1) or two (2) unrelated adults. Adult foster homes will be certified by the area agency on aging in those counties under its jurisdiction, in accordance with rules for certification established by the Ohio Department of Aging. 
    Adult group home: means an adult care facility licensed by the Ohio Department of Health which provides accommodations for six (6) to sixteen (16) unrelated adults, supervision, and personal care services to at least three (3) individuals. Adult group homes are permitted by law in any multi-family zoned district. An adult care facility does not include the following specific facilities, nor any which are similar in nature to these facilities: a nursing home, rest home, or home for the aging as defined in ORC § 3721.01; An alcohol and drug addiction program as defined in ORC § 3793.01; A habitation center as defined in ORC § 5111.041. 
    Adult material: means magazines, books, photographic reproductions, videotapes, movies, slides, compact discs in any format (e.g., cd-rom, cd-r, cd-rw), digital video discs in any format (eg., dvd), other devices used to reproduce or record computer images, or other print, video, film, electronic, computer-based, analog, or digital media characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or related to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater: means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
    Aggrieved: means any person who demonstrates an interest that is directly affected by the order, requirement, decision, or determination. A person's interest is directly affected where it is subject to an immediate, unique harm distinct from the harm suffered by the community at large. A future, contingent, or speculative interest will not suffice. For the purposes of this definition, any person owning property contiguous or adjacent to a proposed land use site shall be considered directly affected with respect to any administrative hearing or appeal regarding that site. 
    Aisle: means that portion of the off-street parking and loading area that provides access to parking, stacking or loading spaces, exclusive of driveways and parking and loading spaces. 
    Alley/Lane: means a public way not more than twenty-two (22) feet wide affording only secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Amusement arcade: means any place of business at which three (3) or more amusement devices are located for the use of entertaining or amusement of persons patronizing the place of business. Billiards/pool tables/rooms are excluded from this definition and are specifically referenced in the zones in which they are permitted. Any amusement device operated exclusively by an employee of the place of business for the entertainment or amusement of patrons shall not be considered in calculating the number of amusement devices, but shall instead be a prima facie indicator of the provision of entertainment. 
    Antenna: means any exterior apparatus used for transmitting and receiving, mounted on a tower, alternative tower structure, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communications signals in the provision of wireless service. 
    Antenna support structure: means any building, poles (utility poles, light poles, or traffic signal poles) currently in place having been previously constructed for a primary purpose other than supporting wireless communication facilities, or other structure other than an antenna tower which can be used for the location of wireless communication facilities. 
    Antenna tower: means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, antenna tower alternative structures, and the like. 
    Antenna tower alternative structures: means man made trees, clock towers, flagpoles, bell steeples, and similar alternative-design mounting structures that substantially camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers such that one would not identify the structure as an antenna tower. 
    Antenna tower height: means the above ground level height measured by the distance from the average grade level of the base of the antenna tower or antenna support structure to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including any antenna and additional height required for co-location. Lightning rods up to six (6) feet in length and 1.25 inches in diameter may extend above the maximum height measured. When roof-mounted, antenna tower height shall be measured from the average grade level of the building to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including any antenna and additional height required for co-location. 
    Apartment: means a suite of rooms or a room in a multi-family building arranged and intended for a place of residence of a single family or a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Apartment, efficiency: means a dwelling unit in a multi-family building consisting of not more than one (1) habitable room, together with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities. 
    Apartment hotel: means an apartment house which furnishes services for the use of its tenants which are ordinarily furnished by hotels. 
    Appeal: means a request for a review of the Director of Community Development and BZAP interpretation of any provision of this Ordinance or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding: means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) foot to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard: means the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Areas of special flood hazard are designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99. 
    Assisted living: See "rest homes". 
    Attached: means (1) a use, room or space that has at least one (1) wall (or part of one (1) wall) in common with the remainder of a building; (2) a use, room or space that can be entered from and/or through other rooms and spaces within a building. An unenclosed roof connection shall not be considered attached. 
    Automobile repair, major: means general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers; collision services including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop; vehicle steam cleaning. 
    Automobile repair, minor: means incidental body or fender work, or other minor repairs, painting and upholstering, replacement of parts and motor service to passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one and one-half (11/2) tons capacity, but not including any operation named under automobile repair, major, or any other similar thereto. 
    Automobile service: means any building, structure, or land used primarily for the dispersal, sale, or offering for the cleaning and washing of automobiles or the sale of automotive fuels, oils, or accessories, including lubrication of automobiles and replacement or installation of minor parts and accessories, but not including repair work, such as motor replacement, rebuilding, body and fender repair, or painting. 
    Automobile/Trailer sales area: means an open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles or trailers in operable condition and where no repair work is done. The parking on such area of one (1) or more motor vehicles which do not bear current registration plates issued for such vehicles, shall be prima facie evidence of the use of such premises as an automobile sales area. 
    Average grade level: means a reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the structure or building at all exterior surfaces. 

Average Grade
    Balcony: means a projecting platform on a building, sometimes supported from below, sometimes cantilevered; enclosed with a railing or balustrade. A balcony is distinguished from a deck when it projects from the building at a second story level or higher and is accessible from within the building. 
    Bank, finance and loan offices: Banking, financial or loan facilities that house the offices of professional banking, financial or loan personnel that do not include tellers and are not open to the general public. 
    Bank, retail: A banking operation that includes personal and/or business banking services, such as deposits, withdrawals and loans, and that is open to the public. 
    Banner: means a sign that contains a message which is attached or imprinted on a flexible surface that deforms under light pressure, that is typically constructed of nondurable materials including paper, cardboard, cloth and/or plastic. 
    Banquet hall: means an establishment that is rented by individuals or groups to accommodate private functions such as weddings, anniversaries, business promotional events, and similar celebrations. 
    Bar: (see also "tavern") means an area primarily devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which the service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. 
    Base flood: means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood may also be referred to as the 100-year flood. 
    Basement: means a story whose floor line is below grade at any entrance or exit and whose ceiling is not more than five (5) feet above grade at any such entrance or exit. 
    Bed and breakfast: means a transient lodging establishment generally in a single-family dwelling providing overnight or otherwise temporary lodging for the general public and may provide meals for compensation. 
    Big box retail: means any single retail establishment having a gross floor area that exceeds sixty thousand (60,000) square feet, drawing customers from a distance greater than five (5) miles and is typically surrounded by parking lots. 
    Big box retail, multi-story: means any single retail establishment having a gross floor area that exceeds sixty thousand (60,000) square feet, draws customers from a distance greater than five (5) miles and has a minimum of two (2) similar-sized floors. 
    Board: means the Board of Zoning and Planning of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. The Board of Zoning and Planning (BZAP) is responsible for reviewing and recommending to City Council a master plan for the physical development of the City, official zoning map and UDO amendments, preliminary and final plats, and other administrative development approvals. 
    Boarding/Lodging house: means a dwelling or part thereof occupied by a single housekeeping unit where meals and lodging are provided for three (3) or more persons for compensation by previous arrangement but not transients. 
    Bottomless: means less than full opaque covering of male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks. 
    Build-to line: An alignment established at a certain distance from and parallel to the curb line along which the building shall be built. 
    Buildable area: means the internal area of a lot bounded by front, side, and rear yard setback lines. 
    Building: means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property, including detached garages. 
    Building addition: means a part added to a building, either by being built so as to form one (1) architectural whole with it, or by being joined with it in some way, as by a passage, and so that one is a necessary adjunct or appurtenance of the other or so that both constitute the same building. 
    Building cover: means the lot area occupied by any structure used for the purpose of providing temporary or permanent forms of shelter. The calculation of building cover area shall include all areas covered by a building's roof and other forms of protection from the elements. 
    Building directory signs: A building directory sign is defined as an exterior building mounted commercial sign intended to provide the identity or name, whether through logo, type, graphics or other symbols, for two (2) or more uses within one (1) building. 
    Building footprint: means the outline of the total area covered by a buildings' perimeter at the ground level. 
    Building, height of: means the vertical distance from the average existing grade around the foundation to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or mansard roof, or to the top of the highest ridge line of gable, hip or gambrel roofs. For commercial buildings and structures, maximum height shall be measured to the top of parapet wall, top of cornice or soffit, or top of eave fascia for sloped or mansard-style roofs, whichever is higher. 
    Building setback line: means the line beyond which no building or parts thereof shall project, except as otherwise provided by this Ordinance. 
    Bus: means a rubber-tired vehicle that is designed for roadway operation for public transportation service. 
(Ord. No. 58-2011; Ord. No. 8-2012; Ord. No. 36-2014 Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 21-2016, § 2, 5-9-2016 ; Ord. No. 44-2017 , § 1, 7-5-2017; Ord. No. 53-2017 , §§ 1, 2, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 54-2017 , §§ 2, 3, 12-11-2017Ord. No. 32-2018 , § 2, 4-23-2018 ; Ord. No. 47-2018 , § 2-5, 6-25-2018) 
§ 2.03 - DEFINITIONS (C-E). 
The following words and phrases when used in the UDO or any zoning ordinance of the City shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them unless otherwise stated: 
    Camper trailer: means a folding or collapsible vehicular structure, mounted on wheels but without its own power, designed as a temporary living quarters for travel, camping, recreation and vacation uses which is not covered by the definition of travel trailer. 
    Canopy: means a permanently roofed shelter projecting over a sidewalk, driveway, entry, window, or similar area, which may be wholly supported by a building or may be wholly or partially supported by columns, poles, or braces extending from the ground. Any roof overhang extending more than two (2) feet from the face of a building shall be considered a canopy. 
    Carport: means a permanent roofed structure permanently open on at least two (2) sides, designed for or occupied by private passenger vehicles. 
    Cemetery: means land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbarium, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries if operated in connection with and within the boundaries of such cemetery. 
    Certificate of economic hardship: means a certificate issued by the Board authorizing the timely demolition of a contributing structure that meets the applicable criteria set forth in this Ordinance, based on a finding by the Board that delaying the demolition by one hundred eighty (180) days would cause unusual economic hardship for the property owner seeking a demolition permit. 
    Certificate of zoning compliance: means a document issued by the Community Development Department indicating compliance with the Unified Development Ordinance. 
    Child day-care: means administering to the needs of infants, toddlers, preschool children and school children outside of school hours by persons other than their parents or guardians, custodians or relatives by blood, marriage, or adoption, for any part of the twenty-four-hour day in a place or residence other than the child's own home. 
    Child day-care center and type A home: means any place in which child day-care is provided, with or without compensation, for thirteen (13) or more children at one time, or any place that is not the permanent residence of the licensee or administrator in which child day-care is provided, with or without compensation, for seven (7) to twelve (12) children at one time. In counting children for the purpose of this Ordinance, any children under 6 years of age who are related to a licensee, administrator, or employee and who are on the premises of the center shall be counted. 
    Child day-care home and type B home: means a permanent residence of the provider in which child day-care services are provided for one (1) to six (6) children at one time and in which no more than three (3) children may be under 2 years of age at one time. In counting children for the purpose of this Ordinance, any children under 6 years of age who are related to the provider and who are on the premises of the type B home shall be counted. A type B family day-care home does not include a residence in which the needs of children are administered to, if all of the children are siblings of the same immediate family and the residence is the home of the siblings. 
    City: means the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
    City property: means land and other property in which the City holds a present right of possession and control such as, but not limited to, rights-of-way, easements, streets, parks, building parcels, and other grounds, regardless of the type of ownership interest in the property. 
    Club: means a non-profit association of persons who are bona fide members, paying regular dues and are organized for some common purpose, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise. 
    Co-location: means the use of wireless communications facilities by more than one (1) wireless communications provider. 
    Collection box: means any portable or permanent container of any type, construction or material designed for the collection and storage of articles donated to a recognized charitable, educational or similar organization. 
    Community Development Department: means the Community Development Department established pursuant to C.O. § 175.01. 
    Community scale A: means a commercial development consisting of a single user whose gross floor area ranges from five thousand (5,000) to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size. 
    Community scale B: means a commercial development consisting of a single user whose gross floor area ranges from twenty thousand one (20,001) to forty thousand (40,000) square feet in size. 
    Community scale C: means a commercial development consisting of a single user whose gross floor area ranges from forty thousand one (40,001) to sixty thousand (60,000) square feet in size. 
    Conditional uses: Conditional uses are those uses that, because of special requirements or characteristics, may be allowed in a particular zoning district only after review by BZAP and granting of conditional use approval imposing such conditions as necessary to make the use compatible with other uses permitted in the same zone or vicinity. 
    Congregate housing: means an independent rental housing facility in which hotel services are included in the monthly rental fee and lease agreement. For a building to qualify under this definition, services provided shall include a meal program available to all residents, a dining room with seating capacity for all residents as defined by the Ohio Basic Building Code, a full-service kitchen with staff and capacity to support the meal program and dining room service, and available housekeeping, laundry, and transportation services for its residents. No supervision or personal care need be provided. 
    Connectivity: The ability to establish vehicular and pedestrian connections between neighborhoods. These connections can take the form of paths or passages. Paths are pedestrian and bicycle connections traversing an open area and connecting with the sidewalk network. Passages provide shortcuts through long blocks or connect rear-parking areas with street frontage. 
    Construction (beginning of): means any act or process that requires a building permit and that adds an addition onto an existing building or erects a new principal or accessory structure on a lot which is subject to the design standards for the district in which the property is located. 
    Continuing care retirement community: means a retirement community licensed by the Ohio Department of Health which contains a number of different living arrangements from independent living to skilled care. Continuing care retirement communities often require the payment of an entrance fee or endowment in exchange for a promise of continuing care to the resident for a prescribed period, usually the life of the resident. Continuing care retirement communities will arrange for nursing care or provide it on the same site. 
    Contributing structures: means those buildings or structures that do not exist principally to serve a religious function, that stand within the "Upper Arlington Historic District," as defined by the National Register of Historic Places, that feature characteristics for which the National Register designation was made such as construction between 1915 and 1940, representation of early 20th century architecture, or local significance in the area of community planning or landscape design, and that were contained in the original nomination form and map for purposes of receiving the historic district designation. 
    Coping: means the protective top member of any vertical construction, such as a wall or chimney. A coping may be masonry, metal, or wood and is usually sloping or beveled to shed water in such a way that it does not run down the vertical face of the wall. Copings often project out from a wall with a drip groove on the under side. 
    Cornice: A horizontal molded projection that crowns or completes a building or wall to which it is affixed. 
    Council: means the City Council of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
    Country club, private: A private organization with facilities set on a minimum of one hundred (100) acres available only to its members and their guests. Is formed primarily for recreational purposes, and includes a club house and golf course, and may also include swimming pools, tennis courts and a fitness center. Dining facilities, meeting rooms, organizational offices, lounges, snack bars, retail sales, maintenance facilities, and housing accommodations for not more than fifteen (15) seasonal/temporary employees may also be permitted as accessory uses. 
    Court: means an open, unoccupied and unobstructed space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, which is enclosed on three (3) or more sides. 
    Deck: Means a horizontal platform supported by any combination of posts, beams, foundations, and/or joists with or without handrails, steps or terraces. Terrace in this definition means a portion of the deck stepping up or down with the grade and used in lieu of, or in combination with, more traditional steps. 
    Decorative pole: means a pole, arch, or structure other than a street light pole placed in the public way specifically designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments have been placed except for any of the following (1) electric lighting; (2) specifically designed informational or directional signage; (3) temporary holiday or special event attachments. 
    Detached: means (1) a use, room, space, building or assembly of buildings that is completely surrounded by open space; (2) a use, room, space, building or assembly of accessory buildings that is not attached or connected to a principally permitted use or building. 
    Development: means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Development cover: means the amount of the lot area occupied by all principal and accessory structures, driveways, parking lots, decks, sidewalks, patios, swimming pools, athletic courts, permeable surface areas and any other permanent impervious development on the lot. 

Development Cover
    Development plan: means a dimensioned presentation of the proposed development of a specified parcel of land that reflects thereon the location of buildings, easements, parking arrangement, public access, street pattern, and other similar features. 
    Director of Community Development: means the person appointed by the City Manager as the Director of Community Development pursuant to C.O. § 175.02. 
    Display area: means the entire area within a continuous perimeter, which encloses the message or display and any other material, color or feature which forms an integral part of the sign and is used to differentiate such a sign from the masonry wall upon which it is placed. 
    District: means a portion of the territory of the City of Upper Arlington, within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Ordinance. 
    Donation bin/receptacle: means a large container placed in outdoor public locations for people to drop-off or donate used clothing or items, typically for charitable purposes. 
    Dormer, shed: means a structure projecting from a sloped roof which contains more than one (1) window unit or louver or which exceeds an overall exterior width of five (5) feet. Window dormers shall be considered a shed dormer when the sum of their exterior widths along any building elevation exceeds thirty percent (30%) of the overall projected elevation length of the building face on which they appear. 

Shed Dormer
    Dormer, window: means a structure projecting from a sloped roof containing one (1) window unit. 

    Dwelling: means any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one (1) or more persons, but not including a tent, cabin, trailer, or trailer coach, boarding or rooming house, hotel or motel. 
    Dwelling group: means a group of two (2) or more detached dwellings located on a parcel of land in one ownership and having any yard or court in common. 
    Dwelling, multi-family: means a building or portion thereof designed for or used by three (3) or more families or housekeeping units. 
    Dwelling, single-family: means a building designed for or used exclusively for residence purposes by one (1) family or housekeeping unit. 
    Dwelling, two-family: means a building designed for or used exclusively by two (2) families or housekeeping units. 
    Dwelling unit: means a single housekeeping unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
    Dwelling unit - No bedroom: means a dwelling unit which contains no bedroom and no other room or space which may be readily converted to a bedroom whether such room or space be designated as a library, study, or otherwise. Generally, a no bedroom unit will contain only a living room, kitchen or kitchenette, breakfast space, bath, dressing room and customary closets or storage areas. 
    Dwelling unit - One-bedroom: means a dwelling unit which has only one (1) bedroom and which does not contain another room or space which may be readily converted to an additional bedroom whether such room or space be designated as a library, study, or otherwise. Generally, a one-bedroom unit will contain only a living room, kitchen or kitchenette, dining or breakfast space, bath, one (1) bedroom and customary closets or storage areas. 
    Elderly housing: means housing in a community that is specifically designed and operated for the elderly under state or Federal programs; or housing intended for and occupied solely by persons who are at least 62 years of age; or housing that meets the following criteria: (1) at least eighty percent (80%) of the occupied units in the housing facility or community must be occupied by at least one (1) person 55 years of age or older, (2) the facility or community must publish and must adhere to policies and procedures that demonstrate intent to comply with the requirements of the federal Fair Housing Act, and (3) the community or facility must meet the rules for verification of occupancy promulgated by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
    Electric supplier: means any electric light company as defined in section 4905.03 of the Ohio Revised Code, including electric light companies organized as nonprofit corporations, but not including municipal corporations or other units of local government that provide electric service. 
    Elevation: means the orthographically projected length of one (1) side of a building without compensation for indentations and projections included in the perimeter length. 
    Eligible facilities request: means any request for modification of an existing wireless tower or base station that involves (A) collocation of new transmission equipment; (B) removal of transmission equipment; or (C) replacement of transmission equipment as such terms are defined in 47 C.F.R. 1.40001. 
    Employees (for determining parking requirements): means the maximum number of employees on duty on the premises at one (1) time or on any two (2) successive shifts, whichever is greater. 
    Essential services: means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities of municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, in connection therewith; reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings. 
(Ord. No. 58-2011; Ord. No. 6-2012; Ord. No. 8-2012; Ord. No. 36-2014; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 16-2017 , § 2, 4-10-2017; Ord. No. 42-2017 , § 1, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 44-2017 , § 2, 7-5-2017; Ord. No. 47-2018 , § 6-10, 6-25-2018) 
§ 2.04 - DEFINITIONS (F-H). 
The following words and phrases when used in the UDO or any zoning ordinance of the City shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them unless otherwise stated: 
    FAA: means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FCC: means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Family: means two (2) or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as an individual housekeeping unit. 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): means the agency with the overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Fence/Wall: means an enclosure or barrier, such as wooden posts, wire, iron, etc., used as a boundary, means of protection, privacy screening or confinement, but not including hedges, shrubs, trees, or other natural growth. 
    Fill: A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means. 
    Finished grade level: means the final elevation of the ground surface after man-made alterations, such as grading, grubbing, filling, or excavating, have been made on the ground surface. 

Finished Grade
    Flood or flooding: means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; and the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM): means an official map on which FEMA has delineated the areas of special flood hazard. 
    Flood insurance study: means the official report in which FEMA has provided flood profiles and the water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    Floodway: means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR): Means the gross floor area of a building, buildings, or structures on a lot divided by the total lot area. For the purposes of this definition, parking garages and/or unfinished basement space shall not be counted toward FAR. 
    Footcandle: means a measure of illumination on a surface that is one (1) foot from a uniform point source of light of one (1) candle and equal to one (1) lumen per square foot. 
    Frontage: means that boundary of a lot which is along an existing or dedicated public street, or where no public street exists, is along a public way. Where a lot abuts more than one (1) street, the Director of Community Development shall determine the frontage for purposes of this Ordinance. 
    Garage, private: means a totally enclosed building which may be attached to, or detached from, the principal structure, and is used or intended for use by the occupants of the premises for the storage of self-propelled vehicles or trailers. 
    Garage, public: means a structure or portion thereof, other than a private garage, used for the storage, sale, hire, care, repair, or refinishing of self-propelled vehicles or trailers. 
    Gazebo: means an accessory building consisting of a detached, covered, freestanding, open-air structure. 
    Governmental directional sign: means a multi-sided sign structure with a unified design theme accommodating individual directional sign panels. 
    Gross floor area: means the total floor area of all main and accessory buildings, whether closed or unenclosed, measured from the exterior building face, including storage areas but excluding interior areas used for parking and loading and access thereto. 
    Ground floor area: means the gross area of the first floor of a building excluding exterior porches and balconies. 
    Hedge: means a row of shrubs or trees used as an enclosure for, or to mark the boundary of, or to screen a yard or lot or enclosure for, or any part thereof. 
    Historic demolition: means any act of process of destruction or removal of a substantial amount of the square footage of a contributing structure so that its historical significance is materially compromised. 
    Historic demolition permit: means a permit approved by the Board of Zoning and Planning that indicates an applicant whose proposal meets the definition of historic demolition of a contributing structure has complied with the requirements of Subsection 4.06(I). 
    Home for the aging: means a home licensed by the Ohio Department of Health which provides both the following: 
(1)  Accommodations, supervision, personal care services, administration of medication, and supervision of special diets for three (3) or more unrelated individuals who are dependent on the services of others by reason of age and physical or mental impairment. 
(2)  Personal care services and skilled nursing care for three (3) or more other unrelated individuals. The part of the unit of the home for the aging that provides personal care services, that may administer medication, and that may supervise special diets is licensed as a rest home. The part of the unit that provides other skilled nursing care is licensed as a nursing home. 
    Home occupation: means any occupation which is customarily incident to the principal use of the premises and is conducted by a resident occupant. 
    Home office: means an office, studio, workshop or area located in a residence or occupying a structure or accessory structure from which a resident occupant conducts professional or business activity incidental to the residential use of the premises. 
    Home sale: means a sale of personal property to the general public conducted in or on any property within a residential zoning district, to include, without limitation, garage sales, patio sales, yard sales, porch sales, driveway sales, motor vehicle sales, and the sale of boats, trailers, motorcycles, motor homes, and the like. 
    Hotel: means any building or portion thereof used as a temporary aboding place for remuneration, with or without meals, containing fifteen (15) or more guest rooms or suites where no provision for cooking is made in any individual guest room or suite, and does not include hospitals and jails. 
    Hot tub: means an artificial container of water with a liquid capacity greater than one hundred (100) gallons and designed with a mechanical air injection system and/or re-circulating device. 
    Housekeeping unit: means an individual or group of persons occupying a dwelling unit that has a single kitchen; provided, however, that an In-law Suite and the primary single-family residence to which it is an accessory use shall also be considered a single housekeeping unit even if the in-law suite has its own kitchen. 
(Ord. No. 58-2011; Ord. No. 62-2015, § 1, 11-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 42-2017 , § 2, 6-26-2017) 
§ 2.05 - DEFINITIONS (I-M). 
The following words and phrases when used in the UDO or any zoning ordinance of the City shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them unless otherwise stated: 
    Identification: means the act of specifying the name, address, and number of a building, institution, or person or the activity carried on in the building or institution. 
    In between places: A location which fulfills a necessary role between the public and private realms. In between places usually occur in cafes, pubs, exercise clubs, corner stores, and the like. 
    Information service: means the offering of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing, retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications, and includes electronic publishing, but does not include any use of any such capability for the management, control, or operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a telecommunications service. 
    In-law suite: means an independent dwelling unit contained within a single-family residence, typically with its own entrance, kitchen, bedroom, and bathroom, and used exclusively for family members of the property owner, who must also live within the single-family residence. The structure must maintain a single-family residential appearance which blends with the principal structure and the neighborhood, and the in-law suite may not exceed more than eight hundred sixteen (816) square feet. The in-law suite shall be located within the buildable area of the lot, and shall not be detached from the home, be located in a detached garage or within another accessory structure. The in-law suite shall only be permitted on properties which meet minimum lot frontage and minimum lot size requirements in that zoning district. The in-law suite shall be occupied in a manner consistent with a single-family use in conjunction with the primary residence. An in-law suite is being occupied in a manner consistent with a single-family use in conjunction with the primary residence if all of the following factors are present: unrestricted access to the entire structure is provided to all occupants; interior passages connect the in-law suite to the primary residence; household expenses and responsibilities are shared; the entire structure has no more than one meter and one connection for water, electricity, gas, and other household utilities, respectively; the in-law suite does not have a separate mailbox or mailing address; the in-law suite will not be used for transient accommodations; and no leasehold interest has been or will be granted in the in-law suite. 
    Intersection clearance zone: means on a corner lot, an area between the curb line or edge of pavement of the two (2) intersecting streets and a diagonal line connecting the curb or edge of pavement of intersecting streets at a point thirty (30) feet from the their point of intersection. In an intersection clearance zone, no fence, snow fence, wall, ornamental landscaping or feature, mound, or hedge shall exceed thirty-two (32) inches in height above the grade of the pavement of street gutter. 

Corner Lot
Intersection Clearance Zone
    Kennel: means any place where four (4) or more dogs, cats, or other animals over three (3) months of age are kept, raised, sold, boarded, bred, shown, treated, or groomed for purposes other than serving as individual or family pets. 
    Kitchen: means any room in a building or dwelling unit which is used for cooking or the preparation of food. 
    List(s), (notice): means the County auditor's current tax listing and/or any other listing that might be reasonably used to identify a current property owner of record or tenant. 
    Live-work quarters: means buildings or spaces within buildings that are used jointly for commercial and residential purposes where the residential use of the space is secondary or accessory to the primary use as a place of work. 
    Livestock: means a generally accepted outdoor farm animal or grazing animal and shall include, but not be limited to: chickens, roosters, cocks, hens, pullets, chicks, capons or other barnyard fowl; ducks, geese or other waterfowl/wildfowl; cattle or other animals of the bovine species; horses, mules, burros, asses or other animals of the equine species; goats or other animals of the caprine species; swine or other animals of the porcine species; sheep or other animals of the ovine species. The term livestock shall not include cats, dogs or other house pets. 
    Longwall: See "side yard increased". 
    Lot: means a parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal instrument such as a recorded deed or a recorded plat and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title. 

Lot Types
    Lot area: means the computed area contained within the lot lines. In cases where the lot lines incorporate public rights-of-way, only the area outside the public rights-of-way shall be considered for purposes of this Ordinance. 
    Lot, corner: means a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. The point of intersection of the street lines is the corner. 
    Lot, depth: means the mean distance between the front and the rear lot lines. 
    Lot, double frontage: means a lot having frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot (see "lot, through"). 

Defining the Front Yard for a Double Frontage Lot
    Lot, flag: means a lot fronting or abutting a public roadway and where access to the public roadway is limited to a narrow private right-of-way. 
    Lot, interior: means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line: means the property lines bounding the lot. 
    Lot line, front: means the line separating the lot from a street on which it fronts (see "frontage"). 
    Lot line, rear: means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side: means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is called an interior side lot line. 
    Lot line, street or alley: means a lot line separating the lot from a street or alley. 
    Lot, through: means a lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
    Lot width: means the mean width of the lot measured at right angles to its depth. 
    Lowest floor: means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable design requirements specified in this Ordinance for enclosures below the lowest floor. 
    Massing: means three-dimensional building form. Appearance and style are applied to massing, but do not appreciably affect the volume established, except for the roof form selected. 
    Microbrewery: means a limited production brewery, producing less than fifteen thousand (15,000 barrels per year), where beer is brewed for consumption primarily on-site. 
    Micro-distillery: A small, often boutique-style distillery established to produce beverage grade spirit alcohol in relatively small quantities, usually done in single batches. 
    Microwinery: means a small wine producer that sources its grape product from an outside supplier or an off-site vineyard. 
    Mobile Billboard: means any motorized or non-motorized vehicle that carries a sign or signs for the primary purpose of displaying such sign, where such sign is not permanently affixed to the vehicle or extends beyond the overall length, width, or height of the vehicle. "Permanently affixed" means that the sign is painted or applied as a decal directly on the body of the vehicle. 
    Monopole: means a single pole with no above ground lateral support from secondary structural members in either tension or compression. 
    Motor home: means a self-propelled vehicle constructed with permanently installed facilities for cold storage, cooking and consuming of food and for sleeping. 
    Motor vehicle: means any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for transportation of persons or goods along public streets or alleys, or other public ways. 
    Motor vehicle wash facility: means a building or structure where chain conveyors, blowers, steam cleaners or similar mechanical devices are employed for the purpose of washing motor vehicles, or which provides coin-operated facilities for the washing of motor vehicles or which provides for the so-called do-it-yourself motor vehicles wash. 
    Mound: means an artificial rise or elevation above the natural grade of the surrounding ground created with earth, rock or other material. 
    Movie theater: means a specialized theater for showing movies or motion pictures. 
(Ord. No. 106-2009; Ord. No. 62-2015, § 2, 11-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 21-2016, § 3, 5-9-2016 ; Ord. No. 53-2017 , § 3, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 54-2017 , §§ 4-7, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 32-2018 , § 3, 4-23-2018; Ord. No. 47-2018 , § 11, 6-25-2018) 
§ 2.06 - DEFINITIONS (N-Q). 
The following words and phrases when used in the UDO or any zoning ordinance of the City shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them unless otherwise stated. 
    National Register of Historic Places: means the official listing of properties (including districts, buildings, structures, sites, and objects) managed by the National Park Service to recognize the value of preserving certain structures that are important to local, state, or National American History. 
    Neighborhood scale: means a commercial development consisting of a single user whose gross floor area is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in size. 
    Nonconforming uses: means a building, structure or premises legally existing and/or used at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto, and which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located. Any such building, structure or premises conforming in respect to use but not in respect to height, area, yards or courts, floor area or distance requirements from more restricted districts or uses, shall not be considered a nonconforming use. 
    No-impact wireless communication facility: means a facility which is either: 
(1)  Virtually invisible to the casual observer, such as an antenna behind louvers on a building, or inside a steeple or similar structure, or 
(2)  Camouflaged with stealth design so as to blend in with its surroundings to such an extent that it is indistinguishable by the casual observer from the structure on which it is placed or the surroundings in which it is located, such as a flagpole serving as an antenna. 
    Nude: means exposing to view the genitals, pubic area, vulva, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, or pubic hair with less than a fully opaque covering; exposing to view any portion of the areola of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering; exposing to view male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if entirely covered by an opaque covering; or exposing to view any device, costume, or covering that gives the appearance of or simulates any of these anatomical areas. 
    Nursing home: means a home licensed by the Ohio Department of Health which is used for the reception and care of individuals who by reason of illness or physical or mental impairment require skilled nursing care and of individuals who require personal care services but not skilled nursing care. 
    Off-street loading space: means a space for parking one (1) commercial vehicle for pickups and deliveries, which space has minimum dimensions of twelve (12) feet in width, fifty (50) feet in length and fifteen (15) feet in vertical height, which is located in a building or in the open on the same lot as the use such space is intended to serve, which has access to a public street, and which is exclusive of the right-of-way of any public or private street or any driveway, aisle, circulation drive or off-street parking space. 
    Off-street parking space: means an area for parking one (1) or more motor vehicles, which is located in a building or in the open, which has access to a public street, and which is exclusive of the right-of-way of any public or private street or any driveway, aisle, circulation drive or off-street loading space. Off-street parking spaces shall have minimum rectangular dimensions as shown in Section 6.03. 
    Open-sided structure: means a free-standing, unheated structure unenclosed except for a structural system supporting a roof, and screen panels which may be used to enclose the open spaces between structural elements. 
    Open space: means the land remaining after all development cover has been constructed on a given lot or in a given area. Open space for public use, such as parks, should not be confused with open space provided to separate buildings, parking, roads and miscellaneous pavement as part of an overall project design. 
    Ornamental feature: means a structure or any part of a structure of wood, metal, masonry or other material used to ornament any part of a yard area. 
    Overlay district: means a district established by ordinance to prescribe special regulations to be applied to a site in combination with the underlying or base district. 
    Package shipment services: A commercial enterprise having as its primary function the pick-up, transport, shipping and delivery of parcels or packages. 
    Parking area, private: means an open area for the same uses as private garage. 
    Parking area, public: means an open area, excluding a street or other public way, used for the parking of automobiles and available to the public, whether for free or for compensation. 
    Parking lot, structured - Aboveground: means a structure designed to accommodate motor and other vehicle parking spaces that are fully or partially enclosed or located on the deck surface of a building where some of the parking spaces are located aboveground. This definition includes parking garages, deck parking and under-building parking areas. 
    Parking lot, structured - Underground: means a below grade structure designed to accommodate motor and other vehicle parking spaces where all of the parking spaces are located underground. 
    Parking lot, surface: means a parking area for motor and other vehicles where there is no gross building area above or below the parking area. 
    Parking space: means a permanently surfaced area of not less than one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet, either within a structure or in the open, exclusive of driveways or access drives, for the parking of a motor vehicle. 
    Pavilion: means a freestanding structure that is used primarily for entertainment, relaxation, and/or leisure activities. 
    Performance, standard: means a criterion established in the interest of protecting the public health and safety for the control of vibration, noise, odor, smoke, noxious gases and other objectionable or dangerous elements generated by and inherent in or incidental to land uses. 
    Person: means any natural person, corporation, or partnership and also includes any governmental entity. 
    Personal services: means an establishment or place of business primarily engaged in the provision of frequent or recurrent needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, beauty and barber shops, massage parlors or spas where the massage is given by a State of Ohio (Ohio State Cosmetology and Barber Board or Board of State of Ohio Nursing or State Medical Board of Ohio or Ohio State Chiropractic Board) licensed massage therapist, non-overnight pet grooming, shoe repair shops, and tailor shops. A tattoo parlor or body-piercing studio shall not be considered a personal service. 
    Pervious concrete: means a special type of concrete with a high porosity used for concrete flatwork applications that allows water from precipitation and other sources to pass through it, thereby reducing the runoff from a site and recharging ground water levels. The high porosity is attained by a highly interconnected void content, with little to no fine aggregate and enough cementitious paste to coast the aggregate particles. 
    Pharmacy (or drug store): An establishment engaged in the retail sale of prescription drugs, nonprescription medicines, cosmetics, and related supplies. Marijuana and marijuana-related products shall not be sold in a pharmacy or drug store. 
    Porch: means a covered but unenclosed projection from the main wall of a building that may or may not use columns or other ground supports for structural purposes. 
    Portable storage unit: means any portable enclosed unit of any type construction or material, designed for permanent or temporary storage, which can be transported by vehicle and left on-site. 
    Preservationists: means those entities or individuals that are considered experts by specialized knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education the field of historic preservation. 
    Principal structure: means a structure, or group of structures, in which is conducted the primary use of the lot on which the structure is located. As regulated in zoning districts, the principal structure contains the principally permitted use. 
    Principal use: means the primary use and chief purpose of the lot or structure. As regulated in zoning districts, the use of a lot which is permitted within the district. This is often referred to as the principally permitted use, or uses, within the district. 
    Profile coefficient: means a number which defines the angle of the rear yard profile limit. The definition of rear yard profile limit identifies where this angle is to be constructed. Defining the increase in height permitted in a twelve-foot run is another way of defining the profile limit slope created by this angle. If the number 12 is divided by the profile coefficient, or cotangent, the result will indicate the feet or rise permitted in a twelve-foot run. 
    Public property: means real estate owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the City of Upper Arlington, the Upper Arlington School District, or other local, state or federal public agency as determined by the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 106-2009; Ord. No. 8-2012; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 21-2016, § 4, 5-9-2016 ; Ord. No. 54-2017 , §§ 8, 9, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 32-2018 , § 4, 4-23-2016; Ord. No. 47-2018 , § 12, 6-25-2018) 
§ 2.07 - DEFINITIONS (R-S). 
The following words and phrases when used in the UDO or any zoning ordinance of the City shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them unless otherwise stated. 
    Recreational vehicle: means a vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis; (2) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. The term also means an all-terrain vehicle (ATV), golf cart, personal watercraft and similar vehicle. 
    Rest home: also called assisted living, both of which mean a home licensed by the Ohio Department of Health which provide either of the following: 
(1)  Accommodations for seventeen (17) or more unrelated individuals and supervision and personal care services for three (3) or more of those individuals who are dependent on the services of others by reason of age or physical or mental impairment or, in the case of a rest home component of a home for the aging, accommodation to three (3) or more individuals and supervision and personal care services for at least three (3) of those individuals; 
(2)  Accommodations for three (3) or more unrelated individuals, supervision and personal care services for at least three (3) or more of those individuals, who are dependent on the services of others by reason of age or physical or mental impairment, and supervision of special diets or the administration of medication to at least one (1) of those individuals. 
    Restaurant: means an establishment where food and drink are prepared, served and consumed primarily or exclusively within the principal building. A restaurant is distinguished by at least the following features: 
(1)  At least thirty percent (30%) of the gross floor area of the facility is devoted to a dining room or area designed for customer seating and food consumption with at least twenty (20) seats provided at all times. 
(2)  No company-owned or sanctioned vehicles are used to deliver ready to consume food to off-site customers. 
(3)  Payment for food consumed is received after consumption by the patron, except for cafeterias. 
(4)  Food orders are taken at the table by employees of the company, except for cafeterias. 
    Restaurant, cafeteria: means a restaurant where ordering of a meal is not required and pre-prepared entrees are selected and assembled by the patron into a complete meal before payment. 
    Restaurant, carry-out: means establishments where food is usually ordered by telephone and prepared on the premises for consumption off the premises, with no seating or other area provided on the premises for consumption. The establishment may deliver food to the customer, or the customer may pick food up. 
    Restaurant, drive-in: means an establishment where food and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption, where all or a significant portion of the consumption takes place or is designed to take place outside the confines of the restaurant, and where ordering and pick-up of food may take place from an automobile. 
    Restaurant, fast-food: means restaurants where most customers order and are served their food at a counter or in a motor vehicle in packages prepared to leave the premises or able to be taken to a table or counter to be consumed. 
    Restaurant, with entertaining or dancing: means a restaurant which also contains a dance floor, stage or bar selling alcoholic beverages to the customer without a meal order. 
    Retail, convenience: A commercial enterprise having as its primary function the sale of goods and/or services directly to the consumer, where the goods for sale are available for immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser. A marijuana dispensary shall not be considered convenience retail. 
    Retail, luxury: A commercial enterprise having as its primary function the sale of goods directly to the consumer where the minimum price for the majority of individual items offered for sale exceeds one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), such as jewelry, men's or women's fashion clothing or accessories, or electronics such as computers. This shall not include big box retail or retail related to automobiles, automotive products, motorcycles, motorcycle products, boats or boating products, furniture, hot tubs/spas or appliances, and marijuana and marijuana-related products. 
    Retaining wall: A wall or similar structure device used at grade changes to hold the soil on the up-hillside from slumping, sliding or falling. 
    Review, administrative: means the act or process for which any city official(s) will study, examine and/or deliberate on a development proposal. 
    Review, board: means the act or process for which any legally established city board or commission will study, examine and/or deliberate on a development proposal. 
    Right-of-way fee or public way fee: means a fee levied to recover the costs incurred by the city and associated with the occupancy or use of a public way. 
    Right(s)-of-way: means the surface of, and the space within, through, on, across, above, or below, any public street, public road, public highway, public freeway, public lane, public path, public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway, public drive, public easement, and any other land dedicated or otherwise designated for a compatible public use, which, on or after July 2, 2002, is owned or controlled by a municipal corporation. "Rights-of-way" excludes a private easement. 
    River Ridge Addition: means the subdivision platted in 1926 that is generally bound by Fishinger Road, Mountview Road, Swansea Road and Sunset Drive. 
    River Ridge Addition (extended): means the area generally bound by the south side of Fishinger Road, the east side of Sunset Drive, the north side of Zollinger Road and the west side of Somerford Road, and consisting of the following subdivisions within that area: River Ridge Addition, East Cleft on the Scioto, North Mountview Addition, Sciotangy Heights, and Millwood Addition. 
    Rooming house: means a residential building with three (3) or more sleeping rooms for lodgers, and wherein no dining facilities are maintained for the lodger, as distinguished from a boarding house. 
    Runoff coefficient: means an empirical coefficient representing a relationship between rainfall and runoff. 
    Satellite signal receiving antennas or dish-type satellite signal receiving antennas (also referred to as satellite earth stations, or satellite dish antenna or ground station: means any antenna designed to receive or transmit microwave signals or other communication, either directly or indirectly, to or from satellites in earth orbit. 
    School, elementary and high: means an institution of learning which offers instructions in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught in accredited schools by the applicable statutes of the State of Ohio. High schools include junior and senior grades. 
    Seats: means the number of seating units installed or indicated on plans, or each twenty (20) lineal inches of stands, benches or pews. It is assumed that a seating unit occupies seven (7) square feet of floor area for fixed seating and fifteen (15) square feet of floor area for uses without fixed seating, exclusive of aisles and assembly areas. 
    Sexually oriented business establishment: means any of the following commercial establishments, as defined herein: 
(1)  Adult cabaret. 
(2)  Adult book store. 
(3)  Adult theater. 
    Side yard increased (longwall): means the situation where, beginning at the front façade of the structure, each side yard, where required, shall be increased in width by two (2) inches for each foot by which the elevation length of the building, adjacent to the side yard, exceeds forty (40) feet. Adjacent in this context means any portion of the side wall that is closer to the side property line than twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot width at the place of measurement. 
Longwall Plan


    Sight triangle: See definition of "intersection clearance zone". 
    Sign: means any text or illustration that is affixed to, portrayed, or depicted directly or indirectly upon any surface for outdoor public view. This definition includes all signs visible from any public right-of-way or adjacent property. 
    Sign, area of: means the total exterior surface computed in square feet of a sign having but one exposed exterior surface; one-half (1/2) the total of the exposed exterior surface computed in square feet of a sign having more than one (1) such surface. 

Sign, Area of
    Sign, building-mounted: means an exterior building mounted sign. Building-mounted signs include murals, messages, graphics, and painted designs, and any letters or numerals mounted directly on buildings. 
    Sign, commercial: means any sign or banner that contains text and/or graphics designed to propose or promote a commercial transaction or directing attention to a business, commodity, or service for non-residential beneficiaries of the message. This includes business identification signs, free standing site identifiers, and free-standing single user identifiers. 
    Sign, deteriorated: means showing signs of weathering, rust, corrosion, exposed wiring, chipped paint or faces, cracked, broken, or missing faces, or loose materials, missing or broken lettering (for changeable copy signs), or other evidence of disrepair. 
    Sign, free-standing: means a sign supported by or suspended from posts, pillars, columns, or other structures which are not a building or portion thereof. 
    Sign, free-standing, main site identifier: means a free-standing commercial sign for the identification of a site where multiple users are grouped together for mutual benefits. For the purposes of this Ordinance, all such arrangements, combinations, and groupings shall be referred to as centers. 
    Sign, free-standing, single user identifier: means a free-standing commercial sign for the identification of a single, individual, profit or non-profit enterprise, excluding single enterprises representing a collection of member users, representing multiple tenants. A free-standing scoreboard is considered a free-standing, single user sign. 
    Sign, message area: means the area within a continuous perimeter that surrounds, but is not limited to, each word, graphic, symbol, number and illustration. 

Sign, Message Area
    Sign, noncommercial: means any sign that does not contain text and/or graphics designed to propose or promote a commercial transaction or directing attention to a business, commodity, or service for any occupant of the property or for non-resident beneficiaries of the message. 
    Sign, off-premise: means any commercial sign where the commercial beneficiary of the sign is not located on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Sign, on-premise: means any commercial sign where the commercial beneficiary is located on the premises where the sign is located. All noncommercial signs are treated as on-premises signs. 
    Sign, permanent: means a building mounted or a free-standing sign that is constructed of materials that are weather-resistant for multiple years without significant deterioration from exposure to the elements or wear and tear; or any sign left in one (1) location for more than three (3) months. 
    Sign, temporary: means a sign, which by virtue of its materials, design, or the manner in which it is affixed to the ground or a structure, is intended to be erected and used, or in fact is used, for a limited period of time. A sign left in one location for more than three (3) months is not a temporary sign regardless of its physical characteristics. Removing and replacing a sign within a fifty (50) feet radius of its original location, where the sign has not been removed for at least a two (2) week period, does not interrupt the calculation of the three (3) month limitation on temporary signs. 
    Sign, window: means a sign visible from the exterior of a building that is attached to, painted on, etched in, or within three (3) feet of the inside of a building's transparent surfaces. 
    Site plan, major: means a site plan where changes involve twenty-five percent (25%) or less of the original floor area not to exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet and reviewed by the Director of Community Development. Amendments to major site plans exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) of the original floor area, or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, shall be reviewed by BZAP. 
    Site plan, minor: means a site plan for single-family residences; accessory uses and structures; multi-family dwellings of three (3) units or less; signs; and non-residential additions up to twenty-five percent (25%) or less of the original floor area, not to exceed ten thousand (10,000) square-feet. 
    Slogan area: means the maximum area permitted for business descriptions, explanations and representations including, but not limited to, slogans, price lists, testimonials and guarantees. The remainder of the message area shall be limited to identification of the name of the business, the business address and the type of business maintained or operated on the premises. 
    Small cell facility: means a wireless facility that meets both of the following requirements: 
(1)  Each antenna is located inside of an enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume. 
(2)  All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively not more than twenty-eight cubic feet in volume. The calculation of equipment volume shall not include electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. 
    Snout house: means a single family or townhome with an attached garage extended forward from the principal structure. 
    Snow fence: means any temporary fence used to control the drifting of snow. 
    Special event: means a special occasion or activity that is open to the general public and supported by the City. A special event is educational, cultural or recreational in function. 
    Specified anatomical areas: means and includes any of the following: (1) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the areolas, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed; or (2) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities: means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in this definition. 
    Stable: means a building which horses, ponies, mules or donkeys are sheltered; may be accessory to a residential or other use, or a freestanding principle use. 
    Stealth design: means any communications facility, which is designed to blend into the surrounding environment. Examples of stealth facilities may include, but are not limited to, antenna tower alternative structures, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted antennas painted to match the existing structure, antennas integrated into architectural elements, antennas and monopoles surrounded or obscured by existing and/or proposed trees and landscaping and antenna structures designed to look like light poles, or other camouflaging techniques available on the market. 
    Story: means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Story, first: means the lowest story or the ground story of any building the floor of which is not more than twelve (12) inches below the average contact ground level at the exterior walls of the building; except that any basement or cellar used for residence purposes shall be deemed the first story, provided, however, that a basement or cellar used purely for recreational purposes shall not be deemed the first story. 
    Story, half: means a partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, whose rafters bear on the floor plate of such story, or the wall plate of the story below. If this partial story exceeds one-third ( 1/3 ) of the area of the next floor below, or if this story uses a shed dormer on one (1) or more sides, it shall be deemed a full story. 
    Story, mezzanine: means a story which covers one-third ( 1/3 ) or less of the area of the story directly underneath it. A mezzanine story shall be deemed a full story in the event it covers more than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the area of the story directly underneath said mezzanine story. 
    Streamer: means any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from or attached to rope, wire, string or cord, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
    Street: means a public right-of-way fifty (50) feet or more in width which provides a public means of access to abutting property, or any such right-of-way more than thirty (30) feet and less than fifty (50) feet in width provided it existed prior to the enactment of this Ordinance. The term street shall include avenue, drive, circle, road, parkway, boulevard, highway, thoroughfare or any other similar term. 
    Street frontage: means the total width of the side of the building that faces a street, excluding any extension of an exterior wall beyond the building envelope. 
    Structure: means anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground, or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground, except that air supported structures shall be defined separately. 
    Structure, air supported: means a structure constructed of any single diaphragm light weight flexible fabric or film, or any combination thereof, which derives its primary support and stability from inflation pressure together with anchorage attached to the base of the structure, which shall be considered a structure and regulated as set forth in the various districts of UDO. 
    Structural alteration: means any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    Subdivision: means the division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or contiguous units as filed on a plat of record with the Franklin County Auditor. 
    Subdivision major: means a platting of land for the purposes of development and transfer of ownership. A major subdivision is any subdivision that does not meet the requirements of a minor subdivision. It requires approval of a preliminary plan by BZAP, approval of a final plat by BZAP, acceptance by Council, and recording of the final plat prior to the transfer of land. 
    Subdivision minor: means a division of a parcel of land that is approved by the Director of Community Development and does not require a plat to be approved by BZAP. A minor subdivision includes a division of a parcel of land along an existing public street or road, and not involving the opening, widening, or extension of any street or road, and involving not more than five (5) lots, any one of which is less than five (5) acres, after the original tract has been completely subdivided. 
    Substantial damage: means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement: means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
(3)  Any improvement to a structure which is considered new construction. 
    Substantial modification: means a change that significantly alters the impacts and/or character of development or activity. 
    Swimming pool: means a structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that is capable of containing water over twenty-four (24) inches deep. 
(Ord. No. 106-2009; Ord. No. 36-2014; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 21-2016, § 5, 5-9-2016 ; Ord. No. 53-2017 , § 4, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 54-2017 , §§ 10, 11, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 35-2018 , § 2, 5-29-2018; Ord. No. 47-2018 , §§ 13-15, 6-25-2018; Ord. No. 50-2018 , § 2, 7-9-2018) 
§ 2.08 - DEFINITIONS (T-Z). 
The following words and phrases when used in the UDO or any zoning ordinance of the City shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them unless otherwise stated: 
    Tattoo parlor or body-piercing studio: means an establishment whose principle business activity is in the practice of inserting ink into the layers of skin to change the pigment for decorative or other reasons, or is to create an opening in the body of a person for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration. 
    Tavern: (see also "bar") means an area primarily devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which the service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. 
    Technical review committee (TRC): means an administrative committee made up of city staff responsible for the initial review of applications forwarded to it by the Director of Community Development. 
    Thoroughfare: means an officially designated federal or state numbered highway or county or other road or street designated as a thoroughfare on the official Thoroughfare Plan of the City of Upper Arlington. 
    Throat width: means the edge-to-edge linear width of any residential or non-residential driveway measured at the right-of-way line. 
    Tower: see "antenna Tower". 
    Traditional public forum: means City-owned parks, the surfaces of City-owned streets to the extent that such use does not constitute a hazard to public safety as reasonably as determined by the Chief of Police; and, subject to the limitations set forth herein and as otherwise necessary to protect, the public health, safety, moral or welfare, sidewalks forming the City's vehicular and pedestrian circulation system. Sidewalks located along the outside perimeter of the Municipal Services Center are included within this definition. Specifically excluded, however, from this definition, and in no way to be construed as a Traditional Public Forum, are the interiors of the Municipal Services Center, the Public Service Center, or other buildings on City Property. 
    Trailer: means a vehicle, standing on wheels or rigid supports, which is used for living, sleeping or business purposes. 
    Transportation/Thoroughfare plan: means the official Transportation/Thoroughfare Plan of Upper Arlington, as recommended by the Board of Zoning and Planning and adopted by City Council on the date noted on the official record. This plan, establishing the location and official right-of-way width of principal highways and streets in the City, shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, together with all amendments thereto subsequently adopted. 
    Travel trailer: means a non self-propelled recreational vehicle, including a tent type fold out camping trailer as defined in ORC § 4517.01(S). 
    Truck camper: means a non self-propelled recreational vehicle, without wheels for road use but with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation use; and designed to be placed upon and attached to a motor vehicle. Truck camper does not include truck covers, which consist of walls and roof, but do not have floors and facilities for using same as a dwelling. 
    Truck: means a motor vehicle of three (3) different types: heavy truck, medium truck and light truck. A heavy truck includes tractor trailers and truck tractors and similar vehicles with two (2) or more rear axels. A medium truck includes vehicles other than truck tractors, with single rear axels and dual rear wheels. Light trucks include vehicles with single rear axels and single rear wheels. 
    Unified Development Ordinance (UDO): The combining of development regulations and procedures, including zoning and subdivision regulations, sign and floodplain regulations, administrative and hearing procedures, etc. into one unified code as in the City of Upper Arlington Unified Development Ordinance. 
    Unusual and compelling circumstances: means those uncommon and rare instances in which the preservation of a contributing structure may not be justified due to conditions unique to the property including that the structure is unsafe or constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, that the contributing structure has been previously modified to such an extent that it has lost its historic architectural integrity, or that the proposed demolition involves only an accessory structure and will not diminish the historical significance of the principal structure; and where the proposed replacement plan is found to be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood in terms of architectural style, scale, massing, height and materials, consistent with the character of the historic district. 
    Use: means the purpose for which land or a building or structure is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or a building or structure is, or may be, occupied or maintained. 
    Use - Conditional: means a use which is permitted in a district only if a zoning certificate therefore is expressly authorized by the Board of Zoning and Planning in accordance with Subsection 4.05(F). 
    Use - Principal permitted: means a use which is permitted outright in a district for which a zoning certificate may be issued by the Director of Community Development in accordance with Subsection 4.05(D). 
    Utility pole: means a structure that is designed for or used for the purpose of, carrying lines, cables, or wires for electric or telecommunications service. "Utility pole" excludes street signs and decorative poles. 
    Utility structure: means any above ground structure, facility, or equipment, including but not limited to, pedestals, poles, boxes, cabinets, meters, storage facilities, or utility stations, that are associated with a utility providing services to its customers. Such services shall include, but are not limited to: electricity, natural gas, telecommunications, cable, video and internet service, and water. Utility structures shall not include fire hydrants, traffic control devices, or other city equipment. 
    Variance: means a grant of relief from the standards of this Ordinance consistent with the variance conditions herein. 
    Video service provider: means a person granted a video service authorization under sections 1332.21 to 1332.34 of the Ohio Revised Code in accordance with section 777.16 of the Codified Ordinances. 
    Vision clearance: means the intersection clearance zone defined as an area in which no fence/wall, ornamental feature, snow fence, mound or hedge may be located so as to obstruct vision from the driver's position in a vehicle or a pedestrian approaching on a street. 
    Window/Window area: means the area within and surrounded by a combination of structural elements designed to contain a pane of glass or other transparent panel. Window panes within a window sash that are separated by muntins are not considered separate windows. Decorative separations with materials such as, but not limited to, lead and plastic also do not create separate windows with a sash or single glass area. 
    Wireless communication facility: includes, but shall not be limited to, towers, poles, cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas, microwave dishes, and/or any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communications as regulated by the FCC (or other unregulated wireless communication facility). The term shall not include: 
(a)  Any satellite earth station antenna two (2) meters or less in diameter or diagonal measurement located in a non-residential district. 
(b)  Any satellite earth station antenna one (1) meter or less in diameter that is designed to receive direct broadband satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite services, or to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals via satellite. 
(c)  Any antenna that is one (1) meter or less in diameter or diagonal measurement and is designed to receive video programming service via broadband video services (wireless cable) or to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals other than via satellite. 
(d)  Antennas used by amateur radio operators. 
(e)  Towers, structures, antennas, or other equipment used for the purposes of operating a public safety voice or data radio network or an outdoor early warning system within the city limits. This includes directional and omnidirectional antenna equipment, as well as microwave and point-to-point equipment. 
    Wireless service: means any services using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using wireless facilities. 
    Wireless service provider: means a person who provides wireless service as defined in division (A)(19) of section 4927.01 of the Ohio Revised Code. 
    Wireline backhaul facility: means a facility used for the transport of communications service or any other electronic communications by coaxial, fiber-optic cable, or any other wire. 
    Yard, front: means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum distance between the front lot line and line parallel thereto on the lot as required in the district where located. In the case of a corner lot, the front yard shall be consistently defined as that yard having the shorter street frontage dimension. In the case of lots where the property line curves at the street intersection, the radius of the curve shall be excluded from the comparison of frontage. In the case of equal frontages, the yard adjacent to the street on which the property is addressed shall be considered the front yard. In the case of a corner lot abutting more than two (2) streets, the front yard shall be defined by the Director of Community Development. 
    Yard, front - How measured: means such depth shall be measured from the right-of-way line of the existing street on which the lot fronts (the front lot line); provided, however, that if the proposed location of the right-of-way line of such street as established on the thoroughfare plan or on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Upper Arlington differs from that of the existing street, then the required front yard least depth shall be measured from the right-of-way line of such street as designated on said Thoroughfare Plan or Official Zoning Map. 

Defining the Front Yard for a Corner Lot

Frontage on a Cul-de-sac
    Yard, rear: means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot as required in the District where located. In the case of an R-1c corner lot platted prior to January 1, 1995, the rear yard shall be considered the minimum side yard required. In the case of a corner lot platted prior to January 1, 1995 and abutting more than two (2) streets, the rear yard, subject to the provision above, shall be determined by the Director of Community Development. 
    Yard, rear (profile limit): means a sloping plane which may not be penetrated by the height and bulk of any principal structure. This imaginary plane slopes up from each rear property line segment to its intersection with the maximum building height permitted in Table 5-E. This slope begins at the intersection formed by the vertical projection of each rear property line segment and the horizontal projection of the first floor elevation of the principal structure at its lowest point. The maximum slope permitted is defined by the profile coefficients, or cotangents, listed for each zone in Table 5-E. No principal structure shall exceed the height and number of stories specified in Table 5-E, nor shall its outermost roof membrane project above the rear yard profile limit specified in Table 5-E. Window dormers may project above the rear yard profile limit when the top of the dormer does not exceed the ridge height of the roof to which it is attached, and when the face of the dormer does not project beyond the face of the wall below. Shed dormers may not project above the rear yard profile limit. 

    Yard, required: means a required amount of open space on a lot, unoccupied by building cover, whose area is defined by the yard requirements of the district (zone) in which it is located. 

    Yard, side: means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot as required in the district where located. 
    Yard, side - Least width, how measured: such width shall be measured from the nearest side lot line and, in case the nearest side lot line is a side street lot line, from the right-of-way line of the existing street; provided, however, that if the proposed location of the right-of-way line of such street as established on the thoroughfare plan or on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Upper Arlington differs from that of the existing street, then the required side yard least width shall be measured from the right-of-way of such street as designated on the thoroughfare plan or official zoning map. 
    Zoning map: means the official City of Upper Arlington map(s), as adopted and amended by City Council, which includes zoning, overlay, and historic district boundaries and classifications within the community. 
(Ord. No. 106-2009; Ord. No. 8-2012; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 42-2017 , § 3, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 44-2017 , § 3, 7-5-2017; Ord. No. 47-2018 , § 16-20, 6-25-2018) 
ARTICLE 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

§ 3.01 - CITY COUNCIL. 
(A)  Role: The role of City Council in land use regulation and development approval includes: considering amendments to the text of existing planning ordinances and documents and adopting or rejecting new planning documents, considering amendments to the text of the UDO and Official Zoning Map, establishing fees, hearing appeals, accepting final plats, and confirming appointments to the Board of Zoning and Planning (BZAP) as submitted by the mayor. 
(B)  Powers and duties: For the purposes of this UDO the City Council shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To adopt the official Master Plan of the City of Upper Arlington; 
(2)  To determine the number, qualifications, and terms of the members of BZAP and confirm appointments to the Board based on those determinations; 
(3)  To initiate or act upon proposed amendments, enactments to the UDO and changes to the zoning map, or changes to the UDO text per C.O. Ch. 157; 
(4)  To accept final plats; 
(5)  To hear appeals of the decisions of BZAP; 
(6)  To decline to follow a recommendation of BZAP provided that such action is passed or approved by a majority vote of the members of the City Council; 
(7)  To modify or postpone the payment of park and playground fees, upon application by the property owner, as provided for in the UDO; 
(8)  To monitor and insure implementation of the principles, goals, and strategies of the master plan; and 
(9)  To adopt or amend the official transportation plan and the Official Zoning Map of the City of Upper Arlington. 
§ 3.02 - BOARD OF ZONING AND PLANNING. 
(A)  Role: BZAP is responsible for reviewing and recommending to City Council a master plan for the physical development of the City, the official transportation plan, the official zoning map and UDO amendments and/or enactments, amendments to the UDO regulations, preliminary plans and final plats, and other administrative development approvals. 
(B)  Powers and duties: For the purposes of this UDO, BZAP shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To recommend to City Council a master plan for the physical development of the City; 
(2)  To recommend to City Council final plats, amendments to the UDO and the official zoning map; 
(3)  To make decisions on conditional uses, major site plans, variances, preliminary plans; 
(4)  To decide appeals of administrative decisions of the Director of Community Development; 
(5)  To approve proposed uses that are not listed as substantially similar to a permitted or conditionally permitted use listed in the UDO; 
(6)  To assist with the implementation of the principles, goals, and strategies of the master plan; 
(7)  To grant variances to the standards of the UDO; 
(8)  To complete design reviews; 
(9)  To issue certificates of economic hardship; and 
(10)  To approve historic demolition permits. 
(C)  Membership: BZAP membership is in accordance with the requirements of the City of Upper Arlington Charter Chapter 15 and C.O. ch. 157. 
(D)  Rules: BZAP shall adopt rules for holding regular formal meetings, work sessions and special meetings, for the transaction and disposition of its business and the exercise of its powers. 
(E)  Work session: BZAP shall hold a work session prior to the regularly scheduled formal meeting. The purpose of this session is for the BZAP to review proposals for information and feedback prior to the filing of or in conjunction with a formal application with the Director of Community Development. The meeting shall be open to the public and include, at a minimum, a quorum of BZAP members. 
(F)  Formal meeting: BZAP shall hold a formal meeting at which complete applications and cases referred to BZAP by the technical review committee (TRC) and/or the Director of Community Development shall be considered. Prior to review and action by BZAP, these applications may be reviewed by the TRC, reported on, and presented to BZAP by staff. 
(G)  Consent agenda: A consent agenda may be established as part of the regular BZAP meeting agenda. The purpose of this agenda is to consider matters and applications before the Board that meet most, if not all, the applicable UDO requirements and require no further review or discussion on behalf of BZAP. The Director of Community Development shall decide the order of items to appear on the consent agenda. Items may be removed from the consent agenda and placed on the regular agenda at the request of the applicant or member(s) of BZAP. Removal of an item from the consent agenda for placement on the regular agenda requires a majority vote of BZAP members. 
(H)  Conditional approvals: A BZAP vote of conditional approval shall also be considered a denial, until all of the required conditions have been met to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 32-2018 , §§ 5-7, 4-23-2018) 
§ 3.03 - DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. 
(A)  Role: The Director of Community Development shall administer the UDO. 
(B)  Administration: For the purpose of the UDO, the Director shall: 
(1)  Interpret the meaning and application of the UDO; 
(2)  Issue zoning certificates, accessory use permits, sign permits, and other administrative permits; 
(3)  Accept and certify, as to completeness, all submitted applications. Incomplete applications will not be placed on an agenda; 
(4)  Establish and publicize the agenda for all meetings; 
(5)  Place informal proposals on the agenda of the TRC and BZAP's work session; 
(6)  Respond to inquiries; 
(7)  Maintain permanent and current records in conformance with the City's records retention/disposition policy; 
(8)  Review and approve major site plans involving changes to twenty-five percent (25%) or less of the total building area; 
(9)  Review and approve minor site plans; 
(10)  Serve as chairperson of the TRC; and 
(11)  Provide minutes of BZAP and work session meetings. 
(C)  Enforcement: The Director shall also enforce the UDO. For the purpose of the UDO, the Director shall: 
(1)  Conduct inspection of sites, buildings and uses of land to determine compliance with the UDO; and 
(2)  Determine the existence of any violations of this UDO, issue notifications, or initiate other administrative or legal action as needed. 
(D)  All references to the Director of Community Development in this UDO shall mean the person appointed by the City Manager as the Director of Community Development pursuant to C.O. § 175.02. 
(Ord. No. 6-2012; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 4, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 3.04 - TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE. 
(A)  Role: The TRC is the technical review body composed of City staff responsible for the initial review of applications submitted to the City under the UDO. 
(B)  Powers and duties: The members of the TRC shall review all applications forwarded to it by the Director of Community Development and respond to other issues to be considered by the City Council and BZAP that are relevant to the purpose, intent, and implementation of the UDO and other related regulations, as determined by the Director of Community Development or BZAP. 
(C)  Membership: The TRC shall be comprised of at least one (1) staff member from the departments of development, public service, and fire division. Additional persons possessing specific expertise in a matter relating to a given application or issue may be added to the TRC, as determined by the Director of Community Development including, but not limited to, parks and recreation, economic development, police division, and City Attorney. 
(D)  Meetings: The Director of Community Development will serve as the chairperson to the TRC, schedule meetings, and prepare follow-up reports as appropriate. At his/her discretion, the Director of Community Development may invite the applicant to attend the TRC meeting. The TRC meeting for an application shall occur before the staff report is prepared for that application. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 3.05 - NONCONFORMANCES. 
(A)  Purpose: Within the district established by this Ordinance, nonconformances include lots, uses of land, structures and land in combination that exist and were lawful before this Ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms or this Ordinance. The legitimate interest of those who lawfully established these nonconformities are recognized by providing for their continuance, subject to regulations limiting their completion, restoration, reconstruction, extension and/or substitution. Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall be construed to require any change in the layout, plans, construction, size or use of any lot, structure or structure and land in combination for which a zoning permit became effective and does not lapse ordinance that such nonconformities be allowed to continue until removed, they should not be encouraged to survive. No nonconformity may be moved, extended, altered, expanded, or used as grounds for any other use(s) or structure(s) prohibited elsewhere in the district without the approval of BZAP, except as otherwise specifically provided for in this Ordinance. 
(B)  Incompatibility of nonconformities: Nonconformities are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts in which such uses are located. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this Ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be generally prohibited in the district in which such use is located. 
(C)  Avoidance of undue hardship: To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. Actual construction is defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where demolition or removal of an existing building has substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that the work shall be carried out diligently. 
(D)  Certificates of nonconformance: The Director of Community Development may, upon his/her own initiative, or shall upon the request of any owner, issue a zoning certificate for any lot, structure, use of land, use of structure or use of land and structure in combination, that certifies that the lot, structure or use is a valid nonconforming use. The certificate shall specify the reason why the use is a valid nonconforming use, including a description of the extent and kind of use made of the property in question, the portion of the structure or land used for the nonconforming use, and the extent that dimensional requirements are nonconforming. The purpose of this section is to protect the owners of lands or structures that are, or becoming, nonconforming. No fee shall be charged for such a certificate. One (1) copy of the certificate shall be returned to the owner and one (1) copy shall be retained by the Director of Community Development, who shall maintain, as a public record, a file of all such nonconforming lots, structures, uses of land, uses of structures, or uses of structures and land in combination. 
(E)  Substitution of nonconforming uses: So long as no structural alterations are made, except as required by enforcement of other codes or ordinances, any nonconforming use may, upon appeal to and approval by BZAP, be changed to another nonconforming use of the same classification or of a less intensive classification, provided that BZAP shall find that the use proposed for substitution is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, BZAP may require that additional conditions and safeguards be met, which requirements shall pertain as stipulated conditions to the approval of such change, and failure to meet such conditions shall be considered a punishable violation of this Ordinance. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a less intensive use or becomes a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a more intensive use or other nonconforming use. 
(F)  Nonconforming uses of land: At the time of adoption of this Ordinance, lawful uses of land exist which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this Ordinance. These uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, provided: 
(1)  No such nonconforming uses shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance; 
(2)  No such nonconforming uses shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such uses at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance; 
(3)  If any such nonconforming uses of land are voluntarily discontinued or abandoned for more than six (6) months (except when government action impedes access to the premises), any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this Ordinance for the district in which such land is located; and 
(4)  No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this Ordinance shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
(G)  Nonconforming structures: Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, bulk or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity; 
(2)  Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a structure be destroyed, by any means, to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of replacement of such structure, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity within the provision of this Ordinance; and 
(3)  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(H)  Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and land in combination: If a lawful use involving individual structures, or of a structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this Ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located; 
(2)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building; 
(3)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed; 
(4)  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for more than six (6) months (except when government action impedes access to the premises), the structure, or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located; and 
(5)  When nonconforming use status is applied to a structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
(I)  Termination of use through discontinuance: When any nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned for more than six (6) months, any new use shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. The intent to continue a nonconforming use shall not be evidence of its continuance. 
(J)  Termination of use by damage or destruction: In the event that any nonconforming building or structure is destroyed by any means to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of replacement of such structure, exclusive of foundation, it shall not be rebuilt, restored or reoccupied for any use unless it conforms to all regulations of this Ordinance. 
(K)  Repairs and maintenance: On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement or non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. Where appropriate, a building permit for such activities shall be required. 
(L)  Nonconforming Lots of Record in Combination: If two or more lots or a combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this Ordinance, and if all or part of the lots with no buildings do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this Ordinance. No portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this Ordinance, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with a width or area below the requirements stated in this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 96-2010, 3-17-2011; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 16-2017 , § 3, 4-10-2017; Ord. No. 66-2018 , § 2, 9-24-2018) 
§ 3.06 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES. 
(A)  Enforcement by Director of Community Development: It shall be the duty of the Director of Community Development to enforce this UDO in accordance with these administrative provisions. All departments, officials and employees of the City of Upper Arlington, shall comply with the provisions of this UDO, and shall issue no permit, license, or registration for any use, building or purpose in conflict with the provisions of this UDO. Any permit, license, or registration, issued in conflict with the provisions of this UDO shall be voidable by the Director of Community Development. The duties imposed on the Director of Community Development shall not constitute a limitation on the power of other enforcement officers of this city to make arrest or to institute prosecutions for violations of this UDO. 
(B)  Violations and penalties: It shall be unlawful to locate, erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, change, maintain, or use any building or land in violation of any of the provisions of this UDO, or any amendment or supplement thereto adopted by the City Council of the City of Upper Arlington. Any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity violating any of the provisions of this UDO, or any amendment or supplement, shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Except as provided below in Subsection (E), upon conviction, the person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity shall be fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). Any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity that is convicted of violating any of the provisions of this UDO, having been previously convicted of violating any of the provisions of this UDO, or any amendment or supplement within two (2) years of the offense charged, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) except where Subsection E below provides otherwise. Each and every day during which such illegal location, erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement, change, maintenance or use continues, shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(C)  Violations, remedies: In case any building is or is proposed to be used in violation of this UDO, or any amendment or supplement, the City Council, City Manager, City Attorney, Director of Community Development or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation may institute appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use. The action could be to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said building structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. 
(D)  Exemptions: Government entities carrying out a governmental function, activity, or implementation of essential services may be exempt in whole or in part from this UDO at the discretion of the City Attorney or the Director of Community Development. 
(E)  Regulation of contributing structures: 
(1)  No historic demolition shall be permitted without a certificate of economic hardship or a final board review following compliance with the one hundred eighty-day period outlined in UDO Section 4.06(I)(3). 
(2)  Nothing in this Ordinance shall limit the ability of the City to seek injunctive relief. 
(3)  Violating the historic demolition ordinance is a strict liability offense. Whoever commits a historic demolition in violation of this Ordinance shall be fined not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day that a violation continues after reasonable notice shall be deemed a separate offense. The owner or tenant of any building, premises or a part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation or noncompliance may be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. In addition to a fine, a violator can be required to complete any restoration ordered by the Board. The total fines that may be imposed on a property owner for violations involving a particular contributing structure shall not exceed seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00). 
(4)  The City reserves the right to revoke a certificate of economic hardship that was issued based on fraudulent information provided by the applicant or anyone acting on behalf of the applicant. 
(5)  Any alteration to a contributing structure which requires a building permit must first complete design review with the Director of Community Development in accordance with the requirements of sections 7.17 and 7.18. Design review shall be conducted by the Board if the alteration requires a historic demolition permit. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 4. - DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES 

§ 4.01 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  The following requirements apply generally throughout this article: 
(1)  All applications for BZAP approval will first be reviewed by the Director of Community Development and may be reviewed by the TRC, at the Director of Community Development's discretion. The TRC will only review applications forwarded to it by the Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development will prepare a report with recommendations and will make a presentation at the BZAP meeting as appropriate; 
(2)  Applications, other than variance applications, may be reviewed by BZAP in a regularly scheduled work session prior to the Board's regularly scheduled formal meeting as appropriate; 
(3)  Unless otherwise indicated within this UDO, all applications for permits or other approvals shall be made to the Director of Community Development; and 
(B)  Expiration: BZAP applications, if postponed for more than one hundred eighty (180) days from the original postponement, shall expire. A new application shall be required should the applicant decide to continue the review. 
(Ord. No. 106-2009; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 4.02 - CONSOLIDATING APPLICATIONS. 
Where possible, this section intends to accommodate the simultaneous processing of applications for different permits and approvals which may be required for the same development project in order to make the review process as short as possible. 
Such possibilities for concurrent filing and processing of applications include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A variance along with a conditional use; 
(2)  A variance along with a major accessory use; 
(3)  A variance along with a major or minor site plan; 
(4)  A variance along with a preliminary subdivision plan or preliminary development plan; 
(5)  A conditional use along with a preliminary development plan; 
(6)  A rezoning along with a petition for annexation; 
(7)  Preliminary plan along with a final plat per Subsection 4.05(H). 
§ 4.03 - ANNEXATION AND BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENTS. 
(A)  Annexation: All territory annexed to the City after August 1, 2007 shall immediately upon annexation be classified as a planned mixed-use district. The focus, permitted and conditional uses, and development standards for the annexed territory will be the same as the planned mixed use district area described in Subsection 5.04(A) that is closest to the annexed territory. 
(B)  Boundary adjustments: All territory transferred to the City after August 1, 2007 from an adjoining municipal corporation shall immediately upon transfer be classified as a planned mixed-use district. The focus, permitted and conditional uses, and development standards for the transferred territory will be the same as the planned mixed-use district area described in Subsection 5.04(A) that is closest to the transferred territory. 
§ 4.04 - UDO AND OFFICIAL ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS. 
(A)  Definition: Zoning amendments include amendments to the official zoning map and/or to the UDO text. Amendments can be initiated by a person, corporation, BZAP or City Council. Amendments are recognized as legislative acts and reviewed by the Director of Community Development, BZAP and approved by City Council. 
(B)  Amendment process: Amendments may be initiated in one of the following ways: 
(1)  By the filing of an application to BZAP by the owner(s) of property within the area proposed to be affected or changed by said amendment; 
(2)  By the filing of a staff report to BZAP by the Community Development Department or the City Manager; 
(3)  By the adoption of a motion by BZAP; or 
(4)  By the adoption of a motion by City Council and referral to BZAP. 
All text and map amendments shall follow the same procedure. City Council initiated text or map amendments shall be referred to BZAP for recommendation prior to City Council consideration. City Council may by majority vote waive any of the procedural requirements. 
(C)  Standards for approval: The following criteria shall be followed in approving zoning map amendments to the UDO: 
(1)  That the zoning district classification and use of the land will not materially endanger the public health or safety; 
(2)  That the proposed zoning district classification and use of the land is reasonably necessary for the public health or general welfare, such as by enhancing the successful operation of the surrounding area in its basic community function or by providing an essential service to the community or region; 
(3)  That the proposed zoning district classification and use of the land will not substantially injure the value of the abutting property; 
(4)  That the proposed zoning district classification and use of the land will be in harmony with the scale, bulk, coverage, density, and character of the area the neighborhood in which it is located; 
(5)  That the proposed zoning district classification and use of the land will generally conform with the master plan and other official plans of the City; 
(6)  That the proposed zoning district classification and use of the land are appropriately located with respect to transportation facilities, utilities, fire and police protection, waste disposal, and similar characteristics; and 
(7)  That the proposed zoning district classification and use of the land will not cause undo traffic congestion or create a traffic hazard. 
(D)  Amendment process steps: Amendments to the UDO text or map shall be submitted seven (7) days prior to the application deadline established by BZAP and according to the following steps: 
(1)  Pre-application meeting: The applicant shall meet with the Director of Community Development prior to submitting an application for an amendment. The purpose of the meeting is to discuss the proposal and to provide feedback regarding applicable standards and requirements. 
(2)  Preliminary review by Director of Community Development: Upon receipt of an application, the Director of Community Development shall, within five (5) working days, review the application and determine whether it provides all necessary and required information. If it is incomplete, the Director of Community Development shall advise the applicant of the deficiencies and inform the applicant that no further action will be taken on the application until all necessary and required information has been provided. If it is complete, the Director of Community Development shall forward the application to the members of the TRC, if applicable. A complete application package shall be forwarded to BZAP. 
(3)  Review by the TRC: The members of the TRC shall review the application and forward comments within five (5) days to the Director of Community Development, who shall then forward the comments of the TRC to the BZAP. 
(4)  Public hearing and notice by Director of Community Development: Within five (5) working days of determining that an application contains all the necessary and required information, the Director of Community Development shall place the application on a BZAP agenda and schedule a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Notice of the hearing shall be provided at least once in one (1) or more newspapers of general circulation in the City. The notice shall be published at least five (5) days before the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposed amendment. The notice shall indicate that the text of the proposed amendment, maps, and plans (if applicable) are on file for public examination in the office of the Director of Community Development. The notice or the proposed amendment, maps and plans (if applicable) may also be posted on the City's website. if no newspaper of general circulation exists in the City, then the notice shall be posted on the City's website. 
(5)  Notice to property owners: If the proposed amendment intends to rezone or redistrict ten (10) or less parcels of land, as listed on the auditor's current tax duplicate, written notice of the public hearing shall be provided to all owners of property proposed to be rezoned or redistricted and property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the area proposed to be rezoned or redistricted. The applicant shall provide a list (based upon the auditor's current tax duplicate) to the Director of Community Development of the owners names and addresses within three hundred (300) feet of the area proposed to be rezoned. Such notice shall be sent, at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing, by the applicant via certified mail, addressed to the owners appearing on the auditor's current tax duplicate and to such other property owners as verified by staff. 
If the proposed amendment is City-initiated, the City shall provide written notice of the public hearing to all owners of property proposed to be rezoned or redistricted and property owners within three (300) feet of the area proposed to be rezoned or redistricted. Such notice shall be sent, at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing, via regular mail addressed to the owners appearing on the auditor's current tax duplicate. 
For purposes of this subsection, "rezone or redistrict" mean an amendment to the official zoning map and does not include text amendments to the UDO. 
Notification shall be considered complete upon deposit of the written notice in the mail. The failure of delivery or lack of receipt of such notice shall not invalidate any such amendment or ordinance. 
(6)  BZAP hearing and recommendation: BZAP shall review the application and recommend that the amendment be granted as requested; be granted as modified by BZAP; or be denied. BZAP shall indicate the specific reasons(s) for its recommendation. 
(7)  Public hearing and notice by City Council: Following receipt of the recommendation from BZAP, the City Clerk shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed amendment. 
(8)  Notice to property owners by City Council: The City Clerk shall publish a legal notice for three (3) consecutive publications in a newspaper of local circulation prior to the scheduled public hearing. Such notice shall set forth the nature of the request, the public hearing date and the meeting dates for discussion on the proposed amendment and for final action by Council. The notice shall indicate that the text of the proposed amendment, maps, and plans (if applicable) are on file for public examination in the office of the Director of Community Development. The notice or the proposed amendment, maps and plans (if applicable) may also be posted on the City's website. If no newspaper of general circulation exists in the City, then the notice shall be posted on the City's website. 
(9)  Action by City Council: After the public hearing required by Subsection 4.04(D)(7) above, City Council shall adopt BZAP's recommendation; deny the recommendation; or adopt some modification thereof. 
(10)  Effective date: The amendment shall become effective after the passing of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days following approval by the City Council unless otherwise indicated by emergency legislation. 
(E)  Submittal requirements: The following information shall be submitted: 
(1)  The name(s), address(s), and telephone numbers of the applicant(s), and the property owner(s) if other than the applicant(s); 
(2)  Legal description of the parcel(s) to be rezoned, drawn by a surveyor registered in the State of Ohio; 
(3)  A statement of the reason(s) for the proposed amendment; 
(4)  Present use and zoning district; 
(5)  Proposed use and zoning district of the subject site plus all parcels within one hundred (100) feet; 
(6)  A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Director of Community Development showing property lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning, and such other items as the Director of Community Development may require; 
(7)  A list of all owners of abutting property including any abutting property located in adjoining communities; 
(8)  A statement on the ways in which the proposed amendment relates to the master plan; and 
(9)  The payment of the application fee as established by Council. 
(Ord. No. 106-2009; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 4.05 - DEVELOPMENT APPROVALS: CATEGORIES AND CRITERIA. 
(A)  General requirements: The following table summarizes the development approvals permitted under the UDO. The subsequent sections of the UDO define the applicable approval processes and submittal requirements. 
Table 4-A: Development Approvals 
Request UDO Permit(s) Required Before Construction Submittal Requirement Approval Authority Initial Appeal Body Accessory use-Major Accessory use 
permit/CZC Major site plan, CZC Application BZAP City Council Accessory use-Minor Accessory use 
permit/CZC Minor site plan, CZC Application Director of Community Development BZAP Certificate for 
nonconformances Certificate for 
nonconformances Certificate for nonconformances application Director of Community Development BZAP Certificate of zoning compliance (CZC) CZC CZC application Director of Community Development BZAP Change in use Change in use 
permit/CZC Change in use application, CZC application Director of Community Development BZAP Conditional use Conditional use 
certificate/CZC Major site plan, CZC application BZAP City Council Development plan CZC Preliminary development plan, final development plan BZAP City Council Preliminary Preliminary (see 4.07(Q)) BZAP City Council Final plat NA Final plat application City Council (accepts final plat) Court of common pleas Floodplain permit Floodplain permit/CZC Floodplain permit application, CZC application Director of Community Development BZAP Sign Sign permit/CZC Sign permit application, CZC application Director of Community Development BZAP Site plan-Major NA Site plan-Major application BZAP City Council Site plan-Minor NA Site plan-Minor application Director of Community Development BZAP Subdivision-Major Preliminary plan Preliminary plan application BZAP City Council Subdivision-Minor Minor subdivision Minor subdivision application Director of Community Development BZAP Temporary use Temporary use permit Temporary use application City Manager City Council Variance NA Site plan BZAP City Council Rezoning N/A Rezoning application City Council Referendum Code/Text amendment N/A Text amendment application City Council Referendum Historic demolition Certificate of economic hardship Certificate of economic hardship application BZAP City Council Historic demolition Historic demolition 
permit Historic demolition permit application BZAP City Council Design review for historic demolitions Building permit after a historical demolition BZAP City Council Design review Building permit Director of Community Development BZAP  
BZAP = Board of Zoning and Planning 
CZC = Certificate of zoning compliance 
(B)  Accessory use and buildings - Major: A major accessory use is an accessory use that, because of its size, location, or intensity of activity, may have impact on adjacent property and is listed as a major accessory use in Table 5-A. Accessory uses and buildings may be erected upon a lot on which a principal structure already exists. The use of the accessory building must be secondary and incidental to the principal use. Major accessory uses and buildings are considered for approval by BZAP. See Section 6.09 for standards. 
(C)  Accessory use and buildings - Minor: A minor accessory use is an accessory use that will not have significant impact on adjacent property and is listed as a minor accessory use in Table 5-A. Accessory uses and buildings may be erected upon a lot on which a principal structure already exists. The use of the accessory building must be secondary and incidental to the principal use. Minor accessory uses and buildings are considered for approval by the Director of Community Development. See Subsection 6.09 for standards. 
(D)  Certificates of zoning compliance (CZC): The certificate of zoning compliance shall demonstrate that an approved development complies with the requirements of the UDO. No building or other structure shall be erected, constructed, re-constructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered, nor shall any excavation or site improvements be commenced, until the following has occurred: 
(1)  The owner of the property involved or a person having an interest in such property and acting under written authority of the owner has applied for a certificate of zoning compliance (CZC); 
(a)  For applications requesting that a CZC be issued for an in-law suite, the property owner submitting the application shall be required to submit an affidavit, upon penalty of perjury and falsification, attesting that the in-law suite will satisfy all of the factors set forth in this definition. This affidavit shall be completed on a form prepared by the city. The affidavit shall serve as a covenant that touches and concerns the land and is intended to be enforceable by the city against successors to the property owner. 
(2)  The application for a CZC shall include the submittal of a site plan as defined here; 
(3)  The Director of Community Development or BZAP shall review and approve a CZC depending upon whether a major or a minor site plan is required; and 
(4)  The Director of Community Development has issued the zoning certificate following approval of the site plan. 
A CZC shall become void at the expiration of one (1) year after the date of issuance unless construction has begun. If no construction has begun or the use has changed within one (1) year of the date of the certificate, a new application and certificate shall be required. Construction is deemed to begin when all necessary excavation and piers or footings of one (1) or more principal buildings included in the plan have been completed. 
(E)  Changes in use: A change in the use of a building or structure may be approved by the Director of Community Development if the use is substantially similar to the existing use or another permitted use under the existing zoning district classification as indicated on the official zoning map. A change in use may or may not involve interior or exterior building alterations. An application must be filed. 
(F)  Conditional use: Conditional uses are those uses that because of special requirements or characteristics, may be allowed in a particular zoning district only after review by BZAP and granting of conditional use approval imposing such conditions as necessary to make the use compatible with other uses permitted in the same district zone or vicinity. A conditional use shall be allowed in a zoning district after permission is granted by BZAP in accordance with the provisions of the UDO. Development standards for each conditional use are described in Section 6.10. 
(1)  Standards for approval: The following standards shall be considered in the review of conditional use applications: 
(a)  The conditional use is a permitted conditional use in the district for which it is proposed; 
(b)  The conditional use will be in accordance with the general objectives, or with any specific objective, of the City's Master Plan or this UDO; 
(c)  The conditional use will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the essential character of the same area; 
(d)  The conditional use will not be hazardous or reasonably disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses; 
(e)  The conditional use will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer, and schools; or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to adequately provide any such services; 
(f)  The conditional use will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community; 
(g)  The conditional use will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and conditions or operations that will be detrimental to any persons, property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare, or odors; 
(h)  The conditional use will have vehicular approaches to the property, which shall be designed so as not to interfere with traffic on surrounding public thoroughfares; and 
(i)  The conditional use will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural, scenic, or historic feature of major importance. 
A conditional use certificate shall authorize a particular conditional use on a specific parcel for which it was approved. The conditional use certificate is non-assignable and shall expire six (6) months from the date of enactment, unless prior to that date the applicant commences actual construction or business. There shall be no modification of a conditional use certificate except by City Council ordinance. 
(G)  Development plan: Approval of a development plan is required within the planned mixed-use district and the planned shopping center district. The two-step development plan review and approval process includes submission of a preliminary development plan and a final development plan. Both plans are reviewed by staff, the TRC and BZAP. Depending on the scope and complexity of the project proposed, BZAP may permit the preliminary development plan and the final development plan to be combined as one (1) submission. That request should be made at the work session with BZAP. 
(1)  Standards for approval: The following standards shall be considered in the review of development plan applications: 
(a)  That it fully complies with the applicable requirements of this Ordinance; 
(b)  That it adequately protects other property or other uses located on the same property; 
(c)  That it is consistent with other development on nearby property; 
(d)  That it provides safe conditions for pedestrians or motorists and prevents a dangerous arrangement of pedestrian and vehicular ways; and 
(e)  That it provides safe ingress and egress to emergency vehicles on the site. 
After the final development plan has been approved by BZAP, and in the course of carrying out this plan, adjustments or rearrangements of buildings may be requested by the proponents. The Director of Community Development shall review and approve amendments to final development plans if the change involves twenty-five percent (25%) or less of the original floor area, not to exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet. Amendments to final development plans exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area, or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, shall be reviewed and approved by BZAP. 
After the final development plan has been approved by BZAP, and in the course of carrying out this plan, adjustments or rearrangements of items other than buildings, such as drives, parking areas, recreation areas, entrances, heights, yards, signage, landscaping, exterior lighting, or similar modifications, may be requested by the proponents. 
The Director of Community Development shall review and may approve such amendment(s) unless the Director determines that such amendment substantially modifies the original development plan, in which case BZAP shall review and approve such amendment. 
(H)  Final plat: A final plat must be accepted by City Council and recorded by the Franklin County Recorder's Office before lots may be transferred. 
(1)  Standards for approval: The following standards shall be considered in the review of final plat applications: 
(a)  The final plat is in accordance with the preliminary plan; 
(b)  The City Engineer has approved all infrastructure construction plans; 
(c)  Homeowners association and other agreements have been approved by the City Attorney's office; 
(d)  Maintenance bonding requirements have been met; and 
(e)  All fees have been paid. 
(I)  Floodplain permit: A floodplain permit shall be obtained before construction begins within any area of special flood hazard as established in Section 6.05, basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. Application for a floodplain permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Community Development Department. 
(1)  Standards for approval: The following standards shall be considered in the review of floodplain permit applications: 
(a)  The floodplain application does not include uses that are dangerous to health, safety and property; 
(b)  The application includes uses that are protected against flood damage at the time of construction; 
(c)  The alteration of stream channels, natural floodplains and protective barriers are controlled; and 
(d)  The filling, grading, dredging, and other development are sufficiently controlled. 
(J)  Landscape plan: A landscape plan shall be submitted as part of the site plan and planned mixed use district review process. Such plans shall be reviewed and approved by the Director of Community Development. 
(1)  Standards for approval: The following standards shall be considered in the review of landscape plan applications: 
(a)  The landscape plan fulfills the purposes and intent of the UDO; 
(b)  The landscape plan is in concurrence with relevant City plans and policies; and 
(c)  The public's health, safety and welfare will not be adversely impacted by the proposal. 
(K)  Lighting plan: Prior to the approval of a building permit, occupancy permit, or certificate of zoning compliance, a plan demonstrating compliance with the exterior lighting standards of Section 6.08 will be submitted and approved by, the Director of Community Development. 
(1)  Standards for approval: The following standards shall be considered in the review of lighting plan applications: 
(a)  The lighting plan fulfills the purposes and intent of the UDO; 
(b)  The lighting plan is in concurrence with relevant City plans and policies; and 
(c)  The public's health, safety and welfare will not be adversely impacted by the proposal. 
(L)  Sign permit: No display sign, whether permanent or temporary, shall hereafter be erected, constructed or maintained until a sign permit has been issued by the Director of Community Development. This provision shall not apply to signs described in Subsection 6.06(C). 
(1)  Standards for approval: The following standards shall be considered in the review of sign permit applications: 
(a)  The sign permit application fulfills the purposes and intent of the UDO; 
(b)  The sign permit application is in concurrence with relevant City plans and policies; and 
(c)  The public's health, safety and welfare will not be adversely impacted by the proposal; and 
(d)  The sign permit application meets the provisions of any applicable comprehensive graphics plan for the development. 
(M)  Site plan - Major: Approval of a site plan is required for zoning approval prior to construction. BZAP shall review all applications that do not meet the definition of a minor site plan as provided for in Subsection 4.05(N)(1). 
After the major site plan has been approved by BZAP, and in the course of carrying out this plan, adjustments or rearrangements of buildings, may be requested by the proponents. The Director of Community Development shall review and approve amendments to major site plans if the change involves twenty-five percent (25%) or less of the original floor area, not to exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet. Amendments to major site plans exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) of the original floor area, or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, shall be reviewed and approved by BZAP. 
After the major site plan has been approved by BZAP, and in the course of carrying out this plan, adjustments or rearrangements of items other than buildings, such as drives, parking areas, recreation areas, entrances, heights, yards, signage, landscaping, exterior lighting, or similar modifications shall be reviewed and approved against all other UDO requirements. 
(1)  Uses requiring major site plan review: The following uses and additions to uses require major site plan review: 
(a)  Multi-family buildings four (4) units and above; 
(b)  Commercial office and all other non-residential buildings and structures; 
(c)  Additions greater than twenty-five percent (25%) or ten thousand (10,000) square feet; 
(d)  Parking structures and facilities and parking lots; 
(e)  Public buildings and structures; 
(f)  Parks; and 
(g)  Places of worship. 
(2)  Standards for approval: The following standards shall be considered in the review of major site plan applications: 
(a)  That it fully complies with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance; 
(b)  That it adequately protects other property or residential uses located on the same property from the potential adverse effects of a non-residential use; 
(c)  That it is consistent with the use and character of surrounding properties; 
(d)  That it provides safe conditions for pedestrians or motorists and prevents the dangerous arrangement of pedestrian and vehicular ways; and 
(e)  That it provides safe ingress and egress for emergency services. 
Following approval of a site plan the Director of Community Development shall issue a CZC. 
The Director of Community Development shall review amendments to major site plans if the change involves twenty-five percent (25%) or less of the original floor area, not to exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet. Amendments to major site plans exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) of the original floor area, or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, shall be reviewed by BZAP. The Director of Community Development shall determine whether amendments to major site plans, other than those that are related to floor area, require BZAP review. These amendments may include architectural design features, footprint location, fencing or other elements of the approved plan. 
(N)  Site plan - Minor: Approval of a site plan is required for zoning approval prior to construction. The Director of Community Development shall review: single-family residences; accessory uses and structures, multi-family dwellings of three (3) units or less; signs; and non-residential additions up to twenty-five percent (25%) or less of the original floor area, not to exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(1)  Uses requiring minor site plan review: The following uses and additions to uses require minor site plan review: 
(a)  Single family buildings; 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures; 
(c)  Multi-family dwellings of three (3) units or less; 
(d)  Signs; and 
(e)  Non-residential additions up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the original floor area not to exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(2)  Standards for approval: The following standards shall be considered in the review of minor site plan applications: 
(a)  That it fully complies with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance; 
(b)  That it adequately protects other property or residential uses located on the same property from the potential adverse effects of a non-residential use; 
(c)  That it is consistent with the use and character of surrounding properties; 
(d)  That it provides safe conditions for pedestrians or motorists and prevents the dangerous arrangement of pedestrian and vehicular ways; and 
(e)  That it provides safe ingress and egress for emergency services. 
(O)  Subdivision - Major: A major subdivision is a platting of land for the purposes of development and transfer of ownership. It requires approval of a preliminary plan by BZAP, approval of a final plat by BZAP, acceptance by Council, and recording of the final plat prior to the transfer of land. 
(1)  Standards for approval: The following standards shall be considered in the review of major subdivision applications: 
(a)  The proposed subdivision is not contrary to the applicable standards of the UDO; 
(b)  The proposed lots in the subdivision shall have adequate space to accommodate the building area and other site requirements; 
(c)  The property has been surveyed and other information relating to the property has been submitted with the application; 
(d)  The proposed lots have been approved for access management and stormwater management; and 
(e)  The proposed lots have been approved relative to emergency access. 
(P)  Subdivision - Minor: A minor subdivision or lot split is a division of a parcel of land that is approved by the Director of Community Development and does not require a plat to be approved by BZAP. 
(1)  Standards for approval: The following standards shall be considered in the review of minor subdivision applications: 
(a)  The proposed subdivision is not contrary to the applicable standards of the UDO; 
(b)  The proposed subdivision shall have adequate area to accommodate the building area and other site requirements; 
(c)  The property has been surveyed and an acceptable sketch, legal description and other information relating to the property has been submitted with the application; 
(d)  The proposed lots have been approved for access management and stormwater management; and 
(e)  The proposed lots have been approved relative to emergency access. 
(Q)  Temporary use: A temporary use may be approved by the City Manager. 
(1)  Standards for approval: The following standards shall be considered in the review of temporary use applications: 
(a)  The site, if undeveloped, contains sufficient open space to support the temporary use; 
(b)  The site, if developed, contains an area that does not interfere with the function of the permanent use; 
(c)  The temporary use has sufficient off-street parking; and 
(d)  The public's health, safety, and welfare on and around the temporary use is assured. 
(R)  Certificate of economic hardship: After reviewing all evidence provided by an applicant for a certificate of economic hardship, the Board shall determine whether such a certificate is appropriate by considering whether: 
(1)  Denial of a certificate will result in a substantial economic burden on the applicant because the structure cannot be maintained in its current form at a reasonable cost during the required one hundred eighty-day delay demolition period; 
(2)  During the one hundred eighty-day delay demolition period, the denial of a certificate of economic hardship would result in substantial and unanticipated economic costs relating to the property that would not have been incurred except for the requirements that were imposed by the demolition review. 
(S)  Graphics plan: Prior to issuing a sign permit in any PMUD-zoned district, a plan demonstrating the types, sizes and locations of signage permitted in the development shall be approved by BZAP. 
(1)  Standards for approval: The following standards shall be considered in the review of graphics plan applications: 
(a)  The graphics plan fulfills the purposes and intent of the UDO; 
(b)  The graphics plan application is in concurrence with relevant City plans and policies; and 
(c)  The public's health, safety and welfare will not be adversely impacted by the proposal. 
( Ord. No. 62-2015, § 3, 11-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 4.06 - DEVELOPMENT APPROVALS: PROCEDURE. 
(A)  General requirements: This section of the UDO outlines a series of actions that are required for specific development approvals. These actions are: 
(1)  Approvals by the Director of Community Development; 
(2)  Approvals by BZAP; 
(3)  Floodplain permit process; 
(4)  Major subdivision process; and 
(5)  Minor subdivision process. 
(B)  Approvals by Director of Community Development: The following outlines the procedure under which the Director of Community Development decides development approvals: 
(1)  Preapplication meeting: The applicant shall meet with the Director of Community Development prior to submitting an application for an amendment. The purpose of the meeting is to discuss the proposal and to provide feedback regarding applicable standards and requirements. 
(2)  Formal application submittal: The applicant shall submit an application meeting all of the applicable requirements of the UDO. This shall occur consistent with the submittal schedule established by the Director of Community Development. 
(3)  Application certification by Director of Community Development: Upon receipt of an application, the Director of Community Development shall, within five (5) working days, review the application as to completeness. If it is incomplete, the Director of Community Development shall advise the applicant of the deficiencies and shall not process the application until the deficiency is corrected. If it is complete and appropriate in the Director's professional judgment, the application shall be forwarded to the TRC, if applicable. 
(4)  Review by the TRC: At the Director's discretion, members of the TRC may review the application and provide comments within five (5) days to the Director of Community Development. 
(5)  Action by the Director of Community Development: Within fifteen (15) working days of a complete application, the Director of Community Development shall render a decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application. The decision shall be communicated by permit, certificate of zoning compliance or letter to the applicant citing the reasons for the decision. 
(6)  Appeal: The decision by the Director of Community Development can be appealed to BZAP per Subsection 4.10(B). 
(C)  Approvals by BZAP: The following outlines the procedure under which BZAP decides development approvals: 
(1)  Preapplication meeting: The applicant shall meet with the Director of Community Development prior to submitting an application for an amendment. The purpose of the meeting is to discuss the proposal and to provide feedback regarding applicable standards and requirements. 
(2)  Review by BZAP: The applicant is encouraged to meet with BZAP prior to submitting an application. The purpose of the work session is to provide feedback regarding the applicant's proposal and to outline submittal requirements. At the applicant's request, the Director of Community Development will place the informal proposal on the work session agenda. 
(3)  Formal application submittal: The applicant shall submit an application meeting all of the applicable requirements of the UDO. This shall occur consistent with the meeting and submittal schedule established by BZAP. Zoning map amendment applications shall be submitted seven (7) days prior to the date noted on this schedule. 
(4)  Application certification by Director of Community Development: Upon receipt of an application, the Director of Community Development shall, within five (5) working days, review the application as to completeness. If it is incomplete, the Director of Community Development shall advise the applicant of the deficiencies and shall not process the application until the deficiency is corrected. If it is complete, the Director shall forward the application to the TRC, if applicable. 
(5)  Preparation of agenda and public notice: Following certification that an application is complete, the Director of Community Development shall place the application on the agenda of BZAP's formal meeting. 
Notice of the hearing shall be given at least once in one (1) or more newspapers of general circulation in the City, or on the City's website, and/or in a conspicuous location at the municipal services center. Notice shall be published and/or posted at least five (5) days before the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposed amendment. 
The applicant shall provide a list (available from the Franklin County Auditor's current tax list) of the owners within one hundred (100) feet of the subject area to the Director of Community Development. Such notice shall be sent, by the applicant by certified mail, at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing addressed to the owners appearing on the County Auditor's current tax list and to such other list or lists as verified by staff. The notice shall contain the same information as required of notices published in newspapers as specified. 
The application, staff recommendation and associated material shall be on file for public examination in the office of the Director of Community Development. 
(6)  Review by TRC: At the Director's discretion, the members of the TRC may review the application at a meeting and provide comments within five (5) days to the Director of Community Development. 
(7)  Preparation of staff report: The director of Community Development shall prepare its staff report providing an analysis of the proposal and a recommendation. The director shall consider comments from the TRC in formulating its recommendation. The application and written report shall be forwarded to BZAP two (2) calendar days prior to the meeting at which BZAP will consider the application. 
(8)  Action by BZAP: BZAP shall consider the application at its formal public meeting. It shall consider comments by staff as appropriate, a presentation by the applicant, and comments by interested parties. BZAP shall consider this information and render a decision at the public meeting. If requested by staff, BZAP can continue the hearing for no more than sixty (60) days, at which time it shall render a decision. If requested by the applicant, BZAP can continue the hearing for no more than one hundred eighty (180) days, at which time it shall render a decision. In rendering a decision, BZAP shall consider the applicable decision criteria of this UDO. BZAP shall approve, approve with conditions or deny an application. Its decision shall take effect immediately. 
(9)  Appeal: The decision by BZAP can be appealed to the City Council per Subsection 4.10(C). 
(10)  Consent agenda: The purpose of this agenda is to consider matters and applications before the Board that meet most, if not all, the applicable UDO requirements and require no further review or discussion on behalf of BZAP. The Director of Community Development shall, upon consultation with the applicant and the TRC, decide the order of items to appear on the consent agenda. BZAP will here testimony from parties attending the meeting and interested in a particular consent agenda item. Items may be removed from the consent agenda and placed on the regular agenda for that meeting at the request of the applicant or members of BZAP. Removal of an item from the consent agenda for placement on the regular agenda requires a majority vote of BZAP members. 
(D)  Floodplain permit procedure: The Director of Community Development is hereby appointed to administer and implement this Ordinance by granting or denying floodplain permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
(1)  Procedure: The Director of Community Development shall: 
(a)  Review all floodplain permits to determine that the permit requirements of this Ordinance have been satisfied; 
(b)  Review all floodplain permits to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining such permits, as required including permits issued by the Department of the Army under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act; 
(c)  Review all floodplain permits to determine if the proposed development is located within a designated floodway. Floodways are delineated on the flood insurance rate map of the flood insurance study. Floodways may also be delineated in other sources of flood information; 
(d)  If the proposed development is located within a designated floodway, assure that the encroachment complies with the provisions of Section 6.05; and 
(e)  If determined as appropriate, submit an application for a floodplain permit to the TRC for review prior to his or her approval. 
(2)  Use of other base flood elevation and floodway data: Areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have not been provided by FEMA, in accordance with Subsection 6.05(A)(2), basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, are designated as zone A on Upper Arlington's Flood Insurance Rate Map. Within these areas, the Director of Community Development shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source. 
(3)  Information to be obtained and maintained: Where base flood elevation data are utilized within areas of special flood hazard on Upper Arlington's Flood Insurance Rate Map, regardless of the source of such data, the following provisions apply: 
(a)  Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not such structures contain an enclosure below the lowest floor; and 
(b)  For all new or substantially improved flood proofed non-residential structures: verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was flood proofed; maintain the flood proofing certifications required in Section 6.05; and, maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(4)  Alteration of watercourse: The Director of Community Development shall also: 
(a)  Notify adjacent communities and the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. A watercourse is considered to be altered, if any change occurs within its banks; 
(b)  Maintain engineering documentation required in Section 6.05 that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse will not be diminished; 
(c)  Require that necessary maintenance will be provided for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished; and 
(d)  Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Where a map boundary and field elevations disagree, the elevations delineated in the flood elevation profile shall prevail. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Subsection 4.09(B), variance process. 
(E)  Subdivision - Major: Before any land is subdivided the owner of the property proposed to be subdivided, or his/her/its authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedures, which includes a preliminary plan and final plat. 
(1)  Preliminary plan preapplication meeting: The developer/subdivider shall meet with the Director of Community Development prior to submitting a preliminary plan for consideration by BZAP. Following the conclusion of the meeting, the Director of Community Development shall forward to the developer/subdivider a written summary of the results of the preapplication meeting including recommendations and all attached comments. 
(2)  Preliminary review by Director of Community Development: Upon receipt of an application, the Director of Community Development shall, within five (5) working days, review the application as to completeness. If it is incomplete, the Director of Community Development shall advise the applicant of the deficiencies and shall not process the application until all the necessary required information has been provided. If it is complete, the Director of Community Development shall submit the application to the TRC. 
(3)  Review by the TRC: The TRC shall review the application after the Director of Community Development determines that the application is complete and forward its comments within five (5) days to the Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development shall forward copies of all documents filed with the Community Development Department to BZAP along with any report or recommendation of the TRC. 
(4)  Public hearing and notice by Director of Community Development: Within five (5) working days of determining that an application contains all the necessary and required information, the Director of Community Development shall place the application on the agenda and schedule a public hearing on the application. Notice of the hearing shall be provided at least once in one (1) or more newspapers of general circulation in the City. The notice shall be published at least five (5) days before the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and a summary of the application. The maps and plans (if applicable) shall be on file for public examination in the office of the Director of Community Development. 
(5)  Notice to property owners: The applicant shall provide a list (available from the Franklin County Auditor's current tax list) of the owners within one hundred (100) feet of the area proposed to be platted to the Director of Community Development. Such notice shall be sent, by the applicant by certified mail, at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing addressed to the owners appearing on the County auditor's current tax list and to such other list as verified by staff. The notice shall contain the same information as required of notices published in newspapers as specified in Subsection 4.06(E)(4) above. 
(6)  BZAP approval: BZAP shall review the application and recommend that the preliminary plan be approved as requested; that the preliminary plan be approved as modified by BZAP; or that the preliminary plan be denied. The decision of BZAP shall indicate the specific reasons(s) upon which the recommendation is based. 
(7)  Plan resubmittal: The developer/subdivider shall submit a reproducible original preliminary plan meeting the approval and conditions of BZAP to the Director of Community Development for approval and signature. The plan shall meet the submittal requirements of Subsection 4.07(Q). 
(8)  Expiration: The approval of a preliminary plan by BZAP shall be effective for a maximum period of twelve (12) months and shall guarantee that the terms under which the approval was granted will not be affected by changes to the UDO. If after this twelve-month period, any phase(s) or portion(s) of the original approved preliminary plan has not received final plat approval, then no final plat approval will be given unless one (1) six-month extension of the preliminary plan approval is requested in writing to and granted by BZAP. BZAP may grant no more than one (1) six-month extension. 
(9)  Construction drawings: A set of construction drawings for all improvements shall be provided to the City Engineer per the City Engineer's requirements. 
(10)  Final plat preapplication meeting: The developer/subdivider is encouraged to meet with the Director of Community Development prior to submitting a final plat for consideration by BZAP. Following the conclusion of the meeting, the Director of Community Development shall forward to the developer/subdivider a written summary of the results of the preapplication meeting including recommendations and all attached comments. 
(11)  Preliminary review by Director of Community Development: Upon receipt of an application, the Director of Community Development or a designated representative shall, within five (5) working days, review the application and determine whether it provides all necessary and required information. If it is incomplete, the Director of Community Development shall advise the applicant of the deficiencies and inform the applicant that no further action will be taken on the application until all necessary and required information has been submitted. Final plats for all phases of the subdivision must be submitted within twelve (12) months of the preliminary plan approval, unless one (1) extension has been granted by BZAP not to exceed six (6) months. 
(12)  Review by TRC: The TRC shall review the application after the Director of Community Development determines that the application is complete and forward its comments within five (5) days to the Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development shall forward copies of all documents filed with the Community Development Department to BZAP along with any report or recommendation of the TRC. 
(13)  Public hearing and notice by Director of Community Development: Once a complete application has been received, the Director of Community Development shall place the application on the agenda and schedule a public hearing on the final plat. Notice of the hearing shall be given at least once in one (1) or more newspapers of general circulation in the City. The notice shall be published at least five (5) days before the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and a summary of the application. 
(14)  Notice to property owners: The applicant shall provide a list (available from the Franklin County Auditor's current tax list) of the owners within one hundred (100) feet of the area proposed to be platted to the Director of Community Development. Such notice shall be sent, by the applicant by certified mail, at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing addressed to the owners appearing on the County auditor's current tax list and to such other list or lists as verified by staff. The notice shall contain the same information as required of notices published in newspapers as specified in Subsection 4.06(E)(13) above. 
(15)  BZAP Hearing and Recommendation: BZAP shall recommend, within thirty (30) days after the public hearing that the final plat be approved as requested; that the final plat be approved as modified by BZAP; or that the final plat be denied. The decision of BZAP shall indicate the specific reasons(s) upon which the recommendation is based. 
(16)  City Council acceptance of final plat: Within thirty (30) days after BZAP makes its recommendation, the plat shall be transmitted to the City Council. City Council shall approve, approve with modifications, or deny the plat. Approval of the final plat by the Council shall be deemed to constitute acceptance by the public of the dedication of every street and other proposed public way or space shown on said plat. 
(17)  Recording of final plat: Once a final plat has been approved by Council, the original tracing shall be returned to the developer/subdivider for any and all modifications. Once complete, the original tracing shall be forwarded to the Director of Community Development for processing. Final plats may not be recorded until all required signatures of officials have been placed on the final plat. Once the final plat has been properly signed by the appropriate officials, the applicant can file the final plat with the Franklin County Recorder, which shall process the final plat prior to its recording. Once processed by the map office, the final plat will be forwarded to the county recorder's office. Once recorded, the original tracing of the final plat shall be filed with the City Engineer. the original tracing of the final plat shall be filed with the City Engineer. 
(18)  Expedited subdivision procedure: In cases where the proposed subdivision includes less than ten (10) lots and can be developed in one (1) phase, the application does not warrant the full submittal procedure as determined by the Director of Community Development and the applicant may combine the final development plan, as outlined in Subsection 4.07(G)(2) and in the final plat procedures. In doing so the same procedural steps will occur, however, a single set of documents will be submitted as directed by the Director of Community Development. The timeframe for review and approval of a major subdivision under this procedure shall be consistent with the general timeframe as provided in Subsection 4.07(H). 
(F)  Final plat amendment: Upon the application of an owner(s) of land described in a plat within the corporation limits of the City of Upper Arlington, the City Council may amend the final plat, in whole or in part, where unusual or exceptional factors or conditions require the amendment to avoid undue hardship. 
(1)  Plat amendment defined: A plat amendment is a change that does not substantially alter the final plat including but not limited to changes in lot and block numbers, setback lines, or subdivision names. The vacation or alteration of any street, road highway, alley, park, or easement by the City is not a plat amendment subject to the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Filing requirements: The applicant(s) shall file with the Director of Community Development, at least twenty (20) working days before the BZAP meeting, a final plat amendment which meets the requirements of Subsection 4.05(H), and other city ordinances as applicable, together with an application for approval thereof and a fee for the review of said plat amendment. 
(3)  Procedure: The procedure for a final plat amendment shall be, as follows: 
(a)  The applicant(s) shall file with the Director of Community Development an application including required submittals, which sets forth the location and description of the proposed plat amendment and the reason(s) why the amendment of the plat is sought. A copy of the application shall be filed along with the required sets of amended plat drawings proposed by the applicant(s). 
(b)  The applicant(s) shall provide proof of notification upon filing as required below. Proper notification requires that the applicant(s) shall send a copy of the application to all other landowners within the plat to be amended. The certified mail certificates shall be presented to the Director of Community Development with all other submittal requirements. 
(c)  The City shall give thirty (30) days notice of the proposed plat amendment application by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction. Such notices shall set forth the part or the plat to be amended and briefly describe the proposed amendment, the date(s) of the BZAP meeting hearing(s) on the application and the date(s) City Council will consider the application. 
(4)  Letter of adequacy, service director: Within five (5) days after the final plat amendment application has been filed with the planning officer, a copy thereof shall be transmitted to the technical review committee (TRC), who will check said plat to determine adequacy with existing street, storm, sanitary, water and utility services. If said final plat amendment does so conform, the TRC, within ten (10) days working days after said plat has been transmitted to him/her, will return said plat to the Director of Community Development, together with a report verifying adequacy of the proposed amendment. The Director of Community Development shall thereupon transmit the report to BZAP for its consideration. 
(5)  BZAP review: At the first meeting of BZAP after a copy of the final plat amendment application, together with the report, has been received by BZAP, it shall consider the final plat amendment and forward its recommendation to City Council. If BZAP recommends disapproval of the final plat amendment, it shall enter in its minutes the reason(s) for such disapproval. 
(6)  City Council acceptance of plat amendment: BZAP's recommendation and the plat shall be transmitted to the City Council, together with all certificates and endorsements herein required. The Council shall take action regarding the plat amendment request at its next regular meeting after the plat amendment has been reviewed by BZAP. If the plat amendment is approved by City Council, the applicant(s) shall follow all final plat filing requirements. 
(G)  Vacation of streets, alleys, and easements: City Council may, by ordinance, vacate any street, road, highway, alley or easement upon finding that there is good cause for such vacation. Any such vacation shall first be reviewed by the Community Development Department, in order to make a recommendation to City Council. Notice of the intention of Council to vacate any street, road, highway, alley, or easement shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least twenty-one (21) days preceding such and shall be sent via certified mail, at least ten (10) days preceding such action, to all property owners abutting or within one hundred (100) feet of the street, road, highway, alley or easement to be vacated. The notification shall include a description of the street, alley, or easement to be vacated and the date scheduled for Council to consider the matter. For vacation of any easement, letters of approval from all pertinent utility companies are required. Any application to vacate any street, road, highway, alley, or easement shall be in compliance with UACO 223.12 and 933.22 and be accompanied by a fee and the notification costs. 
(H)  Encroachments into easements: Upon proper application by the property owner and the payment of the required fee, the City Manager or his/her designee may approve existing or proposed easement encroachments without City Council approval provided that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The property owner executes a hold harmless agreement in favor of the City; 
(2)  The property owner obtains letters of approval from all utilities indicating there is no objection; 
(3)  The Community Development Department reviews and recommends of approval to the City Manager; 
(4)  All existing and proposed structures meet all other UDO zoning/building requirements. 
(I)  Historic demolition procedures: The following section outlines the procedure by which the Director of Community Development and the Board shall review proposed historic demolitions. 
(1)  Historic demolition review: Upon the filing of a building or demolition permit for a contributing structure, the Director of Community Development or designee shall within five (5) business days determine whether the proposed work constitutes a historic demolition. In conducting its review concerning whether the permit qualifies as a historic demolition as discussed in this section, the Director of Community Development or designee may utilize the United States Department of the Interior's Standards for the Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings and the Preservation Briefs of the United States Department of the Interior. The Director of Community Development or designee also may adopt specially written guidelines that pertain to the specific architectural styles and character common to neighborhoods within Upper Arlington. The Director of Community Development or designee also may within five (5) business days determine whether unusual and compelling circumstances justify a finding that the project is exempt from the regulations set forth under UDO Subsection 4.06(I)(3). If the Director of Community Development or designee determines that the demolition is not a historic demolition, the applicant may proceed with the building and/or demolition permit process pursuant to Section 1305 of the Upper Arlington Building Code. If the Director of Community Development or designee determines that the building or demolition is a historic demolition, the applicant shall be notified of the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Effect of designation of historic demolition: An applicant proposing actions constituting a historic demolition shall not be issued a historic demolition permit covering the property at issue prior to (i) satisfying the requirements set forth in UDO Subsection 4.06(I)(3) below; or (ii) the issuance of a certificate of economic hardship or (iii) a finding of unusual and compelling circumstances by the Director of Community Development. 
(3)  Historic demolition procedure: Unless a certificate of economic hardship is issued or a finding of unusual and compelling circumstance, an applicant proposing a historic demolition may only proceed with the proposed plans for the property by following the procedure described in this section. 
(a)  After complying with the requirements of Subsection (b) below, the applicant shall request a final review by the Board of compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  The requirements for final review approval are the following: 
i.  Stabilizing and securing the structure to prevent deterioration. 
ii.  Cooperate with reasonable requests by preservationists to understand the significance of the property and its neighborhood. This may include reviewing any plans or studies as to available preservation options. 
iii.  Cooperate with preservationists to permit the documenting of the property including any reasonable requests to photograph the exterior and interior of the property. 
iv.  Meeting with the Board during a work session within sixty (60) days of the application proposing a historic demolition to review actions taken to address Subsections i.-iii. above for the purposes of exploring alternatives to the proposed demolition. 
(c)  Unless the Board and the applicant agree to postpone the final review, the Board shall conduct its final review and issue a decision during the earliest meeting occurring thirty (30) days after the applicant requests final review and has complied with the notice requirements outlined in Subsection (d) below. 
(d)  Written notice of the final review hearing shall be provided by the applicant to all owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the subject site. The applicant shall provide to the Director of Community Development a list (such as those available from the Franklin County Auditor's current tax list) of the owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the site at issue in the application. At least twenty (20) days before the date of the hearing, the applicant shall send notice of the hearing, by certified mail, to all addresses on that list and to such other addresses reasonably requested by staff. The notice shall include a description of the applicant's proposed changes to the property as well as an outline of the City's historic demolition requirements. 
(e)  If the Board determines during its final review that the applicant has satisfied each of the requirements outlined in UDO Subsection 4.06(I)(3)(b) above, the Board shall approve a historic demolition permit and return the application and appended materials to the Community Development Department with the instructions that the historic demolition permit may be issued. The historic demolition permit shall not be issued until at least one hundred eighty (180) days after the applicant initially submitted the demolition application. If the Board determines that the applicant has not satisfied each of the requirements, the demolition permit shall not be issued until such time as the applicant can provide the Board additional evidence of compliance with UDO Subsection 4.06(I)(3)(b). If the applicant has not provided the Board with additional evidence of compliance within ninety (90) days, the application shall be considered denied for failure to meet the requirements of the UDO. 
(f)  If a historic demolition permit is approved for a historic demolition, any alterations to contributing structures that require a building permit and new construction that replaces such structures must first complete design review with the Board in accordance with the requirements of UDO sections 7.17 and 7.18. 
(4)  Certificate of economic hardship procedure: Applicants who propose actions constituting a historic demolition may apply to the Board for a certificate of economic hardship. An application for a certificate of economic hardship shall be submitted to the Community Development Department on a prescribed form authorized by the Board. 
(a)  The board will review an application for a certificate of economic hardship during the first board meeting that occurs at least twenty-one (21) days after the application is filed and ten (10) days after an applicant sends notice of the hearing as provided below. 
(b)  Written notice of the public hearing shall be provided by the applicant to all owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the subject site. The applicant shall provide to the Director of Community Development a list (such as those available from the Franklin County Auditor's current tax list) of the owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the site at issue in the application. At least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing, the applicant shall send notice of the hearing, by certified mail, to all addresses on that list and to such other addresses reasonably requested by staff. The notice shall include a description of the applicant's proposed changes to the property as well as an outline of the City's economic hardship requirements. 
(c)  In granting approval or denial of a certificate of economic hardship, the Board shall prepare written findings of fact pursuant to the standards set forth in Subsection 4.05(R). If the certificate of economic hardship is approved, the Board shall return the application and appended materials to the Community Development Department with the instructions that the demolition permit may be issued. If denied, the Board shall return the application and appended materials to the Community Development Department who shall send to the applicant a notice of the denial that includes the reasons for that denial. Failure of the Board to approve or deny a complete application within ninety (90) days of its receipt by the City shall be considered to constitute approval of the certificate of economic hardship, unless the Board and the applicant agree to postpone the hearing for good cause. 
(d)  If the hearing is postponed, the Board shall return the application to the Community Development Department staff, who will accept additional information from the applicant prior to the next meeting for the purpose of making a determination of economic hardship. 
(e)  If a certificate of economic hardship is approved for a historic demolition, any alterations to contributing structures that require a building permit and new construction that replaces such structures must first complete design review with the Board in accordance with the requirements of sections 7.17 and 7.18. 
(f)  If the certificate of economic hardship is denied for a historic demolition, the applicant may file a separate application for a historic demolition permit pursuant to Subsection 4.06(I)(3). However, the full one hundred eight-day period shall apply without any credit for time spent during the economic hardship process unless the two (2) applications were filed simultaneously. 
(5)  Duration: A certificate of economic hardship or the approval of a historic demolition permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed six (6) months from the date of final approval by the Board. The board, for good cause and upon written request from the applicant, may extend this period, but at no time shall the total period exceed two (2) years. 
(6)  Appeals: The Community Development Department's decision whether a proposed project constitutes a historic demolition may be appealed to the Board within ten (10) days. The board's decision on appeal whether a proposed demolition constitutes a historic demolition may be appealed to City Council within twenty-one (21) days. The board's decision whether the applicant has or has not satisfied each of the requirements outlined in UDO Subsection 4.06(I)(3)(b) may be appealed to City Council within twenty-one (21) days. The board's decision to grant or deny a certificate of economic hardship may be appealed to City Council within twenty-one (21) days. 
(J)  Dedications of easements and right-of-way: City Council may, by ordinance, accept the dedication of any easement or right-of-way upon finding that there is good cause for such dedication. Any such dedication shall first be reviewed by the Community Development Department, engineering division, and the City Attorney's office, in order to make a recommendation to City Council. 
(Ord. No. 106-2009; Ord. No. 96-2010, 3-16-2011; Ord. No. 8-2012; Ord. No. 57-2013; Ord. No. 36-2014; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 44-2016 , § 2, 10-24-2016) 
§ 4.07 - DEVELOPMENT APPROVALS: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  General: The following general requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Each development approval shall include an application provided by the Director of Community Development with the submittal. 
(2)  Only complete applications shall be processed by the City. Determination as to completeness shall be made by the Director of Community Development. 
(3)  The Director of Community Development may request additional supporting information that in his/her professional judgment is necessary to fully explain the applicant's proposal. The applicant shall supply the requested additional information. 
(4)  The full application fee shall be presented to the City with the application. 
(B)  Accessory use - Major: The submittal for approval of a major accessory use shall include an application form for an accessory use-major/certificate of zoning compliance, a major site plan, related materials, and fee. The application shall include at a minimum: 
(1)  Name and address of the current property owner; 
(2)  Address and zoning classification of the subject property; 
(3)  Description of the existing and proposed use; 
(4)  Extent of any proposed interior or exterior building alterations that may be required as a result of the change in use; and 
(5)  A list of the surrounding uses and zoning classification(s). 
(C)  Accessory use - Minor: The submittal for approval of a minor accessory use shall include an application form for an accessory use-minor/certificate of zoning compliance, a minor site plan, related materials, and fee. The application shall include at a minimum: 
(1)  Name and address of the current property owner; 
(2)  Address and zoning classification of the subject property; 
(3)  Description of the existing and proposed use; 
(4)  Extent of any proposed interior or exterior building alterations that may be required as a result of the change in use; and 
(5)  A list of the surrounding uses and zoning classification(s). 
(D)  Certificate of zoning compliance: The submittal for a certificate of zoning compliance shall include an application and the appropriate site plan (major or minor as applicable). The application shall include at a minimum: 
(1)  Name and address of the current property owner; 
(2)  Name of applicant. If the applicant is not the owner then written consent from the owner should be submitted; 
(3)  Address and zoning classification of the subject property; 
(4)  Description of the existing and proposed use; 
(5)  Extent of any proposed interior or exterior building alterations that may be required as a result of the change in use; and 
(6)  A list of the surrounding uses and zoning classification(s). 
(E)  Change in use: The submittal for approval of a change in use shall include an application form for a change in use with related materials and fee. The application shall include at a minimum: 
(1)  Name and address of the current property owner; 
(2)  Name of applicant. If the applicant is not the owner then written consent from the owner should be submitted; 
(3)  Address and zoning classification of the subject property; 
(4)  Description of the existing and proposed use; 
(5)  Extent of any proposed interior or exterior building alterations that may be required as a result of the change in use; and 
(6)  A list of the surrounding uses and zoning classification(s). 
(F)  Conditional use: The submittal for approval of a conditional use shall include an application form for a conditional use with related materials and fee, unless included within a development plan or site plan application. The application shall include at a minimum: 
(1)  Name and address of the current property owner; 
(2)  Name of applicant. If the applicant is not the owner then written consent from the owner should be submitted; 
(3)  Address and zoning classification of the subject property; 
(4)  A site plan and other drawings to scale, showing the existing and proposed use of the site, all pertinent natural and man-made features, and adjacent development character and buildings; 
(5)  A statement of need for the proposed use, its location and a report identifying the effects of the proposed use on the surrounding properties and the neighborhood; and 
(6)  A plan of how the potential negative effects of the proposed use will be mitigated including traffic, parking, noise, light intrusion, solid waste storage and removal. 
(G)  Development plan: The following outlines the submittal requirements for preliminary and final development plan. Relative to the approval process, each preliminary and final development plan must be approved through the same process. 
(1)  Preliminary development plan: Application for a preliminary development plan shall be provided at the time of submittal. The preliminary development plan shall be comprised of the following information: 
(a)  A general supporting statement. This is a narrative that explains what is being proposed and why. The narrative shall explain the development proposal in context of existing structures on the property and adjoining properties and shall provide the approximate allocation of land use by acreage and type and shall provide an estimate of the population of the project at build-out; 
(b)  An existing conditions plan at a scale not less than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet indicating existing topography, property boundaries, trees, structures, pavements, utilities, and the location of existing directly adjacent properties and their structures; 
(c)  Proposed site plan at not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet scale indicating pavement, structures, service areas, loading areas, parking circulation, trash dumpsters, setbacks, vegetation to remain, points of access, required screens and buffers, and related site improvements. This plan shall include the location of existing contiguous properties and their structures; 
(d)  Conceptual architectural design and landscape planting; 
(e)  Longitudinal and transverse cross-sections through the building at its tallest point. These sections shall include contiguous property and their principal buildings to illustrate neighboring height relationships. The scale of these sections shall be no less than one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet; and 
(f)  Engineering feasibility comments, report or study from a civil engineer for water, sanitary sewer and stormwater utilities. 
(2)  Final development plan: Application for a final development plan shall be provided at the time of submittal. In addition to the preliminary development plan requirements outlined in Subsection 4.07(G)(1) above, the final development plan shall include the following: 
(a)  Boundaries of the tract and legal description; 
(b)  Locations of buildings, streets, drives and parking areas. Locations and dimensions of rights-of-way, easements and all land to be dedicated to the City or reserved for specific uses; 
(c)  Proposed building floor plans at one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch equals one (1) foot; 
(d)  Proposed building elevations at one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch equals one (1) foot; 
(e)  Proposed exterior material schedule which identifies all exterior and site structure materials and color; 
(f)  Illustration of general architectural concepts, such as perspective renderings and building/site cross-sections, which may be needed to explain concepts, if applicable or requested; 
(g)  Location of existing trees or tree masses that will remain. Location of all individual trees on the site plan with diameters/calipers six (6) inches or greater; 
(h)  Location of public utility services, including storm drainage; 
(i)  Indicate whether streets and utilities are to be publicly or privately owned and maintained; 
(j)  The location and dimensions of rights-of-way, easements and all lands to be dedicated to the City or reserved for specific uses; 
(k)  Location of proposed construction limits and areas to remain undisturbed; 
(l)  Proposed landscape plan prepared by a registered landscape architect, as defined by Subsection 6.08(D) integrated with a grading plan, at one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet scale indicating existing trees to be saved, new plantings, and a schedule of plant material showing proposed sizes and quantities; 
(m)  Location, dimensions, (including height, square feet and language) and elevations of all signs; 
(n)  Exterior lighting plan and specifications including cut-off angle, distribution plan, intensity in footcandle value within the light distribution area produced by the fixture(s) proposed, and the relationship values of these foot-candle levels at all property lines; 
(o)  Longitudinal and transverse cross-sections through the building at its tallest point. These sections shall include contiguous property and their principal buildings to illustrate neighboring height relationships. The scale of these sections shall be no less than one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet; 
(p)  Grading plan including storm drainage by a licensed civil engineer; 
(q)  Engineering plans for sanitary sewer, storm sewer and pavements by a licensed civil engineer; 
(r)  A plat of the proposed development area showing street right-of-way, subdivided and common land and easements in accordance with the requirements of the UDO which shall be in form for recording; and 
(s)  A text describing the character of the proposed development and includes standards that are supplemental to, and supportive of, the development standards contained within in this Ordinance. 
(3)  Effect of approval: The final development plan or amendment thereto, as approved by BZAP, shall constitute an administrative act as it applies to the land included in the approved amendment. Detailed site plan approval is assured based on good faith compliance with the approved development plan. The approval of a final development plan or amendment thereto shall be for a period of two (2) years to allow for the submission of a zoning compliance. Unless the required zoning compliance is properly submitted and approved within the two-year period, the approval shall be voided and a new final development plan shall be required, unless an application for time extension is submitted and approved. 
(H)  Final plat: An application form shall be completed by the developer/subdivider and submitted with the final plat. The application form shall be provided by the Community Development Department. The required fees shall also be paid at the time of application submittal. The following supplementary information shall be supplied in addition to these requirements: 
(1)  Boundary lines: All plat boundary lines with lengths of courses to hundredths of a foot and bearings to half minutes. These boundaries shall be determined by an accurate survey in the field, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure of not to exceed one (1) to ten thousand (10,000). 
(2)  Recorded streets: The exact location and the width along the property line of all existing recorded streets intersecting or paralleling the boundaries of the tract. 
(3)  Bearings: True bearings and distances to nearest established street bounds, patent or other established survey lines, or other official monuments, which monuments shall be located or accurately described on the plat. Any patent or other established survey or corporation lines shall be accurately monument-marked and located on the plat, and their names shall be lettered on them. 
(4)  Monuments: The accurate location and material of all permanent reference monuments. 
(5)  Site layout: The exact layout including: 
(a)  Streets and alley lines - Their names, bearings, angles of intersection and widths (including widths along the line of any obliquely-intersecting street); 
(b)  The chord length of all arcs - Radii, points of curvature and tangent bearings; 
(c)  All easements and rights-of-way, when provided for or owned by public services (with the limitation of the easement rights definitely stated on the plat); and 
(d)  All lot lines with dimensions in feet and hundredths, and with bearings and angles to minutes if other than right angles to the street and alley lines. 
(6)  Lots and block numbers: Lots numbered in numerical order. In tracts containing more than a block the blocks may be likewise numbered in numerical order or lettered in alphabetical order. 
(7)  Property offered for dedication: The accurate outline of all property which is offered for dedication for public use, and of all property that may be reserved by covenant in the deeds for the common use of the property owners in the subdivisions, with the purpose indicated thereon. All lands dedicated to public use other than streets or roads shall be marked "Dedicated to the Public". Streets and roads not dedicated shall be marked "Private Street". 
(8)  Setback lines: As shown on the preliminary plat. 
(9)  Name of subdivision: Name of subdivision and name or number of the largest subdivision or tract of which the tract now subdivided forms a part. 
(10)  Adjoining subdivision: Names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and location and ownership of adjoining unsubdivided property. 
(11)  Names of owners, etc.: Names and addresses of the owner of record, the subdivider, and of the engineer or surveyor. 
(12)  North-Point, etc.: North-point, scale, date and title. 
(13)  Engineer's certificate: A certificate by a registered professional engineer or surveyor to the effect that said plat was prepared by him, pursuant to an actual survey of the premises and that said plat is correct. 
(14)  Owner's certificate: A certificate by the owner of the land to the effect that he has caused said land to be platted and that he dedicates to public use the streets, parks and other lands indicated on the plat as intended for public use. This certificate shall be executed as a conveyance is executed. 
(15)  Bond or certificate to ensure street construction. 
(16)  Park and playground fee: The proprietor of each new subdivision in the City, as a prerequisite to the approval of the final plat thereof on behalf of the City, shall pay a park and playground fee into the general fund of said City, said fee shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.10 for each category listed below which is applicable to the new subdivision: 
(a)  For each lot shown on said plat which is intended for single-family residence use. 
(b)  For each lot intended for multi-dwelling use, the fee specified in Section 1.10 shall be paid for each dwelling unit permitted to be constructed thereon under applicable regulations of the zoning ordinance. 
(c)  For each lot or parcel intended for commercial, office or other business use. 
(d)  In lieu of payment of the above park and playground fee, the City Council on recommendation of BZAP may accept the dedication for public park and playground use of open spaces constituting a reasonable proportion of the gross acreage of the subdivision, suitably located and of adequate size, provided, however, that in no event shall the aggregate value of such dedicated land be less than the equivalent park and playground fee otherwise payable and computed in accordance with Section 1.10. 
(I)  Floodplain permit: Application for a floodplain permit shall be made on forms, furnished by the Community Development Department and may include, but not be limited to: site specific topographic plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; and existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. A floodplain permit shall be provided at the time of submittal. The following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures located in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data are utilized; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed structure will be flood proofed in accordance with Section 6.05 where base flood elevation data are utilized; and 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development and certification by a registered professional engineer that the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished. 
(J)  Landscape plan - Major: A major landscape plan prepared by a landscape architect shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development to coordinate review by city departments. Proposed landscape treatment shall be indicated on the major landscape plan and shall not be shown on any separately required major site plan. Landscape plans shall be submitted with major site plans and development plans as required in Section 4.07(O) and 4.07(G). Each landscape plan shall be drawn to scale, show the placement of individual plants and include the following information: 
(1)  Project name and address; 
(2)  Project owner's name, address and telephone number; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of landscape architect; 
(4)  Distance from the property to nearest intersecting street; 
(5)  Signature panel for the Director of Community Development; 
(6)  North arrow, scale (1?=20' preferred, no scale smaller than 1?=40'), date and/or date of revisions; 
(7)  A notation stating, "This landscape plan has been reviewed and approved by the owner/responsible agent who understands that any changes, substitutions, or deletions may require review and approval by the responsible reviewing authority"; 
(8)  The species (common name and botanical name), location and crown spread to scale of all trees existing on the site prior to construction with a caliper of six (6) inches or greater at common breast height. An indication of which trees are to be retained and which are to be removed, including a plan for how those to be retained will be preserved; 
(9)  Existing and proposed buildings and accessory structures to include existing and proposed signs; 
(10)  Zoning district boundaries and zoning designations of the site and adjacent properties; 
(11)  Parking and loading spaces showing all required wheel stops, curbs, driveways, landscape screening, parking lot landscaping, and sidewalks or other pedestrian paths; 
(12)  All sight triangles; 
(13)  Location, width and names of all existing/proposed streets and watercourses; 
(14)  All easements (provide dimensions and purpose); 
(15)  Location of all existing and proposed utilities, both overhead and underground; 
(16)  Principal buildings, streets (public and private), right-of-way lines and property lines; 
(17)  Location and type of trash disposal and details of screening; 
(18)  Location, height, type and material of all fences, walls, screen planting and landscaping details of all buildings and grounds. Show each individual plant on the plan; 
(19)  Location of all ground mounted heating, ventilating and cooling equipment; 
(20)  Location of all transformers; 
(21)  Square footage measurements of the total site, building, parking and hard surface areas, and landscape areas. Show percentage of landscape area for the total project. For parking spaces, show percentage of interior landscape area; 
(22)  Dimensions and distances of landscape strips as required in Section 6.07; 
(23)  Landscape notes indicating the following: 
(a)  All landscaping materials shall meet the minimum specifications and standards described in the American Standard for Nursery Stock, 1986 or as may be amended, published by the American Association of Nurserymen, 1250 I Street, N.W., Suite 500, Washington, D.C. 20005; and 
(24)  Grading plan, including mounding, and topographical lines at one-foot intervals. 
(K)  Landscape plan - Minor: A minor landscape plan prepared by a landscape architect shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development to coordinate review by city departments. Proposed landscape treatment shall be indicated on the minor landscape plan and shall not be shown on any separately required minor site plan. Landscape plans shall be submitted with minor site plans as required in Subsection 4.07(P). Each landscape plan shall be drawn to scale, show the placement of individual plants and include the following information: 
(1)  Project name and address; 
(2)  Project owner's name, address and telephone number; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of landscape architect; 
(4)  An indication of which trees are to be retained and which are to be removed, including a description of how those to be retained will be preserved; 
(5)  Existing and proposed buildings and accessory structures to include existing and proposed signs; 
(6)  Parking and loading spaces showing all required wheel stops, curbs, driveways, landscape screening, parking lot landscaping, and sidewalks or other pedestrian paths; 
(7)  All site triangles; 
(8)  Location of all existing and proposed utilities, both overhead and underground, and easements; 
(9)  Principal buildings, streets (public and private), right-of-way lines and property lines; 
(10)  Location and type of trash disposal and details of screening; 
(11)  Location, height, type and material of all fences, walls, screen planting and landscaping of all buildings and grounds; 
(12)  Location of all ground mounted heating, ventilating and cooling equipment and location of all transformers; and 
(13)  Square footage measurements for the total site, building, parking and hard surface areas, and landscape areas. 
(L)  Landscape plan - Alternative: Under certain conditions, the strict application of the regulations contained within this section may be impractical. In order to accommodate modifications to existing landscaping requirements, an alternative landscape plan may be submitted to the Director of Community Development. An alternate landscape plan may be submitted as part of an overall site plan in accordance with Section 4.07(O). The alternative landscape plan shall be provided at the time of submittal. Requests for alternative landscape plans will be accepted for review only when one (1) or more of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The site involves space limitations or is an unusually shaped lot; 
(2)  Topography, soil, vegetation, or other physical conditions of the lot are such that full compliance is impossible or impractical; 
(3)  Public safety considerations are involved; and 
(4)  Impact on the environmental quality of the lot and surrounding area will be improved with the proposed alternative landscape plan. 
Said Alternative Landscape Plan and justification statement shall be forwarded to the Director of Community Development for a recommendation on the proposal. 
(M)  Lighting plan: A lighting plan shall be provided at the time of submittal. The plan shall be submitted along with other required site information to the Director of Community Development to coordinate review by City departments. 
(1)  Scaled building plans, site plans and elevations shall be submitted showing property boundaries, building location(s), parking lot layout, driveways, pedestrian pathways, all building entrances, adjacent rights-of-way, north arrow, scale, address or legal description, and locations of all luminaires, controls, and electrical transformers; 
(2)  Cut sheets (profiles) shall be submitted for all proposed exterior luminaires and poles; 
(3)  Scaled isofootcandle plots and/or point-by-point footcandle layouts shall be submitted demonstrating compliance; and 
(4)  During the design and/or construction process after Community Development Department approval, changes shall be reviewed for re-approval prior to final acceptance. 
(N)  Graphics plan: A sign plan shall be provided at the time of submittal as may be required to assure compliance with the UDO, including: 
(1)  Name and address of the owner of the sign; 
(2)  Name and address of owner or the person in possession of the premises where the sign is located or to be located; 
(3)  Clear and legible drawings showing the location of the sign(s) that is subject to the permit including the sign's location with respect to existing right-of-way and property lines and all other existing signs whose construction requires permits, when such signs are on the same premises; and 
(4)  Drawings showing the dimensions, construction supports, sizes, electrical wiring and components, sign materials, and method of attachment. 
(O)  Site plan - Major: An application form shall be completed by the developer/subdivider and submitted with the major site plan. The application form shall be provided by the Community Development Department. Submittal requirements for a major site plan includes the following: 
(1)  Name and address of current property owner; 
(2)  An accurate legal description prepared by, or certified by, a registered surveyor of the state; 
(3)  A property location map showing existing property lines, easements, utilities, and street rights-of-way; 
(4)  A site plan, prepared by a civil engineer, landscape architect, or architect drawn at a suitable scale not to exceed one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet indicating use, location, and height of existing and proposed buildings and structures, including accessory buildings, structures and uses, along with notation of the development standards for building spacing, setback from property lines, and maximum building heights. The site plan should also show the location and configuration of off-street parking and loading areas, the arrangement of internal and in-out traffic movement including access roads and drives and the location of signs related to parking and traffic control; 
(5)  Topographic maps available from the Franklin County Auditor's Office with sufficient elevations to show existing and generally proposed grading contours, major vegetation features, wooded areas and existing trees over six (6) inches in diameter measured at the average breast height; 
(6)  Proposed landscaping plans indicating the preliminary description of the location and nature of existing and proposed vegetation, landscaping, screening elements and existing trees to be removed; 
(7)  Elevation drawings of proposed structures, floor plans, exterior construction materials, by type and color; 
(8)  Proposed sign plans indicating the location, size, and illumination of wall signs, ground mounted signs, and directional signs. Elevation drawings of ground mounted signs and wall signs shall also be included; 
(9)  Proposed lighting plans including exterior building, parking lot, and site lighting. Sample cut sheets indicating pole and luminaire height as well intensity of illumination in footcandles on a point-by-point isofootcandle map shall also be provided; 
(10)  Summary table showing total acres of the proposed development; number of acres devoted to each type of residential and/or non-residential use including streets (right-of-way) and open space; number of dwelling units by type; total building square footage; and overall density (units per acre) and intensity (lot coverage); 
(11)  Proposed grading and stormwater management plan; 
(12)  Landscape plan indicating location of existing plants; proposed plantings, including planting height and caliper of proposed trees measured at the average breast height; and 
(13)  Other information necessary for the evaluation of existing site conditions and proposed development as deemed necessary by the Director of Community Development and/or BZAP. 
(P)  Site plan - Minor: The minor site plan shall be provided at the time of submittal. An application form shall be completed by the developer/subdivider and submitted with the minor site plan. The application form shall be provided by the Community Development Department. Submittal requirements for a minor site plan include the following: 
(1)  General layout plan with existing and proposed property lines, showing all proposed property lines with typical dimensions, yards and setbacks; 
(2)  Proposed and existing buildings on site with general sketch floor plans and building elevations; 
(3)  Building height; 
(4)  List of property owners and labeling of adjacent property owners; 
(5)  Square footage of existing and proposed buildings; 
(6)  Zoning of property and existing use on site, including adjacent use and zoning; 
(7)  Preliminary grading plan, stormwater plan and landscape plan; 
(8)  Street and parking lot layout, including street rights-of-way, drive aisles, parking spaces, and sidewalk location; and 
(9)  Preliminary water and sewer plan. 
(Q)  Subdivision - Major: An application form shall be completed by the developer/subdivider and submitted with the major subdivision. The application form shall be provided by the Community Development Department. The following information shall be provided upon submittal of an application for a major subdivision: 
(1)  Major subdivision - Preliminary plan application and base information: An application form shall be completed by the developer/subdivider and submitted with the preliminary plan and required supplemental information. The preliminary plan and base information shall be provided at the time of submittal. The application form shall be provided by the Community Development Department. The required fees shall also be paid at the time of application submittal. The Director of Community Development shall certify the receipt of a complete application package meeting the requirements of the UDO prior to scheduling the application on BZAP agenda. The preliminary plan shall be drawn on twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheets to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet. When more than one (1) sheet is required, an index shall be incorporated into the title block. The Director of Community Development may approve the consolidation of the submittal requirements provided the intent of this section is met. The preliminary plan shall contain the following information at a minimum: 
(a)  Name and address of developer, property owner, land planner, landscape architect, engineer and/or surveyor; 
(b)  Adjoining property owners, deed references and/or recorded subdivision names, recording references and adjoining property structures within three hundred (300) feet or as specified by the Director of Community Development; 
(c)  Vicinity map (section and range); 
(d)  The ownership, acreage and boundaries of all adjacent properties within three hundred (300) feet of the subdivision or as specified by the Director of Community Development. If a recorded subdivision adjoins the subject site, the subdivision name, lot numbers, block numbers and recording number shall be indicated with dashed lines; 
(e)  North arrow; 
(f)  Title block shall be in the lower right-hand corner. The title block shall include title "Preliminary Plan", sheet title, proposed subdivision name, developer and preparer, scale of the plan, tax map and parcel numbers, sheet index, date and revisions numbered and dated; 
(g)  Boundary of the proposed subdivision clearly indicated by a heavy line with bearings and distances; and 
(h)  Existing topography at two-foot intervals for slopes under ten percent (10%) and at ten-foot intervals for slopes ten percent (10%) or greater. Contour lines shall be indicated fifty (50) feet beyond the subdivision boundary. 
(2)  Preliminary plan - Existing conditions: The existing conditions map and text shall indicate the subdivision and all property within two hundred (200) feet of the subdivision or as specified by the Director of Community Development, the following conditions depicted to scale: 
(a)  Existing generalized natural features; 
(b)  Existing zoning; 
(c)  Existing utilities, including: water; sanitary sewer and stormwater facilities, (indicating approximate pipe sizes and directions of slope); underground transmission lines; electric and telephone poles; street lights; fire hydrants; landfills; and public utility easements; 
(d)  Existing streets and roads, including: locations, widths and names of all streets and roads; existing easements; and streets which have been preliminarily approved or recorded but which remain unimproved shall be indicated; 
(e)  Existing community facilities, including parks and recreation facilities; and 
(f)  Master plan recommendations for the subject site and applicable zoning districts and standards. 
(3)  Preliminary plan - Proposed subdivision plan: The following proposed improvements are to be superimposed on top of the existing conditions map: 
(a)  Proposed generalized land use, including proposed building footprint; 
(b)  Proposed layout of all proposed and existing lots with approximate dimensions and minimum area in square feet (acres if lot size is greater than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet), section number, phase number and part number, building lines, lot frontages and required setbacks; 
(c)  Lot numbers in numerical or alphabetical order throughout the entire subdivision; 
(d)  The location, dimensions, use and area of all property proposed to be reserved or temporarily reserved for public use, or reserved for the use of all property owners in the subdivision and the location, dimensions and purposes of any proposed easements; and 
(e)  Total number of lots, area of lots and parcels, area of public roadways, areas of open space dedications, and total area of the subdivision. 
(4)  Preliminary Plan - Proposed Water, Sanitary Sewer, and Stormwater: The following improvements are to be superimposed on top of the existing conditions map: 
(a)  Proposed water system; 
(b)  Proposed sewer system; 
(c)  Proposed drainage and stormwater management systems, including: the type of structures; drainage easements; proposed changes in topography; the 100-year floodplain (floodway and floodway fringe shall be indicated separately); and 
(d)  A preliminary storm drainage study including an evaluation of drainage structures and/or drainage systems, both upstream and downstream, affected by the drainage from the area covered by the preliminary plan, as directed by the City Engineer. 
(5)  Preliminary plan - Proposed circulation: The following improvements are to be superimposed on top of the existing conditions map: 
(a)  Proposed streets and roads, including: widths of rights-of-way and pavements; tentative profiles of each street centerline; tentative horizontal curve data; and typical cross sections of each type of street proposed; 
(b)  Proposed sidewalks and bike paths, including: locations; widths of rights-of-way; surface widths; and typical cross sections; and 
(c)  Proposed locations of street trees and landscape features. 
(6)  Preliminary plan - Proposed sedimentation and erosion control: The following improvements are to be superimposed on top of the existing conditions map: 
(a)  Locations and extent of tentative erosion and sedimentation control measures; and 
(b)  Preliminary grading plan for the entire area covered by the preliminary plan. 
(7)  Construction documents: The final plat shall include a set of construction drawings and specifications of improvements. This shall be a set of construction plans prepared by a registered professional engineer that shall include typical sections, plan and profile views, construction details, and estimates of quantities. A set of construction drawings and specifications for all improvements shall be provided to the City Engineer per the streets and services code. 
(8)  Security for construction: In lieu of constructing improvements, the subdivider may apply for final plat approval by insuring completion of the required improvements by one of the following methods and review and approval by the City Attorney, the City Engineer and the Finance Director: 
(a)  A surety performance bond running to the City sufficient to cover the full cost of said improvements as estimated by the officials having jurisdiction, to assure the satisfactory installation of said improvements in accordance with its regulations. 
(b)  The subdivider may deposit in a bank in Franklin County, Ohio, the sum not less than the total estimated improvement cost, to be held in escrow to guarantee the satisfactory completion of said improvements within the required time, the form of said escrow agreement to be subject to the approval of the Director of Community Development and the City Attorney and which agreement may provide for the making of payments from such funds from time to time upon certificates of the City Engineer that the balance remaining after such payments will, in his opinion, be adequate to pay the remaining costs of said improvements. 
(c)  The subdivider may deposit with the Director of Community Development a cashiers check or irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of the total estimated improvement cost to be held in escrow until the satisfactory completion of construction, unless a default in the completion of said improvements occurs, in which event the check may be cashed by the Director of Community Development and the proceeds thereof used to complete the improvements, to pay claims connected therewith for which the subdivider may be liable, or to cure any other default of the subdivider connected with the making of said improvements. 
(9)  Construction of buildings: Construction of buildings shall not be permitted until all improvements are completed and accepted by the City. 
(R)  Regulation concerning improvements required in subdivisions: 
(1)  Required minimum improvements: Minimum improvements shall be installed: (a) in the case of subdivisions within the City, in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance; and (b) in the case of subdivisions outside the corporate limits within three (3) miles of the City, in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the Board of county commissioners, provided such county rules and regulations are equally or more restrictive than the requirements of this Chapter. In the event that the applicable county requirements are less restrictive, the provisions of this section shall govern. 
(2)  Time for construction of improvements: All required improvements shall be constructed within two (2) years of the acceptance of the final plat by the City Council. 
(3)  Street construction: Streets shall be graded to full width of the right-of-way and fully constructed with all-weather macadam or concrete pavements surfaced with asphaltic or Portland cement concrete wearing surfaces, concrete curbs and gutters with tile underdrain and porous backfill and proper storm drains and inlets. Streets constructed within this city shall be in conformity with the plans and specifications for street construction adopted by Council, duplicates of which shall be kept on file in the office of the City Manager and the City Engineer. Streets constructed outside the City shall be as specified by the county engineer. 
(4)  Water supply: Where a public water supply main is reasonably accessible, the subdivision shall be provided with a complete loop type water distribution system adequate to serve the area being platted, including a connection for each lot and appropriately spaced fire hydrants in accordance with the requirements of the City of Columbus. Where public water supply is not available within a reasonable distance, the average size of the lots shall be not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. The entire water system shall be designed to meet the approval of the officials having jurisdiction. 
(5)  Storm drainage: Every subdivision shall be provided with a stormwater sewer or drainage system adequate to serve the area being platted and otherwise meeting the requirements of Section 6.04. 
(6)  Sewerage: Where a public sanitary sewer main is reasonably accessible, in the opinion of BZAP, the subdivision shall be provided with a complete sanitary sewer connected with such sewer main, including a lateral connection for each lot. 
(7)  Electric and telephone lines: Where it is necessary to locate electric or telephone lines in the street right-of-way, they shall be not less than nine (9) feet six (6) inches back of curb. 
(8)  Street signs: The City will erect the necessary street signs. The subdivider shall reimburse the City for the cost thereof. 
(9)  Construction plans: Construction plans, including the following, for improvements shall be furnished in accordance with the specifications of the City Engineer and shall receive approval of the City Engineer and the fire division before improvements are installed, and before approval of the final plat: 
(a)  The centerline profile of each proposed street, with tentative grades indicated; 
(b)  The cross-section of each proposed street, showing the width of pavement, the location and width of sidewalks and the location and size of the utility mains; 
(c)  The plans and profiles of proposed sanitary sewers and stormwater sewers, with grades and sizes indicated, or method of sewage or stormwater disposal in lieu of sewers; 
(d)  A plan of the proposed water distribution system, showing pipe sizes and the location of valves and fire hydrants; 
(e)  A drainage plan showing all existing and proposed storm sewers, manholes, catch basins, watercourses, culverts and other underground structures within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto, with pipe sizes and grades, waterway openings indicated thereon. The drainage plan shall show the method to be used for the adequate disposal of all stormwater, including drainage outlets, and such other data as may be required by the City Engineer and Section 6.04. 
(10)  Inspection: Prior to the start of any work covered by the above plans, after approval thereof, arrangements shall have been made to provide for inspection of the work sufficient, in the opinion of the City Engineer, to insure compliance with the plans and specifications as approved. 
(11)  Completion of construction: The construction of all improvements required by these rules and regulations must be completed within two (2) years from the date of approval of the final plat by City Council, unless good cause can be shown for the granting of an extension of time by authority of BZAP and City Council. 
(12)  Maintenance after approval: For a period of one (1) year from the date the constructed improvements were approved by the City Engineer the subdivider shall make such repairs or replacements as may be required by reason of defective workmanship or material. 
(S)  Subdivision - Minor: A minor subdivision application shall be provided at the time of submittal. An application form shall be completed by the developer/subdivider and submitted with the minor subdivision. The application form shall be provided by the Community Development Department. In order to be complete and to be accepted for review and processing, all minor subdivision (lot split) proposals must be legible and include or comply with the following: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number and e-mail address of existing property owner; 
(2)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number and e-mail address of surveyor or preparer of the submittal if different from the property owner; 
(3)  Location and size of existing and proposed parcels, including date of creation of existing parcel to be split; 
(4)  North arrow and bar scale; 
(5)  Location information including: location map; adjacent or frontage roads; adjacent parcel ownership; proposed easements of access; etc.; 
(6)  Acreage of all proposed lots and acreage of all remaining property resulting from the division of the original parcel, including existing and proposed boundaries; 
(7)  Proposed building envelope, building footprint and proposed site drainage and grading may be required by the TRC if existing data indicates a situation where development constraints should be addressed in detail sufficient for approving the development proposal; 
(8)  Site drainage and 100-year floodplain (floodway and floodway fringe, elevation and boundaries); 
(9)  Steep slopes, ravines, drainage swales, and all other natural features; 
(10)  All other natural and built features or conditions that in the determination of the Director of Community Development are directly relevant to the ability of the proposed lot(s) to be buildable per these regulations. Existing topography at two-foot intervals for slopes under ten percent (10%) and ten-foot intervals for slopes ten percent (10%) or greater or as approved by the TRC if topographic characteristics of the site and/or adjacent properties indicates a situation where development constraints should be addressed in detail sufficient for approving the development proposal; 
(11)  Any and all proposed easements, reserves or no build zones; and 
(12)  A filing fee shall be charged and must be paid at the time that the final survey is filed with the Community Development Department. 
(T)  Temporary use: A temporary use application shall be provided at the time of submittal. An application for a temporary use shall be filed with the Director of Community Development on a form prescribed by the Director, along with the fee for such permit and the following information: 
(1)  A sketch plan showing the boundaries of the property; 
(2)  The use of adjacent properties identified and labeled; 
(3)  The location of the temporary use or structure on the property. 
(U)  Certificate of economic hardship: An applicant that reasonably believes that delaying a historic demolition of a contributing structure by one hundred eighty (180) days would cause economic hardship may submit an application for a certificate of economic hardship. Documents that the Board may consider shall be described on the application prepared by the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 8-2012; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 4.08 - RELATED APPROVALS. 
(A)  Building permit: 
(1)  Definition: A permit issued by the Director of Community Development authorizing the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, or maintenance of any building, structure or portion thereof. Such permit shall not be issued without the signature of the Director of Community Development, certifying compliance with this UDO. 
(2)  Permit process: An application for a building permit shall be filed with the Director of Community Development on a form prescribed by the Director, along with the fees and charges for building permits and inspections. Each application for a building permit shall contain or be accompanied by such information and plans as required on the application form and as otherwise required by the Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development and any other applicable departments shall review the application and any required plans in order to determine whether the proposed work complies with the applicable provisions of this UDO and all other applicable city ordinances and construction regulations. 
(B)  Occupancy permit: 
(1)  Definition: A new building or part of a new building, an addition or enlargement of any existing building, or an existing building may be occupied after being altered or moved, and a change in use or occupancy of any building may be made in any existing building only after the Director of Community Development has issued an occupancy permit stating that the building and/or the proposed use complies with the provisions of this Ordinance. An occupancy permit shall be required for the purpose of maintaining, renewing, changing, or extending a nonconforming use. 
(2)  Permit process: In issuing an occupancy permit the Director of Community Development shall follow the requirements set forth in Subsection 4.06(B). 
(Ord. No. 82-2013; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 4.09 - VARIANCES. 
(A)  Definition: A variance may be granted allowing deviations from the height, mass, setback, parking, or other dimensional requirements established by the zoning and subdivision provisions of the UDO where practical difficulties unique to the property in question prevent full compliance with such provisions. A variance may also be granted allowing a deviation from the permitted use provisions in the UDO in cases where limiting the use of a property in question to those permitted in the UDO would constitute an undue hardship resulting in denial of any economically viable use of the property. 
(B)  Variance process: Authority to consider variance(s) from the terms of this UDO is granted to the Board of Zoning and Planning. The board may authorize, in specific cases, such variance from the terms of this UDO as will not be contrary to the public interest. 
(1)  Preapplication meeting: The applicant may meet with the Director of Community Development or informal BZAP prior to submitting a variance request for consideration by BZAP. Following the conclusion of the meeting, the Director of Community Development shall forward to the applicant a written summary of the results of the pre-application meeting including recommendations and all attached comments. 
(2)  Preliminary review by Director of Community Development: Upon receipt of an application, the Director of Community Development shall, within five (5) working days, review the application and determine whether it provides all necessary and required information. If it is incomplete, the Director of Community Development shall advise the applicant of the deficiencies and inform the applicant that no further action will be taken on the application until all necessary and required information has been provided. If it is complete, the Director of Community Development may forward the application to the TRC. 
(3)  Review by the TRC: The TRC shall review the application after the Director of Community Development determines that the application is complete and forward its comments within five (5) days to the Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development shall forward copies of all documents filed with the Community Development Department to BZAP along with any report or recommendation of the TRC. 
(4)  Major variance public hearing and notice by Director of Community Development: Within five (5) working days of determining that an application contains all the necessary and required information, the Director of Community Development shall place the application on the agenda and schedule a public hearing on the proposed variance. Notice of the hearing shall be provided at least once in one (1) or more newspapers of general circulation in the City. The notice shall be published at least five (5) days before the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposed variance. Maps and plans (if applicable) shall be on file for public examination in the office of the Director of Community Development. 
(5)  Notice to property owners: Written notice of the public hearing shall be provided to all owners of property within one hundred (100) feet of the subject site. The applicant shall provide a list (available from the Franklin County Auditor's current tax list) of the owners within one hundred (100) feet of the property for which the variance is requested to the Director of Community Development. Such notice shall be sent, by the applicant by certified mail, at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing addressed to the owners appearing on the County auditor's current tax list and to such other list or lists as verified by staff. 
(6)  BZAP hearing and recommendation: BZAP shall review the application and recommend that the variance be granted as requested; be granted as modified by BZAP; or be denied. BZAP shall indicate the specific reasons(s) for its recommendation. 
(7)  Additional conditions and safeguards: The BZAP may further prescribe any conditions and safeguards that it deems necessary to ensure that the objectives of the regulations or provisions to which the variance applies will be met. 
(C)  Expiration of the variance: Variances shall expire two (2) years from the date of enactment, unless prior thereto the applicant applies for a building permit in accordance with the granted variance. There shall be no modification of variances except by further consideration of BZAP. Extension of variances, without modification, may be applied for prior to the date of expiration, if the variance does not carry a prohibition against the extension. Extensions may be granted by BZAP if it finds that the requested extension is consistent with the purpose, policies, and intent of the master plan, and the specifications of the UDO. Requests for renewal of expired variances shall be considered to be the same as an application for a variance and shall meet all requirements for application and review pursuant to Section 4.09. 
Variances approved by BZAP as part of a subdivision, development or site plan shall not expire until said plan has expired. 
(D)  Standards for approval: The following factors shall be considered and weighed by BZAP in determining practical difficulty or hardship: 
(1)  Whether special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land or structure involved and which are not applicable generally to other lands or structures in the same zoning districts. Examples of such special conditions or circumstances are: exceptional irregularity, narrowness, shallowness, or steepness of the lot, or adjacency to nonconforming and inharmonious uses, structures, or conditions; 
(2)  Whether the property in question will yield a reasonable return or whether there can be any beneficial use of the property without the variance; 
(3)  Whether the variance is substantial and is the minimum necessary to make possible the reasonable use of the land or structures; 
(4)  Whether the essential character of the neighborhood would be substantially altered or whether adjoining properties would suffer substantial detriment as a result of the variance; 
(5)  Whether the variance would adversely affect the delivery of governmental services such as water, sewer, and trash pickup; 
(6)  Whether special conditions or circumstances exist as a result of actions of the current or a previous owner; 
(7)  Whether the property owner's predicament feasibly can be resolved through some method other than a variance; 
(8)  Whether the spirit and intent behind the zoning requirement would be observed and substantial justice done by granting a variance; and/or 
(9)  Whether the granting of the variance requested will confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this regulation to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
(E)  Submittal requirements: An application for a variance shall be filed on a form provided by the Director of Community Development, and shall be accompanied by the following requirements: 
(1)  Name, address, and phone number of applicant(s) and property owner; 
(2)  Proof of ownership, legal interest or written authority; 
(3)  Legal Description of property or portion thereof; 
(4)  Description or nature of variance requested; 
(5)  Narrative statements establishing and substantiating the justification for the variance pursuant to subection 4.09(D); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, elevations and other drawings at a reasonable scale to convey the need for the variance; 
(7)  Payment of the application fee as established by City Council; and 
(8)  Any other documents deemed necessary by the Director of Community Development. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 16-2017 , § 4, 4-10-2017) 
§ 4.10 - APPEALS. 
(A)  Responsibility and computation of time: This section identifies the responsibility for hearing appeals and establishes the appeals process for decisions made by the administration, BZAP, and City Council. 
In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this section, the day of the act or order from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period as computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. Intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be included in the computation unless otherwise specified. If the final day of the period falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, then the act may be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. 
(1)  Appeal of administrative action: Any person aggrieved by any order, made by the Director of Community Development, or a designated representative, in the administration or enforcement of this Ordinance may appeal to BZAP. A decision to file a code enforcement citation in the Upper Arlington Mayor's Court or other court of competent jurisdiction may not be appealed to BZAP. 
(2)  Appeal of Board of Zoning and Planning action: Any person aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by BZAP, who actively participated at the hearing at which the order, requirement, decision, or determination being appealed was made, may appeal to the City Council. A person actively participates where they appear at the hearing at which the order was made, either in person or through their legal counsel, and state their position on the record. The City Manager, or a designated representative; the Director of Community Development, or a designated representative; the community improvement corporation; and any board or commission of the City may appeal any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the BZAP to City Council. City Council may not appeal any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the BZAP unto itself. 
(3)  Appeal of City Council action: Any person aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the City Council, who actively participated at the hearing at which the order, requirement, decision, or determination being appealed was made, may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Franklin County. A person actively participates where they appear at the hearing at which the order was made, either in person or through their legal counsel, and state their position on the record. 
(B)  Appeals to BZAP: The following outlines the appeals process and notification requirements for appeals to BZAP from an administrative decision: 
(1)  An appeal to BZAP shall be made within ten (10) days from the date of issue of the order appealed from, by filing a notice of appeal with the Director of Community Development. The Director shall transmit to the BZAP all the papers constituting the record upon which the order appealed from was taken. No enforcement action of the Director of Community Development shall take effect until after the expiration of ten (10) days from the date of the order. 
(2)  Upon the filing of the appeal and payment of the filing fee and cost of mailing, the Director of Community Development shall notify BZAP and schedule a public hearing on the proposed appeal. Unless continued as provided herein, the hearing shall be held within ninety (90) days of the date of the filing of such appeal. The hearing may be continued by either party upon filing a written notice to the Director and the approval of a majority of BZAP Members. If all parties are in agreement regarding a continuance, no vote of BZAP is required and the Chairman of BZAP may approve the new hearing date. The hearing may be continued by a majority vote of BZAP at any time. The Director shall give notice by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation at least five (5) days before the date of the hearing and shall give notice of the hearing to the interested parties. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposed appeal. 
(3)  The BZAP shall decide the case within thirty (30) days from the date of such hearing. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or be represented by an attorney. 
(C)  Appeals to City Council: The following outlines the appeals process and notification requirements for appeals from a BZAP decision to City Council: 
(1)  No order of the BZAP shall take effect until the expiration of twenty-one (21) days from the date of the meeting at which such action is announced. An appeal to City Council shall be taken within twenty-one (21) days after the final action of the BZAP by filing a written notice of such appeal with the City Clerk and paying the filing fee and the cost of mailing the notices required in Subsection (C)(3). Payment shall be due at the time of filing the notice of appeal and shall be considered jurisdictional. 
(2)  Upon the filing of the appeal and payment of the filing fee and cost of mailing, the City Clerk shall notify Council and schedule a public hearing on the proposed appeal. Unless continued as provided herein, the hearing shall be held within ninety (90) days of the date of the filing of such appeal. The hearing may be continued by either party upon filing a written notice to the City Clerk and the approval of a majority of Council Members. If all parties are in agreement regarding a continuance, no vote of Council is required and the President may approve the new hearing date. The hearing may be continued by a majority vote of City Council at any time. Notice of the hearing shall be provided at least once in one (1) or more newspapers of general circulation in the City. The notice shall be published at least five (5) days before the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposed appeal. Maps and plans (if applicable) shall be on file for public examination in the office of the City Clerk. 
(3)  Written notice of the public hearing shall be provided to all owners of property within one hundred (100) feet of the subject site, based on the information available from the Franklin County Auditor's website. Such notice shall be sent, by the City Clerk by certified mail, at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. The mailing of the notice is sufficient proof of service. 
(4)  The applicant, Council, staff or any party may request a change in the date of the public hearing pursuant to UDO Article 4.10 (C)(2) by filing a written request with the City Clerk setting forth the reason for the change in date. If the applicant makes the request and it is granted, the applicant shall be responsible for the City Clerk's costs to mail a new notice of hearing as required in Subsection (C)(3) and to publish a new notice of hearing as required in Subsection (C)(2). Failure to pay these costs prior to the hearing shall result in dismissal with prejudice of the appeal. Any change in the date of the public hearing requires the approval of the president of Council. The decision of the president of Council shall be final. 
(5)  A proper permit may be issued for construction before the expiration of the twenty-one-day waiting period provided all of the following conditions exist: 
(a)  Required notices have been given and not dispensed with by the BZAP. 
(b)  There are no written objections filed by any person aggrieved by the decision. 
(c)  There are no objections stated at the hearing of the BZAP by any person aggrieved by the decision. 
(d)  No appeal to Council has been filed with the City Clerk by any person aggrieved by the decision of the BZAP prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(e)  The applicant has filed a hold harmless application for the waiver of the twenty-one-day waiting period specifically acknowledging the rights of anyone appealing the decision of the BZAP and that the applicant understands he or she proceeds at his or her peril. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 54-2017 , §§ 12, 13, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 32-2018 , § 8, 4-23-2018) 
ARTICLE 5. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND USE STANDARDS 

§ 5.01 - GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
(A)  Regulation of the use and development of land and structures: These regulations are established and adopted governing the use and physical development of land and/or structures. 
(B)  Rules of application: These regulations shall be interpreted and enforced according to the following rules: 
(1)  Identification of uses: Listed uses are to be defined by their customary name or identification, except where they are specially defined or limited in this Ordinance. 
(2)  Permitted uses: Only a use designated as a permitted use shall be allowed as a matter of right in a zoning district and any use not so designated shall be prohibited except, when in character with the zoning district, such other additional uses may be added to the permitted uses of the zoning district by an amendment to this UDO. Only lawful uses shall be permitted and prior zoning approval of a use does not override state or federal laws. 
(3)  Conditional uses: A use designated as a conditional use shall be allowed in a zoning district when such conditional use, its location, extent and method of development will not substantially alter the character of the vicinity or unduly interfere with the use of adjacent lots in the manner prescribed for the zoning district, and is not inconsistent or contrary to master plan objectives related to uses. To this end BZAP shall, in addition to the development standards for the zoning district, set forth such additional requirements as will, in its judgment, render the conditional use compatible with the existing and future use of adjacent lots and the vicinity. Additional standards for conditional uses are listed in Section 6.10. 
(4)  Accessory uses: A use designated as an accessory use shall be permitted in a zoning district when such use is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal use and is located on the same lot and in the same zoning district as the principal use. 
(5)  Development standards: The development standards shall be the minimum required for development in a zoning district unless otherwise stated. If the development standards are in conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or laws, the more restrictive or higher standard shall govern. 
(6)  Secondary or auxiliary uses: Secondary or auxiliary uses are subject to the same requirements as primary uses. A prohibited or conditional use is not permitted simply because it is a secondary or auxiliary use to a permitted primary use. A primary use that is prohibited or conditional is not permitted simply because a secondary or auxiliary use may be permitted. The granting of a conditional use permit for a primary use does not constitute conditional use approval of any secondary or auxiliary uses. The granting of a conditional use permit for a secondary or auxiliary use does not constitute conditional use approval of any primary uses. 
(C)  Districts: The City is divided into the following zoning districts, which shall be governed by all the use and area requirements of this Ordinance. The following lists each district along with its appropriate symbol: 
Residential districts R-S Residential suburban district R-1 One-family residence district R-2 One- to four-family residence district R-3 Multi-family residence district RCD Residential community development district Commercial districts B-1 Neighborhood business district B-2 Community business district B-3 Conditional business district O Office district ORC Office and research district Planned districts PMUD Planned mixed-use district PB-3 Planned shopping center district Overlay districts HD Historic district WCD Wireless communications district  
(Ord. No. 96-2010, 3-16-2011) 
§ 5.02 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. 
(A)  Purpose: The following generally describes the purpose and general characteristics of each residential district: 
(1)  R-S residential suburban district: The purpose of the R-S district is to allow single-family dwellings in low-density residential neighborhoods. This district is further subdivided into four (4) subdistricts: R-Sa, R-Sb, R-Sc, and R-Sd, differing primarily in required lot area and yard space. Net densities range from 0.33 dwelling units per acre in the R-Sa district to two (2) dwelling units per acre in the R-Sd district. Permitted uses generally include, but are not limited to, single-family residential, institutional, cultural, recreation, and day care. 
(2)  R-1 one-family residence district: The purpose of the R-1 district is to allow single-family dwellings in low- to medium-density residential neighborhoods. Two-family dwellings are a conditional use. The district is further subdivided into three (3) subdistricts: R-la, R-1b, and R-1c, differing primarily in required lot area and yard space. Net densities range from 1.09 dwelling units per acre in the R-1a district to 4.84 dwelling units per acre in the R-1c district. Permitted uses generally include, but are not limited to, single-family residential, institutional, cultural, recreation, and day care. 
(3)  R-2 one-to-four-family residence district: The purpose of the R-2 district is to allow single-family dwellings and two- to four-family dwellings in medium-density residential neighborhoods. The district is further subdivided into two (2) subdistricts: R-2a and R-2b, differing only in height regulations. Net densities range from 4.84 dwelling units per acre in the R-2a district to 14.52 dwelling units per acre in the R-2b district. Permitted uses generally include, but are not limited to, single-family and two- to four-family residential, institutional, cultural, recreation, and day care. 
(4)  R-3 multi-family residence district: The purpose of the R-3 district is to allow single-family dwellings and multi-family dwellings (up to six (6) units in a building) in medium-density residential neighborhoods. The district is further subdivided into two (2). 
(5)  RCD residential community development district: The purpose of the RCD district is to allow residential uses in medium- to high-density residential complexes. Permitted uses generally include, but are not limited to, single-family, and two- to six-family residential, institutional, cultural, recreation, day care, and adult care facility retirement homes. 
(B)  Permitted, prohibited, accessory, and conditional uses: Permitted, prohibited, accessory, and conditional uses for each of the residential use districts are listed in Table 5-A, Residential Uses and Table 5-B, Home Occupational Uses. No residence or portion thereof may be rented out to any tenant(s) for a period of less than 30 days. 
(C)  Performance standards: Development standards for each of the residential districts are listed in Table 5-E, Residential Building Area, Density, and Setback Standards and Table 5-F, Residential Building Coverage and Height Standards. Standards for the RCD, residential community development district, shall be established by specific text approved by the Board of Zoning and Planning for each individual development. 
( Ord. No. 21-2016, § 6, 5-9-2016 ; Ord. No. 38-2018 , § 2, 4-23-2018; Ord. No. 22-2019 , § 3, 4-8-2019) 
§ 5.03 - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS. 
(A)  Purpose: The following generally describes the purpose and general characteristics of each commercial district: 
(1)  B-1 neighborhood business district: The purpose of this district is to allow local retail business or service establishments that supply commodities or perform services needed on a daily basis primarily for residents of the immediate neighborhood. Permitted uses generally include, but are not limited to, personal services, professional offices, coffee shops, barber shops, laundromats, and child day care centers. 
(2)  B-2 community business district: The purpose of this district is to allow retail business or service establishments that supply commodities or perform services needed on a daily basis primarily for residents of the community. Permitted uses generally include, but are not limited to, offices, restaurants, personal services, child day care centers, entertainment, supermarkets, and pharmacies. 
(3)  B-3 conditional business district: The purpose of this district to allow retail, retail service, eating and drinking places, including drive-in carry out and other types of fast food restaurants, automotive service and entertainment and commercial recreation uses. Sexually-oriented businesses are also a permitted use in this district. 
(4)  O office district: The purpose of this district is to allow offices of varying types within the community. Permitted uses in the O district are: professional offices, single occupancy office buildings, and such permitted uses as are set forth or may in the future be set forth in Table 5-C. At least eighty-five percent (85%) of the gross floor area of any building located in an O district shall be exclusively dedicated to one of these permitted uses. The lesser of fifteen percent (15%) of the gross floor area or ten thousand (10,000) square feet of any building located in an O district may be dedicated to secondary conditional uses as listed in Table 5-C. Secondary conditional uses shall be subject to the conditional use review process set forth in UDO Subsection 4.05(F). 
(5)  PB-3 planned shopping center district: The purpose of this district is to allow retail business or service establishments that supply commodities or perform services primarily for residents of the community on a day-to-day basis within an integrated shopping center design. Permitted uses generally include, but are not limited to, retail and personal services, offices, restaurants, child day care centers, department stores, groceries, and supermarkets. The PB3 is a planned district requiring development plan approval. 
(6)  ORC office and research district: The purpose of this district is to allow offices and research facilities that will contribute to the City's physical pattern of planned, healthy, safe, and attractive neighborhoods. The ORC district should also provide job opportunities and services to residents and contribute to the City's economic stability. Permitted uses in the ORC district are: business and professional offices, research and development, book and periodical publishing, insurance carriers, corporate data centers, survey research firms, bank finance and loan offices, outpatient surgery centers, hospitals, and such permitted uses as are set forth or may in the future be set forth in Table 5-C. At least eighty-five percent (85%) of the gross floor area of any building located in an ORC district shall be exclusively dedicated to one of these permitted uses. The lesser of fifteen percent (15%) of the gross floor area or ten thousand (10,000) square feet of any building located in an ORC district may be dedicated to secondary conditional uses as listed in Table 5-C. Secondary conditional uses shall be subject to the conditional use review process set forth in UDO Subsection 4.05(F). 
(B)  Permitted, prohibited and conditional uses: Permitted, prohibited and conditional uses for each of the commercial districts are listed in Table 5-C, Commercial Uses and Table 5-D, Mixed Uses. 
(C)  Development standards: Development standards for each of the commercial districts are listed in Table 5-G, Commercial Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 106-2009; Ord. No. 36-2014) 
§ 5.04 - PLANNED MIXED-USE DISTRICTS. 
(A)  Purpose: It is the purpose and intent of planned use districts to implement the goals, policies, and strategies of the master plan by allowing a mixture of residential, office, and commercial uses in a high quality urban environment. This type of development pattern was recommended in the master plan for seven (7) specific areas of the City. Other areas of the City may be considered for planned mixed-use designation if the development meets the guidelines established in Article 7. These seven (7) areas, or planned mixed use districts as further described in Volume 2: Study Areas Report of the Master Plan, are the following: 
(1)  Kingsdale: The area contains three (3) sub-areas which are demonstrated in the master plan. The Kingsdale Core and Triangle area bounded by Northwest Boulevard, Tremont Road and Zollinger Road containing approximately thirty-eight (38) acres. The Kingsdale West area is generally bounded by Tremont Road, Fishinger Road, Ardleigh Road and Somerford Road. 
(2)  Henderson Road: The area on both sides of Reed Road and south of Henderson Road containing approximately fifty (50) acres. 
(3)  Tremont: The area encompassing a seven-acre commercial center and an 18-acre multi-family site north of the center. 
(4)  Lane Avenue: A predominantly commercial corridor that includes thirty-three (33) acres on both sides of Lane Avenue from North Star Road to Northwest Boulevard. 
(5)  Northwest Boulevard: The area along Northwest Boulevard from Zollinger Road to the Ridgeview Road area containing approximately thirteen (13) acres. 
(6)  U.S. 33: The area along the U.S. 33 corridor and more specifically the area around both the Fishinger Road and Trabue Road intersections with U.S. Route 33. 
(7)  Mallway: The area bounded generally by Arlington Avenue, Guilford Road, Coventry Road, and Waltham Road. 
(B)  Criteria: In order to be eligible for approval under this section, a proposed development must meet all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Design criteria: The property shall be situated within a study area as identified in Volume 2: Study Areas Report of the Master Plan. Each study area shall include: 
(a)  Mixed use centers with vertical and horizontal integration of office, residential, and retail functions. 
(b)  Prominently located civic spaces and uses that also serve as a gathering place for residents and visitors. 
(c)  Increased floor area and higher intensity use of land to create vitality and enhance real property values. 
(d)  Emphasis on office use within a mixed-use district. 
(e)  Enhanced physical image to compliment the character of Upper Arlington's oldest residential neighborhoods. 
(f)  Interconnected uses with pedestrian and vehicular links to adjacent neighborhoods. 
(g)  Demonstrated consistency with the design guidelines outlined in Article 7. 
(2)  Focus: The proposed development shall, in general, be consistent with the master plan recommendations for each study area, shall have a strong pedestrian orientation, and shall be of overall economic and aesthetic benefit to the community. The design of each development shall also adhere to the following recommended focus: 
(a)  Kingsdale: Town center with a mix of uses including office, retail, residential, and civic. 
(b)  Henderson Road: Regional office corridor with a supporting mix of uses. 
(c)  Lane Avenue: Mixed-use corridor with office emphasis, improved streetscape, and gateway treatment. 
(d)  Tremont: Neighborhood center with retail, office, and residential. 
(e)  Northwest Boulevard: Mixed-use corridor with office and residential. 
(f)  U.S. 33: Improved design character, especially at key intersections. 
(g)  Mallway: Neighborhood center with retail, office and civic uses. 
(3)  Timing: It is expected that individual development projects will only address one (1) geographic portion of a planned mixed-use district (PMUD). In those areas, the development should address the City's intent for a particular PMUD, but it may propose a portion of a PMUD that fits within the overall concept and the study area plan. 
(C)  Permitted and conditional uses: Permitted, prohibited and conditional uses for the mixed-use districts are listed in Table 5-D, Mixed Uses. 
(D)  Development standards: Development standards for each of the commercial districts are listed in Table 5-G, Commercial Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 106-2009) 
§ 5.05 - OVERLAY DISTRICTS. 
(A)  Wireless Communication District: The purpose of this section is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public while not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunication market place through the establishment of requirements for the installation of wireless telecommunication facilities. The goals of this Ordinance are to: 
(1)  Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas. 
(2)  Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community. 
(3)  Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional single use towers. 
(4)  Encourage users of the towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal. 
(5)  Ensure that users of towers and antennas configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques. 
(6)  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
(7)  Consider the public health and safety of communication towers. 
(8)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. 
(B)  Historic District: The purpose of this section is to preserve and protect the architectural character, history and significance of the buildings within the Upper Arlington Historic District through provisions designed to: 
(1)  Establish guidelines and encourage sensible rehabilitation of buildings within the Historic District. 
(2)  Ensure that the Historic District maintains its historic architectural character in Upper Arlington into the future. 
(3)  Ensure that new additions and remodeling are compatible with the neighborhood. 
(4)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from the removal of an irreplaceable asset. 
(5)  Provide a public procedure for a historic demolition. 
(Ord. No. 96-2010, 3-16-2011) 
§ 5.06 - OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. 
(A)  Official zoning map adopted: All land in the municipality is placed into zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map that is hereby adopted and declared to be part of the UDO. 
(1)  Final authority: The official zoning map, as amended from time to time, shall complement appropriate legislation as the final authority for the current zoning district status of land under the jurisdiction of the UDO. 
(2)  Land not otherwise designated: All land under the UDO and not designated or otherwise included within another zoning district map shall be included in the R-S, suburban residential district. 
(B)  Identification of the official zoning district map: The official zoning map, with any amendments made thereon, shall be identified by the signatures of the mayor and all members of City Council under the following words: 
Official Zoning District Map, Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
Adopted by the City Council, Upper Arlington, Ohio. 
Date           President of Council 
___________ 
___________ 
___________ 
___________ 
___________ 
___________ 
(C)  Establishment of zoning districts: The names and symbols for zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map are as follows: 
Residential Districts R-S Residential suburban district R-1 One-family residence district R-2 One-to-four-family residence district R-3 Multi-family residence district RCD Residential community development district Commercial Districts B-1 Neighborhood business district B-2 Community business district B-3 Conditional business district O Office district ORC Office and research district Planned Districts PMUD Planned mixed-use district PB-3 Planned shopping center district Overlay Districts HD Historic district WCD Wireless communications district  
(D)  Legend and use of color or patterns: There shall be provided on the official zoning map a legend which shall list the name and symbol for each zoning district. In lieu of a symbol, a color or black and white pattern may be used on the official zoning map to identify each zoning district as indicated in the legend. 
(E)  Interpretation of zoning district boundaries: The boundaries of the zoning districts are shown upon the official zoning map. The official zoning map and all notations, references, and other information are a part of the UDO. A certified copy of the official zoning map shall be kept on file with the City Clerk. 
(F)  Rules for determination: When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Along a street or other right-of-way: Where zoning district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following a center line of a street or highway, alley, railroad easement, or other right-of-way, or a river, creek, or other watercourse, such centerline shall be the zoning district boundary. 
(2)  Along a property line: Where zoning district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following a lot line, such lot line shall be the zoning district boundary. 
(3)  Parallel to right-of-way or property line: Where zoning district boundary lines are indicated as approximately being parallel to a centerline or a property line, such zoning district boundary lines shall be parallel to a centerline or a property line and, in the absence of a specified dimension on the official zoning map. 
(4)  Actual conflict with map: When the actual street or lot layout existing on the ground is in conflict with that shown on the official zoning map, the party alleging that such conflict exists shall furnish an actual survey for interpretation by the Director of Community Development. 
(5)  Right-of-way vacation: Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended district or districts. 
Table 5-A: Residential Uses 
R-S R-1 R-2 R-3 RCD Adult Group Homes (six to 16 adults) Pr Pr Pr Pr P Adult Family Home (three to five adults) P P P P P Agricultural Uses P 2 Pr Pr Pr Pr Antenna and Antenna Towers a a a a a Cemeteries C C C C C Clubs/Organizations Pr Pr C C C Country Club, Private P P P P P Decks a a a a a Dish-Type Antennas a a a a a Dish-Type Satellite Antennas a a a a a Dwelling, Four-Family Pr Pr P P P Dwelling, Multi-Family Pr Pr Pr P P Dwelling, Single-Family P P P Pr P Dwelling, Three-Family Pr Pr P P P Dwelling, Two-Family Pr C P P P Elderly Housing Pr Pr Pr C C Essential Services P P P P P Funeral Homes Pr Pr Pr Pr C Home, Type A Day Care P Pr Pr P P Home, Type B Day Care P P P P P Home Occupations 1 Home Sales a a a a a Hospitals C Pr Pr Pr C Hotels and Motels Pr Pr Pr Pr C Hot Tubs & Jacuzzis a a a a a Hotels and Motels C C C C C In-law Suite a a a a a Libraries P P P P P Mechanical Devices a a a a a Open Sided Structure a a a a a Park P P P P P Parking of Motor Vehicles a a a a a Parking Lot, Structured - Aboveground Pr Pr C C C Parking Lot, Structured - Underground Pr C C C C Parking Lot, Surface Pr C C C C Parking of Recreational Vehicles, Watercraft, and Trailers a a a a a Parking of Trucks and Trailers a a a a a Pet Shelters a a a a a Places of Worship or Churches P P P P P Playhouses a a a a a Playground, Public P P P P P Recreation Center, Public P P P P P Private Schools P P P P P Public Schools P P P P P Storage Structures and Buildings a a a a a Swimming Pools, Private a a a a a Swimming Pools, Public C C C C C Tennis Courts, Private A A A A A Tennis Courts, Public C C C C C Utility Structures C C C C C  
KEY: P=Permitted Use, C=Conditional Use, Pr=Prohibited Use, A=Accessory Use 
1 =Home occupations' - See Table 5-B 
2 =Permitted on property zoned R-5 with not less than 5 acres. 
Table 5-B: Home Occupations 
KEY: P=Permitted Use, C=Conditional Use, Pr=Prohibited Use, A=Accessory Use 
Section 1.01 Home Occupations Status Aerobics with no more than 2 students at one time P Ambulance service Pr Animal hospitals Pr Architectural services P Art restoration P Art studio (non-teaching) P Automotive repair, parts sales, upholstery, or detailing or washing service Pr Bakeries using equipment which is not normally associated with residential cooking Pr Beauty salons and barbershops Pr Brokers P Ceramics (kiln of four cubic feet or more) Pr Daycare, adult P Daycare, child, Type A Pr Daycare, child, Type B P Clinics or hospitals Pr Computer programming P Consulting services P Crafts P Dance teachers with no more than 2 students at one time P Dancing schools with more than 2 students present at the same time Pr Data processing P Dental offices Pr Dental technician with laboratory P Desktop publishing P Direct sale product distribution P Drafting and graphic services P Dressmaking P Editing and writing P Electronic assembly P Engineering service P Financial planning and investment services P Fine arts education in music, painting, sculpture, and drawing P Flower arranging P Furniture repair P General business office P Health salons, gyms, dance studios, aerobic exercise studios, massage therapists with more than 2 clients/customers present at the same time Pr House cleaning business P Insurance agents P Interior design P Internet-based business P Jeweler P Jewelry making P Landscape maintenance service Pr Laundry and/or ironing service P Lawyers P Licensed massage therapists P Limousine service Pr Locksmith P Manufacturer's representative P Massage parlors Pr Medical offices Pr Millinery P Ministers, Rabbis, Priests, or members or religions orders P Mortuaries Pr Office facility of sales representative P Painting of vehicles trailers or boats Pr Private clubs Pr Private schools with organized classes Pr Radio repair P Real estate sales or broker P Renting of trailers and other equipment Pr Repair shops or service establishments, except the repair of electrical appliances, typewriters, cameras, or other similar small items Pr Restaurants Pr Retail uses involving the sale of goods or articles individually or in quantity directly to the consumer Pr Secretarial services P Security service P Sewing, tailoring, contract sewing P Small appliance repair P Small engine repair Pr Software development P Stables or kennels Pr Telephone services P Tow truck service Pr Tutoring with no more than 2 students at one time P Typing and/or word processing P Upholstery P Wallpapering P Watch repair P Welding Pr Writing or editing P  
Table 5-C: Commercial Uses 
Commercial Use B-1 B-2 B-3 PB-3 O ORC Adult Book Stores Pr Pr P Pr Pr Pr Adult Motion Picture Theaters Pr Pr P Pr Pr Pr Adult Only Entertainment Establishments Pr Pr P Pr Pr Pr Amusement Arcades Pr Pr P Pr Pr Pr Animal Boarding Pr P Pr P Pr Pr Appliance, Plumbing & Heating Establishments P P P P Pr Pr Automotive Service Establishments Pr P P Pr Pr Pr Banks, Finance & Loan Offices P P P P P P Bank Retail P P P P S S Barber Shops & Beauty Parlors P P P P S S Big Box Retail Pr Pr P Pr Pr Pr Bowling Alleys Pr P P P Pr Pr Business & Professional Offices P P P P P P Candy Stores P P P P Pr Pr Carpenter Shops Pr P P Pr Pr Pr Child Day Care Centers P P P P C Pr Coffee Shops P P P P S S Pool or Billiard Rooms Pr C P Pr Pr Pr Corporate Data Centers Pr Pr Pr Pr P P Dancing Studios C P P P Pr Pr Department Stores Pr P P P Pr Pr Drive Through Carry Outs C C C C C Pr Drug Stores P P P P Pr Pr Dry Cleaning Shops P P P P Pr Pr Dry Goods & Apparel Stores P P P P Pr Pr Electronic & Text Information Retrieval Services Pr Pr Pr P P P Fast Food Restaurants Pr C P Pr Pr Pr Funeral Homes P P P P Pr Pr Furniture & Appliance Stores P P P P Pr Pr Furniture Upholstering P P P P Pr Pr Grocery & Supermarket P P P P Pr Pr Hotels/Motels Pr Pr P Pr C P Hospitals Pr Pr P C C C Insurance Carriers P P P P P P Interior Decorating Shops P P P P Pr Pr Laundromats P P P P Pr Pr Liquor Stores P P P P Pr Pr Luxury Retail P P P P S S Mail Order Houses Pr P P P Pr Pr Massage Parlors Pr Pr P Pr Pr Pr Meat & Fruit Market P P P P Pr Pr Motor Vehicle Wash Facilities Pr Pr P Pr Pr Pr Movie Theaters Pr C P Pr Pr Pr Night Clubs Pr Pr P Pr Pr Pr Outpatient Surgery Centers Pr Pr Pr Pr C P Package Shipment Service P P P P S S Parking Lot, Structured - Aboveground C C C C C C Parking Lot Structures - Underground C C C C C C Parking Lot Surface C C C C C C Periodicals and Book Publishing Pr Pr Pr Pr P P Pharmacies P P P P S S Pharmacies with Drive-Through Pr Pr P P Pr Pr Photographic Studios P P P P Pr Pr Places of Worship, Churches P P Pr P C C Printing Pr P P Pr Pr Pr Radio & TV Studios Pr P P Pr Pr Pr Research & Development in Information Technologies Pr Pr Pr Pr C P Research & Development in Special Technologies Pr Pr Pr Pr C P Residential C Pr Pr Pr S S Restaurant & Accessory Cocktail Lounge C P P P S S Restaurants C P P P S S Restaurants with Entertainment or Dancing Pr P P P Pr Pr Satellite Ground Stations C C P P C Pr Shoe Repair & Tailor P P P P S S Skating Rinks Pr P P Pr Pr Pr Soda Fountains P P P Pr Pr Pr Survey Research Finns Pr Pr Pr Pr P P Tattoo parlor or Body-piercing studio Pr Pr C Pr Pr Pr Variety Stores P P P P Pr Pr  
P=Permitted Use, C=Conditional Use, Pr=Prohibited Use, A=Accessory Use 
S=Secondary Conditional Use 
Table 5-D: Mixed Uses 
Planned Mixed Use Planned Mixed Use Districts Kingsdale Tremont Northwest Boulevard Mallway Henderson Road Lane
Avenue Route 33 Residential Uses Multi Family Residential (senior housing, townhouse, condominiums, apartments, second story units, flex units) P P P P P P C Residential/Commercial Uses Commercial Uses Daycare- P P P P P P P Live/Work Units P P P Pr P P P Lodging and Hotel P Pr Pr Pr P P P Administrative & Office, Community Scale P P P C P P P Administrative & Office, Neighborhood Scale P P P P P P P Automotive Service and Repair Pr Pr Pr Pr C C C Drive-Thru Uses Pr Pr Pr Pr C C C Drive-Thru Uses, rear and side only C C C Pr C C C Eating/Drinking Establishments (including microbreweries and microwineries) and Outdoor Dining. P P P P P P P Entertainment-Movie theaters, theaters P Pr Pr Pr P P P Financial Services (banks, savings and loans and credit unions) P P P P P P P Funeral Homes C Pr Pr Pr Pr Pr Pr In Between Gathering Place (coffee bar, pub, exercise clubs, corner store) P P P P P P P Office Related Goods and Services (mail center, office supplies, reproduction, conference center) P P C C P P P Personal Services P P P P P P P Other Uses Parking Lot Structured - Aboveground P P P C P P C Parking Lot Structured - Underground P P P C P P C Parking, Surface P P P P P P P Public and Institutional (community center, post office, library, educational) P P P P P P P Transit Stop P P P P P P P Retail Convenience Retail P P P P P P P Neighborhood Scale P P P P P P P Community Scale A P P P C P P P Community Scale B C C C Pr C C C Community Scale C C C C Pr C C C Big Box Retail, single-story C Pr Pr Pr C Pr Pr Big Box Retail, multi-story C C C Pr C C C P=Permitted Use, C=Conditional Use, Pr=Prohibited Use  
Table 5-E: Residential Building Area, Density and Setback Standards 
Zone standards
District Stories Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Maximum Density Min. Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Feet

R-Sa N/A 130,680 130,680 0.33 150 80 20 40 
R-Sb N/A 87,120 87,120 0.5 150 60 20 40 
R-Sc N/A 43,560 43,560 1 150 40 12 30 
R-Sd N/A 21,780 21,780 2 125 40 12 30 
R-1a 2.5 15,000 15,000 2.9 90 40 10 20 
R-1b 2.5 12,000 12,000 3.63 90 40 10 20 
R-1c 2.5 9,000 9,000 4.84 75 40 10 20 
R-2a 2.5 9,000 9,000 4.84 75 40 8 20
R-2b 2.5 9,000 4,500 9.68 75 40 8 20 
R-2c 2.5 12,000 4,000 10.89 75 40 10 22
R-2d 2.5 16,000 4,000 10.89 75 40 10 22
R-2e 2.5 12,000 3,000 14.52 100 40 12 28
R-3A 2.5 9,000 9,000 4.84 75 40 8 16 
R-3B 2.5 9,000 4,500 9.68 75 40 8 16  
R-3C 2.5 12,000 3,000 10.89 100 40 10 28
R-3D 2.5 N/A 4,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 
R-4A 1.5 9,000 9,000 4.84 75 40 8 20
R-4B 1.5 9,000 4,500 9.68 75 40 8 20
R-4C 3.5 10,000 4,000 10.89 100 10 22 
R-4D 3.5 18,000 3,000 14.52 100 40 12 28

Notes:
See Article 2, Profile Coefficient Definition 
2 Dimension Stated, or 1/4 of the lot depth, whichever is less 
3 OPU is Other Permitted Uses 
4 For elevations longer than 40 feet, see Article 2, Side Yard Increased. 
Table 5-F: Residential Building Coverage and Height Standards 
Building Coverage District Number of Floors Detached Garage Bldg. Cover Limit as a % of TLA 1,2 Accessory Bldg. Cover Limit as a % of TLA 2 Building Cover Limit As % of TLA 2 3 Dev. Cover Limit as % of TLA 2,5,6 Swimming Pool in Addition to Dev. Cover as % of TLA 2 Building Height Principal Building 7 Detached Garage R-S R-Sa 0.88% 0.11% 10% 15% 2% 35 17 OPU 3 0.88% 0.11% 6% 60% 2% Churches' NA NA NA 50% 0% R-Sb 1.32% 0.17% 10% 15% 3% 35 17 OPU' 0.88% 0.11% 6% 60% 2% Churches' NA NA NA 50% 0% R-Sc 2.64% 0.34% 15% 25% 4% 35 17 OPU' 0.88% 0.11% 5% 60% 1% Churches' NA NA NA 50% 0% R-Sd 3.97% 0.69% 20% 30% 5% 35 17 OPU' 0.66% 0.11% 3% 60% 1% Churches' NA NA NA 50% 0% R-1 Churches' 1 to 2.5 NA NA NA 50% 0% 50 17 R-1a 1&1.5 5.76% 1.00% 25% 40% 5% 35 17 2&2.5 OPU' 1&1.5 2.16% 0.38% 60% 2&2.5 R-1b 1&1.5 7.20% 1.25% 27% 40% 5% 35 17 2&2.5 OPU' 1&1.5 2.16% 0.38% 60% 2&2.5 R-1c interior lot >=75 width 6.39% 1.67% 29% 
0% 45% 5% 35' unless in the River Ridge Addition (extended) where a 28' limit exists. All building heights are subject to neighborhood compatibility standards in Article 7.17 17 pre-1995 corner lot >=75 width pre-1995 corner lot <75 width 5% pre-1962 <75 width 50% pre-1962 <=60 width 7.00% OPU 3 1&1.5 1.44% 0.38% 60% 5% 2&2.5 R-2 R-2a 1 Family 1&1.5 6.39% 1.67% 20% 35% 5% 35 17 2&2.5 2 Family 1&1.5 12.78% 38% 55% 0% 2&2.5 18% 50% 3 Family 1&1.5 14.38% 1.25% 35% 55% 2&2.5 19% 50% 4 Family 1&1.5 0.94% 30% 55% 2&2.5 15% 50% <2 BR 1 to 2.5 9.60% 1.25% 10% 50% OPU 1 to 2.5 0.75% 20% 60% R-2b Same as R-2a, except principal building height 
permitted 22 17 R-3 R-3a 1 Family 1&1.5 6.39% 1.67% 20% 35% 5% 35 17 2&2.5 2 Family 1&1.5 12.78% NA 55% 0% 2&2.5 50% Multi Family 1&1.5 14.38% 1.25% 55% 2&2.5 50% <2 BR NA NA 50% NA NA OPU 3 1 to 2.5 4.17% 60% R-3b 1 Family 1&1.5 6.39% 1.67% 20% 35% 5% 40 25 2&2.5 2 Family 1&1.5 12.78% NA 55% 0% 2&2.5 50% Multi Family 1&1.5 14.38% 1.50% 55% 2&2.5 50% 3&3.5 <2 BR 1 to 3.5 9.60% 0.83% 50% OPU 3 1 to 2.5 NA 1.50% 60%  
1 In no case shall a detached garage exceed 870 square feet. 
2 TLA is Total Land Area any new cover request that results in equivalent or less 
3 OPU is Other Permitted Uses cover for sites currently exceeding permissible limits. 
4 Excepting steeples which may go to a height of 60 feet. 
5 Not more than 25% of the required front yard may be occupied by development cover, unless the use is an OPU, in which case 60% cover shall be permitted. 
6 The Director of Community Development may administratively approve any new cover request that results in equivalent or less cover for sites currently exceeding permissible limits. 
7 The maximum permitted height for properties located in the River Ridge Addition (extended) shall not exceed 28 feet in height. All building heights are subject to neighborhood compatibility standards in Article 7.17. 
TLA is Total Land Area 
Table 5-G: Commercial Development Standards 
District Building Setback Minimum Side Yard (Feet) Minimum Rear Yard (Feet) Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage (Percent) Minimum Lot Area Maximum from Curb Face 1 (Feet) Minimum from R.O.W. (Feet) Maximum from R.O.W. (Feet) Commercial/Office Districts B-1 15 0 10 10 10 80 NA B-2 15 0 10 10 10 80 NA B-3 15 0 10 10 10 80 NA PB-3 20 0 10 50 50 80 10 acres O 20 0 10 15 40 80 20,000 sq. ft. ORC 20 0 10 25 25 80 5 acres Planned Mixed Use Districts Kingsdale 15 0 10 0 2 0 90 3 acres Kingsdale West 15 0 10 0 2 0 90 1 acre Tremont 15 0 10 0 2 0 80 2 acre Northwest Blvd 15 0 10 0 2 0 80 2 acre Mallway 15 0 10 0 2 0 90 1 acre Henderson Road 20 0 10 0 2 0 80 3 acres Lane Avenue 20 0 10 0 2 0 80 1 acre Route 33 20 0 10 0 2 0 80 1 acre 1 If the maximum building setback from the curb is within the existing right-of-way, then the setback shall not exceed 10 feet or the maximum setback from the right-of-way for each district. 2 Adjacent to a different zoning category, the setback shall incorporate the adjacent setback up to six (6) feet.  
District Minimum to Maximum Floor Area Ratio Minimum Building Frontage (percent) Maximum Block Length (feet) Maximum Height to Cornice 4 (feet) Maximum Parking Ratio Minimum Residential Density (units per acre) Non-residential Spaces/sq. ft. Residential Spaces/Dwelling Unit Commercial/Office Districts B-1 .50-.75 60 400 30' * 5 * 5 NA B-2 .60-.75 70 400 30' * 5 * 5 NA B-3 .75-.80 75 400 35' * 5 * 5 NA PB-3 .75-.90 80 400 35' * 5 * 5 NA O .50-.75 60 400 40' * 5 * 5 NA ORC .50-.75 60 400 * 3 * 5 * 5 NA Planned Mixed Use Districts Kingsdale .45-.75 45 400 96' 4/1000 1.5 15 Kingsdale West .40- .70 60 400 48' 3.5/1000 1.5 15 Tremont .35-.70 60 400 48' 3.5/1000 1.5 15 Northwest Blvd .35-.70 60 400 48' 3.5/1000 1.5 15 Mallway .35-.70 60 400 48' 3/1000 1.5 15 Henderson Road .35-.85 60 400 96' 5/1000 2.5 15 Lane Avenue .35-.70 60 400 48' 
Up to 96' for properties east of North Star Road which provide an appropriate transition approved by BZAP Minimum 3/1000 for office, 4/1000 for retail, 5/1000 for medical office, and 7/1000 for restaurant 1.5 15 Route 33 .35-.70 60 400 54' 3.5/1000 1.5 15 3 Height determined as part of the Major Site Plan. 5 Parking ratios applicable to a specific use, refer to the Parking and Loading Standards, Section 6.03. *Additional parking for medical office and restaurant uses up to 5/1000 SF is permitted ^Additional shared parking arrangements required for banquet halls and restaurant uses required. Proper enforcement language must be included. Hotels require a minimum of one space per room plus one space per employee. Uses not included require a minimum parking ratio of 3.5/1000 SF.  
( Ord. No. 62-2015, § 4, 11-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 21-2016, §§ 7, 8, 5-9-2016 ; Ord. No. 54-2017 , §§ 14, 15, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 38-2018 , § 3, 4-23-2018; Ord. No. 50-2018 , § 3, 7-9-2018; Ord. No. 22-2019 , § 3, 4-8-2019) 
ARTICLE 6. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

§ 6.01 - LOT ARRANGEMENT AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS. 
(A)  Purpose: The purpose of this section is to regulate the arrangement of lots and building heights within a subdivision and to ensure that lot and height dimensions are consistent with the appropriate zoning district standards. 
(B)  Lots: All lots shall front onto a public or private road, and all lots shall conform to or exceed the requirements of the UDO and the zoning district regulations for the district in which they are located. The following regulations shall govern the design and layout of lots and lot improvements: 
(1)  Lot arrangement: The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with health and building regulations and in providing approved driveway access to buildings on the lots from an approved road. 
(2)  Lot dimensions: All lots shall comply with the standards of Table 5-E for residential uses and Table 5-G for commercial uses. 
(3)  Future subdivision lots: Where lots are more than double the minimum required area, BZAP may require that those lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve potential lots, all in compliance with the UDO. 
(4)  Side lot lines: In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule is approved by BZAP when such variance will give a better street or lot plan. 
(5)  Corner lots: Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for the construction of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback from both streets. 
(6)  Building setback - Residential districts: The building setback line shall be established from the edge of the right-of-way or the edge of an access easement. It shall be equal to the building setbacks listed in Table 5-E unless otherwise platted, in which case the platted setback shall take precedence as the minimum standard. The setbacks in the RCD, Residential Community Development District, shall be established by development standards approved by the Board of Zoning and Planning and City Council, and shall take precedence in all cases over the platted setback. 
Building setback - Commercial, office and planned mixed use districts: The building setback line shall be established from the edge of the right-of-way or the edge of an access easement. It shall be equal to the building setbacks listed in Table 5-G and shall take precedence in all cases over the platted setback. 
(7)  Commercial and mixed uses: Depth and width of lots reserved or laid out for commercial and/or mixed use purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated. 
(8)  Depth-to-width ratio: No lot shall have an average depth, which is more than 4.5 times its average width. However, BZAP or the Director of Community Development as appropriate may permit a waiver of this recommended standard, permitting the lot depth to be up to 3.5 times the average width. 
(9)  Double frontage lots: In general, double frontage lots and reversed frontage lots should be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation, as determined by BZAP or the Director of Community Development as appropriate. 
As to lots included in any plat approved by the BZAP and accepted by Council after April 1, 1960, the required depth of the front yard shall be the distance between the street right-of-way line and the setback line shown on the plat, if less than forty (40) feet. As to any lots in any recorded plat which has greater restrictions than are required under this prdinance, then these recorded restrictions shall apply and the Board shall have no authority to grant variances therefrom. 
For corner lots where the side yard abuts a street, the platted setback and not the side yard setback required within a specific zoning district, shall prevail. If there is no platted setback, then the minimum side yard setback shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(10)  Lot frontage: A lot shall front onto an improved public or private road. Lot frontage is measured at the right-of-way line. 
(11)  Side yard modification: Beginning at the front face on the building, each side yard, where required, shall be increased in width by two (2) inches for each foot by which the elevation length of the building, adjacent to the side yard, exceeds forty (40) feet. Adjacent in this context means any portion of the side wall that is closer to the side property line than twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot width at the place of measurement. In no case, other than corner lots shall the total elevation length of the side wall of a principal structure exceed fifty percent (50%) of the average lot depth, or the depth. 

(a) This example illustrates how the side yard is modified as an extension is added to an existing home.
(12)  Rear and side yard computation: In computing the depth of a rear yard or the width of a side yard, where the rear or side yard abuts an alley, one-half (1/2) of the width of the alley may be included as a portion of the required rear or side yard, as the case may be. However, in no event shall any building or structure be erected closer than five (5) feet from any lot line, except accessory buildings. 
(C)  Height modifications: The height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this Ordinance shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Places of public assembly: Places of public assembly in churches, schools and other permitted public and semi-public buildings, provided that these are located on the first floor of such buildings and provided that for each three (3) feet by which the height of such building exceeds the maximum height otherwise permitted in the district, its side and rear yards shall be increased in width or depth by an additional foot over the side and rear yards required for the highest building otherwise permitted in the district. 
(D)  Yard projections in R-districts: Certain architectural features may project into required yards or courts as follows: 
Architectural Feature Front Yards Side Yards Along a Side Street Lot Line Interior Side Yards Rear Yards Cornices, Canopies, Eaves, or Similar Architectural Roof Projections May project up to 2' May project up to 2' May project up to 1/5 the required least width, not to exceed 3' May project up to 2' Entrance Platforms/Porches May project up to 5'; subject to the limitations in footnote 1 below May project up to 5' subject to the limitations in footnote 1 below May project up to 1/5 the required least width, not to exceed 3' subject to the limitations in footnote 1 below May project up to 5' subject to the limitations in footnote 1 Cantilevered Window Wall Projections such as, but not limited to, Bay, Bow, and Box Windows For yards that are platted, unless otherwise permitted by the terms of the plat or deed restriction, no projection permitted. For unplatted yards and platted yards which permit encroachments but do not specify sizes, these architectural features may project up to 2' not to exceed 8' in width No projections permitted No projections permitted May project up to 2', not to exceed 8' wide Chimneys No projection permitted No projection permitted May project up to 1/5 the required least width, not to exceed thirty inches subject to the limitations in footnote 2 No projection permitted Basement Egress Window Projection permitted Projection permitted Projection permitted Projection permitted Carport Enclosure (with no footprint changes or additional story in the River Ridge Addition only) No projection permitted No projection permitted Projection permitted when compatible with the principal residence and screening is provided No projection permitted Footnote 1:  An entrance platform may encroach as noted in the table above if not exceeding a width of ten feet and not exceeding a height of two feet above the finished grade of the lot. Footnote 2:  In the R-S and R-1 zoning districts only, a chimney, built as part of and serving the principal residence, may project as noted in the table above if not exceeding eight feet in width.  
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 44-2016 , § 3, 10-24-2016; Ord. No. 16-2017 , § 5, 4-10-2017; Ord. No. 35-2018 , § 3, 5-29-2018) 
§ 6.02 - TRANSPORTATION STANDARDS. 
(A)  Purpose: The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade construction and location of all roads shall conform to the Upper Arlington Thoroughfare Plan or subsequent amendments, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relations to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, and for the efficient provision of utilities and/or where such continuation is in accordance with the master plan. The street pattern shall discourage traffic through the interior of a subdivision. The developer/subdivider shall provide within the boundaries of the subdivision plat, the necessary right-of-way for the widening, continuance or alignment of such streets in conformity with the thoroughfare portions of the thoroughfare plan. 
(B)  General design standards: In addition to the requirements established herein, the standards for the design and construction of all streets and roads are as detailed by the City Engineer. 
(1)  Classification: All roads shall be classified as arterial, collector, or local. In classifying roads, the City shall consider projected traffic demands after twenty (20) years of development. 
(2)  Level of service: No development shall be approved if such development, at full occupancy, will result in or increase traffic on an arterial or collector so that the street does not function at a level of service of C or better as defined by the "Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE)". The applicant may propose and construct approved traffic mitigation measures to provide adequate roadway capacity for the proposed development. The applicant shall refer to the City's access management policy and/or a recommendation of the City Engineer to determine if a traffic impact analysis is required. 
(3)  Grading and improvement plan: Roads shall be graded, improved and conform to city standards and specifications, and shall be approved as to design and specifications by the City Engineer in accordance with construction plans required to be submitted prior to final plat approval. The entire existing road frontage shall be graded to a typical section approved by the City Engineer. For all public or private roads including local roads in subdivisions, the City Engineer shall determine design and specifications. 
(4)  Arrangement: All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of major thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as established in the thoroughfare plan. All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses. Appropriate street patterns include rectangular gridiron, curvilinear streets, U-shaped or loop streets and a limited number of cul-de-sacs may be permitted where such use will result in a more desirable layout. Proposed street rights-of-way shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other extreme physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of BZAP such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. 
(5)  Blocks: The arrangement of blocks shall be such as to conform to the street planning criteria set forth herein and shall be arranged to accommodate lots and building sites of the size and character required as set forth in the UDO and to provide for the required community facilities. Irregularly shaped blocks, those intended for cul-de-sacs or loop streets, and those containing interior parks or playgrounds, may be approved by BZAP if properly designed and located and if maintenance of the interior public spaces is covered by a Homeowners Association. Block length shall be consistent with the master plan and study area plans. However, no blocks shall be longer than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet and the block width shall accommodate two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted under special circumstances only where blocks are adjacent to major streets, railroads or waterways or where unusual topography or other exceptional physical circumstances exist. 
(6)  Topography: Roads shall be related appropriately to the topography. Local streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to the topography to discourage use by unrelated through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property. Streets serving business developments and accessory parking areas shall be planned to connect with arterial or collector streets so as not to generate through traffic on local residential streets. The intersections of driveways from parking areas with arterial or collector streets shall be located so as to cause the least interference with traffic movement in the streets, and shall be located not less than one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way line at the intersection of an arterial or collector street with any other street, and shall be spaced not less than two hundred (200) feet from each other unless a more significant spacing is required by the access management policy or in the opinion of the City Engineer. 
(7)  Commercial subdivisions and mixed-use developments: In commercial and mixed-use developments, the streets and other access ways shall be planned in connection with the groupings of buildings, and the provision of alleys, truck loading, maneuvering areas, walks, and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian. The intersections of service streets from parking areas with arterial or collector streets shall not be less than fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way line at the intersection of the arterial or collector street with any other street unless a more significant spacing is required by city's access management policy or in the opinion of the City Engineer. Street rights-of-way shall be planned to be extended to the boundaries of any adjoining land planned for commercial development, except for severe physical conditions or if BZAP finds such extension is not in accordance with the approved plans of the area. 
(8)  Road names: The preliminary plan shall include proposed names for all streets, which shall be reviewed and approved by BZAP prior to submittal of the preliminary plan. The developer/subdivider shall also consult with the postmaster prior to selecting names. Final road names shall be shown on the preliminary plan and final plat. The following criteria shall be used in naming streets: 
(a)  Names shall be sufficiently different in sound and spelling from other road names in the City so as not to cause confusion. Proposed street names should not duplicate existing street names of record in the emergency response district, unless they are extensions; 
(b)  Where feasible, road names should bear a relationship to the subdivision name; and 
(c)  Road names shall be continuous the entire length of the road. 
(9)  Street lights: Installation of street lights shall be required at key intersections in major subdivisions and at the entrance of subdivisions. Street light posts, if located in the right-of-way, shall be of a breakaway design unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. In the planned mixed-use district, street lights shall be provided in all streets and drives. 
(10)  Stub streets and culs-de-sac: If a street must be a temporary dead-end and the adjacent property is undeveloped, the rights-of-way shall be extended to the property line. In all cases, temporary dead ends or cul-de-sacs shall conform to the design requirements for a permanent turnaround. If the temporary dead-end is not to be used for a period in excess of eighteen (18) months and is within four hundred (400) feet of an intersection, a T-type turnaround shall be used if so approved by the City Engineer. 
Where a road does not extend to the boundary line of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by BZAP or Director of Community Development as appropriate for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than fifty (50) feet. However, BZAP or Director of Community Development as appropriate may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of all permanent turnarounds. For greater convenience to traffic, more effective police and fire protection, and efficiency of road maintenance, permanent cul-de-sacs shall be limited to a maximum length of eight hundred (800) feet or serving twenty (20) dwelling units, whichever is larger, however, in no instance shall a cul-de-sac exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet in length. 
The preferred cul-de-sac design is circular. Landscaped islands are strongly preferred over paved islands and should be dedicated to an existing or proposed Homeowners Association for ownership and maintenance. Circular culs-de-sac should be designed with twenty-seven-foot four and one-half-inch inside radius, and a forty-six-foot one-inch outside pavement radius if an island is included. 

Cul-de-Sac Islands
As an option to a standard cul-de-sac, a one-way fifteen-foot wide circular lane can be used if approved by BZAP or Director of Community Development as appropriate. Such an approach is advisable when an outstanding natural feature exists in the location of a proposed cul-de-sac, such as a mature stand of trees or a pond. The lane must be shown on the preliminary plan, placed in a public right-of-way and a cross section provided for review and approval by the City Engineer. 
(11)  Traffic calming: In all cases developers/subdividers should design local streets within subdivisions to slow traffic to protect public safety. Local streets shall be designed to accommodate a maximum twenty-five (25) miles per hour speed limit. Traffic calming devices shall meet the design requirements of the City Engineer. 
(12)  Frontage on an approved road: No subdivision (major or minor) shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage as required herein on an existing road or a street shown upon a plat recorded in the county recorder's office, or an approved access easement as permitted herein. Such public road, street or highway must be suitably improved by the developer as approved. In situations with poor site distance and to ensure appropriate access, cross access easements may be permitted. 
(13)  Access limitations: Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing arterial or proposed arterial road, BZAP or Director of Community Development may require that access to such streets be limited by one of the following means: 
(a)  Access: The subdivision of lots so as to back onto the primary arterial and front onto a parallel local street; no access shall be provided from the primary arterial, and screening shall be provided in a strip along the rear property line of such lots within a landscape easement. 
(b)  Streets: A series of U-shaped streets, short loops or culs-de-sac entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the major arterial. 
(c)  Service road: A marginal access or service road (separated from the primary arterial by a planting or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable points). 
(14)  Access points in major subdivisions: In all major subdivisions designed to accommodate more than twenty-five (25) dwelling units, there shall be at least two (2) exclusive streets existing or created to have access in and out of the subdivision to the existing street system for fire and police protection purposes. Larger subdivisions may be required by BZAP to have a proportionately greater number of such access points to ensure adequate and reasonable police and fire accessibility. 
(15)  Private roads: As an alternative to publicly dedicated roads, private roads may be provided with the approval of BZAP. Such private roads shall be placed in private right-of-way on the final plat. The design of private roads shall be reviewed by the City Engineer, but construction and maintenance shall be the responsibility of the developer/subdivider and future homeowners. Private roads may be designed to a pavement width of not less than eighteen (18) feet, but shall meet the same cross section standards as public roads. Private roads should be designed to accommodate a twenty-five (25) miles per hour design speed. The final plat shall not be recorded until a professional civil engineer versed in subdivision development has provided documentation approving the installation of the roadway(s) as provided in the reviewed plans. Pre-existing private roads shall not be accepted by the City as publicly dedicated roads unless such pre-existing roads are improved by the controlling private entity to meet the applicable design and construction standards of the City Engineer's office. 
(16)  Sidewalks: All development plans, site plans, and subdivisions shall be required to install sidewalks when bordering right-of-way without a sidewalk. All sidewalks shall meet minimum city specifications, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, and shall be continued through any driveway intersection. 
(17)  Bicycle paths/routes: to be completed per the transportation/thoroughfare plan. 
(18)  Transit: To be completed per the transportation/thoroughfare plan. 
(Ord. No. 106-2009; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 6.03 - PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS. 
(A)  Purpose: The purpose of this section is to outline requirements for parking, stacking, and loading spaces by use and to regulate the location of parking areas in relation to adjacent uses. 
(B)  General requirements: The following general requirements apply: 
(1)  Parking, stacking and loading space required: When any building or structure is erected, modified, enlarged, or increased in capacity, or any open use is established, modified, or enlarged, the requirements of this section shall be met. For enlargements, modifications, or increases in capacity, the requirements of this section shall apply only to such enlargements, modifications, or increases in capacity. In other cases of mixed use occupancy, the minimum number of parking, stacking, and loading spaces shall be the cumulative total of individual use requirements unless otherwise specified (Table 5-G, Commercial Development Standards). 
(2)  Off- and on-street parking spaces: In all districts except the planned mixed use districts, all required parking spaces shall be provided as off-street spaces. In the planned mixed use districts, required parking spaces may be provided as both off-street and on-street spaces. The credit for on-street spaces for a lot shall be determined as provided in Subsection 7.10(A)(4). 
(3)  Handicap spaces: Spaces for the physically handicapped shall be provided as required by the Building Code and Americans with Disabilities Act in off-street parking areas. 
(4)  Minimum required: In all instances where parking is required, except for residential uses and uses in the planned mixed use districts, a minimum of five (5) parking spaces shall be provided. 
(5)  Maintenance: All parking, stacking and loading facilities shall be permanently maintained by the owners or occupants. 
(6)  Access: All parking, stacking, and loading facilities shall have vehicular access to a street, either directly or via a shared driveway or alley. 
(7)  Additional parking facilities: If any use change or expansion or any building or structure increase results in the need for an increase in off-street parking spaces of less than ten percent (10%) of the parking facilities previously provided or of less than five (5) spaces, whichever number is greater, no additional parking facilities shall be required. 
(8)  Parking lot reduction: Reducing the size of any parking lot in a manner that reduces the number of parking spaces below the amount required by the UDO shall require approval from BZAP. 
(C)  Parking requirements: Parking spaces shall be provided per Table 6-G, Parking Requirements. For any use not specifically listed in Table 6-G, the parking requirements shall be those of the most similar use as determined by the Director of Community Development. Parking space dimensions and aisle widths shall be provided per Table 6-A, Minimum Parking Space Dimensions and Table 6-B, Minimum Aisle Width in feet. Up to 20% of required off-street parking spaces may be compact parking spaces. 
(D)  Maneuvering: Every parking and loading space shall have sufficient access and maneuvering area as defined in Tables 6-B, E and F. 
(E)  Stacking requirements: Any use having a drive-through structure unit shall provide drive-in stacking area on-site to minimize off-site traffic congestion while waiting for service. For each pick-up window associated with a use, an owner shall provide stacking spaces, each the size of a regular parking space. The area required for any stacking space(s) is exclusive of any required parking space, loading space, driveway, aisle or required yard and is dependent on the total number of pick-up windows as shown in Table 6-D, Vehicle Drive-Through Stacking Requirements. Sites with stacking shall include an exclusive by-pass lane with a minimum width of ten (10) feet or include an aisle, driveway or other circulation area in the parking lot designed to allow vehicles to by-pass the stacking line. A pick-up window may project up to one (1) foot into the stacking area. 
(F)  Loading requirements: The minimum number of off-street loading spaces required for various types of uses shall not be less than that as set forth in Table 6-E, Minimum Number of Loading Spaces for Institutional and Office, and Table 6-F, Minimum Number of Loading Spaces for Commercial Uses. Each use of an institutional or office nature including but not limited to a business office, hotel, motel, recreational or entertainment type use shall provide loading spaces based on gross floor area as shown in Table 6-E. Each commercial use involving the retail or wholesale exchange, sale, storage, processing or manufacturing of merchandise or personal property of any type, which is permitted in any commercial or mixed-use district, shall provide loading spaces based on gross floor areas as shown in Table 6-F. No off-street loading space shall be located in any part of a required front yard. Any off-street parking space may be located in any part of the required side or rear yard, except the side yard along the side street of a corner lot. No off-street loading space shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any lot in any residential district, unless wholly within a completely enclosed building or unless enclosed on all sides by a masonry wall or uniformly painted solid board fence matching the principal structure in color and not less than six (6) feet in height. 
(G)  Design standards: For the purposes of this section, non-residential shall mean all commercial, office and institutional properties and uses. The term shall further include multi-family residential dwellings consisting of four (4) units or more. The following design standards shall apply to both residential and non-residential properties and uses, unless otherwise indicated: 
(1)  Design: Parking facilities shall be designed and constructed to allow unobstructed movement into and out of each parking space without interfering with fixed objects or vehicles; minimize delay and interference with traffic on public streets and access drives; and maximize sight distances from parking lot exits and access drives. All off-street parking spaces in parking lots shall have access from parking lot driveways and not directly from streets. 
(2)  Screening: Screening for non-residential properties and uses shall be provided per Subsection 6.07(K), landscaping, screening, and buffering. 
(3)  Lighting: Lighting for non-residential properties and uses shall be provided per Section 6.08, on-site lighting. 
(4)  Striping: All non-residential parking areas shall be striped and maintained in good condition to be clearly visible with lines four (4) inches wide to indicate parking space limits. 
(5)  Traffic control: Any non-residential off-street parking area shall be marked or posted with such traffic control devices as may be determined necessary by the Director of Community Development for the protection of operators and pedestrians, including directional arrows, one-way signs, no parking signs and fire lane signs and meet the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (OMUTCD). 
(6)  Improvements: Required parking spaces, access drives, and loading areas shall be paved and maintained with concrete, asphalt, or similar material of sufficient thickness and consistency to support anticipated traffic volumes and weights. Curb and gutter or an equivalent drainage system shall be provided along the periphery of the parking lot, except where it is determined by the City Engineer that such system is not practical for storm drainage purposes. All facilities shall be graded, properly drained, stabilized, and maintained to minimize dust and erosion. 
(7)  Wheel stops: Whenever a non-residential parking area extends to a lot line, sidewalk, planter strip or building, a wheel stop device consisting of blocks, a permanent curb, expanded sidewalk or other suitable restraint shall be installed. The minimum height of a wheel stop device shall be five (5) inches and the minimum distance from a wheel stop device to a property line or protected area shall be two (2) feet six (6) inches. 
(8)  Driveways: A driveway is an access corridor leading from a public right-of-way to a parking lot, aisle, parking circulation area, garage, off-street parking space or loading space. Each driveway shall be located and designed in a manner that provides for the safety of motorists and pedestrians. A driveway serving a non-residential parking lot shall be located and designed so that vehicles entering or leaving such parking lot will be traveling in a forward motion. Driveway construction, which requires the removal of trees within the public right-of-way shall receive the prior approval of the City Forester. The City Forester shall determine the number, type, size and location of replacement trees required. 
(a)  Residential driveways: 
 To ensure the location of driveway flares in front of the subject property, a driveway shall maintain a minimum three (3) feet setback from the (continued) side property line at the street, unless there is a shared driveway. 
 A driveway shall be six (6) feet or more from another driveway, except for a common drive serving two (2) adjoining lots, which uses a common driveway apron. 
 A driveway serving a residence shall have a minimum width of eight (8) feet and a maximum throat width of eighteen (18) feet. Shared residential drives shall not exceed a combined throat width of twenty-four (24) feet. 
 A driveway shall consist of an approved impervious material (i.e. concrete, asphalt, concrete pavers, etc.) Permeable pavement materials such as porous asphalt or concrete, modular or permeable pavers, or similar products, may be approved subject to review and approval by the Director of Community Development. 
 Residential properties, not located in the Upper Arlington Historic District, may be permitted to install one (1) dedicated parking space forward of the front building setback line, subject to approval of a certificate of zoning compliance (CZC) which demonstrates compliance with the following five (5) conditions: 
1)  The dedicated parking space shall maintain a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from the public right-of-way line and three (3) feet from the side property line; 
2)  Evergreen and perennial landscaping shall be required to screen the outer perimeter of the parking space to a minimum fifty percent (50%) opacity during all seasons of the year; 
3)  The parking space must be parallel and continguous to the existing driveway; 
4)  Front yard development coverage shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) and overall site development coverage shall not exceed the limits set forth in Table 5-F; and 
5)  The dedicated parking space and access throat area shall not exceed a total of two hundred fifty (250) square feet. 
 Residential parking spaces shall not be occupied by recreational vehicles, commercial vehicles, boats, or trailers, unless in compliance with Subsection 6.09(D)(5). 
 The driveway flare shall be a minimum distance of thirty-two (32) feet from a street intersection. 
(b)  Commercial driveways: 
 A driveway shall be six (6) feet or more from another driveway, except for a common drive serving two (2) adjoining lots, which uses a common driveway apron. 
 One-way driveways shall have a minimum throat width of ten (10) feet. All other two-way non-residential driveways shall have a minimum throat width of twenty (20) feet and a maximum throat width of thirty-five (35) feet, except curb returns. 
(11)  Bicycle racks: A bicycle rack accommodating at least two (2) bicycles shall be installed near at least one (1) building entrance. The rack shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular circulation, and shall adhere to ADA and all other applicable requirements. It shall be securely anchored to the ground or building structure. 
(H)  Location: When required off-street parking is permitted to be located off-site, it shall begin within the distance specified in Table 6-C, Maximum Walking Distances to Parking Lots. 
1.  Parking for any use may be provided in any non-residential district if parking is a permitted use or approved as a conditional use. 
2.  Surface parking in a residential district for any use not permitted in that district is allowed under the following conditions: 
a.  The area where the parking is located shall be part of or abut the zone lot containing the use which the parking serves; 
b.  All access to such property shall be through non-residentially zoned property; 
c.  No parking shall be located more than one hundred twenty (120) feet into the residential zoning district; 
d.  Such surface parking lots shall include landscape islands of not less than eight (8) feet in width dividing the parking areas into bays of not more than ten spaces per bay. At least one Type A tree shall be placed in each required landscape island. Shrubbery, hedges, and other plant materials shall be used to complement the tree, but shall not be used in locations where they would be subject to damage by car overhangs or the opening of car doors. 
e.  Long term or dead storage, loading, sales, repair work, or servicing of vehicles is prohibited. 
f.  Must be a permitted use or approved as a conditional use for surface parking. 
3.  Underground parking in a residential district for any use not permitted in that district is allowed under the following conditions: 
a.  The area where the parking is located shall abut the district containing the use which the parking serves; 
b.  All access to such property shall be through non-residentially zoned property; 
c.  No parking shall be located more than two hundred (200) feet into the residential zoning district; 
d.  Long term or dead storage, loading, sales, repair work, or servicing of vehicles is prohibited. 
e.  Must be a permitted use or approved as a conditional use for surface parking. 
(I)  Combined parking: The owners of two (2) or more separate uses as specified in this section may establish a joint off-street parking facility to provide the total number of required off-street parking spaces for all such combined uses, provided a valid legal instrument is executed by the consenting parties for such joint use. Such instrument shall be approved as to form and executed by the City Attorney and filed with the application for a building permit. Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the required off-street parking spaces for a theater, bowling alley, dance hall, or an establishment for the sale and consumption of food, alcoholic beverages or refreshments on the premises, and up to one hundred percent (100%) of the required off-street parking spaces for a church or an auditorium incidental to a private, public or parochial school, may be supplied by the following uses: banks, business offices, retails stores, personal service shops, household equipment or furniture shops, clothing or shoe repair or service shops, manufacturing buildings and similar uses. 
(J)  Planned mixed use districts: The provision of parking within planned mixed-use districts shall meet the maximum requirement provided in this section. In most cases, the provision of parking shall occur in parking lots and garages that meet the needs of multiple tenants and users. In cases where a single tenant structure or user is meeting all of its parking needs in a separate facility, the maximum parking requirement shall still apply. 
Table 6-A: Minimum Parking Space Dimensions 
Full-Size Parking Space Parking Angle < or = 45 Degrees (feet) 46-79 Degrees (feet) 80 Degrees or More (feet) Width 9 9 9 Length 18 18 18 Compact Parking Space Parking Angle < or = 45 Degrees (feet) 46-79 Degrees (feet) 80 Degrees or More (feet) Width 8 8 8 Length 16 16 8  
Table 6-B: Minimum Aisle Width 
Angle of Parking (Degrees) One Way
Aisle Width (feet) Two Way
Aisle Width (feet) Parallel 13 20 Up to 50 Degrees 13 Not Applicable 50 up to 80 Degrees 17 Not Applicable 80 Degrees or More 22 22  
Table 6-C: Maximum Walking Distances to Parking Lots 
Use Distance from Parking Facility to Building Required to Serve (feet) One- and Two-Family Dwelling On same lot Multiple Dwelling Not more than 200 Feet Commercial and Institutional Uses First Permitted in B-Districts, Hospitals, Churches, Lodging Not more than 300 Feet Use Not Specified Herein Not more than 1000 Feet  
Table 6-D: Vehicle Drive-Through Stacking Requirements 
Type of Use Minimum Total Number of Vehicle Stacking Spaces per Pick-Up Window by Use Financial institutions, grocery and retail stores, pharmacies, casual and fine dining restaurants and other similar uses not listed 4 Fast food and fast casual restaurants 8 Coffee shops 12  
Table 6-E: Minimum Number of Loading Spaces for Institutional and Office 
Gross Floor Area (square feet) Minimum Loading Spaces Required Under 25,000 0 25,000 to 100,000 1 100,000 to 350,000 2 350,000 or More 2 plus 1 for each 300,000 additional square feet or fraction thereof exceeding 350,000 square feet Note: In the Planned Mixed-Use District the provision for loading may occur in public roads and alleys under specific conditions and with the approval of BZAP.  
Table 6-F: Minimum Number of Loading Spaces for Commercial Uses 
Gross Floor Area (square feet) Maximum Loading Space Required Under 5,000 0 5,000 to 10,000 1 10,000 to 30,000 2 30,000 to 90,000 3 90,000 to 150,000 4 150,000 to 250,000 5 250,000 or More 5 plus 1 for each 80,000 square feet or fraction thereof exceeding 250,000 square feet  
Table 6-G: Parking Requirements 
A. Residential 
Type of Use Minimum Parking Spaces Required One- or Two-Family Dwelling 2 per dwelling unit Multi-Family\ 
0-1 Bedrooms 
2 Bedrooms 
3+ Bedrooms   
  
1.50 per unit 
1.75 per unit 
2.0 per unit Townhouse 2.1 per dwelling unit on the same zoned lot Congregate Senior Housing 1 per 4 beds or 1.5 per dwelling unit + 1 per employee on largest Shift Home for the Aging or Continuing Care Retirement Community 1.25 per Independent living unit + parking as required by other dwelling unit types in the Project Nursing Home .17 per Resident + 1 per employee on largest shift Adult Care Facility, Adult Family Home, Adult Group Home, Adult Foster Home and Rest Home .25 per Resident + 1 per employee on largest shift Home Occupations Minimum one space, maximum 3 spaces in addition to required residential spaces All Other Dwelling Units 2.5 per dwelling unit  
B. Office 
Type of Use Minimum Parking Spaces Required Administrative or Business 3 per 1000 sq. ft. gross floor area Medical 3 per examination or treatment room plus one per doctor and other employees Dental 2 per examination or treatment room plus one per dentist and other employees  
C. Institutional 
Type of Use Minimum Parking Spaces Required Auditorium, Stadium, Conference Center or Other Place of Assembly 1 per 5 persons based on design capacity of building Church 1 per 30 sq. ft. of sanctuary, auditorium, or main place of worship Day or Nursery Schools 1 per teacher/employee + 1 per six students Elementary Schools 2 per classroom + 1 per 60 sq. ft. of auditorium or assembly hall High School, Business, Technical, or Trade School, College or University 2 per classroom + 1 for every 20 students for which the facility is designed, or 1 per 60 sq. ft. of auditorium or assembly hall, whichever is better Hospital 2.5 per bed + 1 per employee on largest shift Library or Art Gallery 1 per 250 sq. ft. + 1 per employee on largest shift Recreation Center or Community Center 1 per 5 persons based on designed capacity of buildings(s) Swimming Facility 1 per 75 sq. ft. + 1 per employee on largest shift  
D. Commercial 
Type of Use Minimum Parking Spaces Required Automobile Service Station 3 per service bay plus 1 per wrecker or service vehicle plus 2 per 3 employees on the largest shift plus four stacking spaces/side of pump island Bank 1 per 250 sq. ft. + 1 per employee on Largest Shift Beauty or Barber Shop 3 per operator plus one per other employee. Business Incubator 1 per workspace plus 1 per 500 Sq. Ft. of gross floor area in administrative office Car Washes-Full Service Stacking for 30 vehicles or 10 per approach lane whichever is greater, plus 3 spaces /bay for manual drying plus 2/3 employees on the largest shift Commercial or Business Service Uses, Including Retail Shopping Centers Except as Otherwise Specifically Provided for Herein 1 per 200 sq. ft. gross floor area. Convenience Stores 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 2 stacking spaces/side of pump island Funeral Home 1 per 150 sq. ft. + 1 per business vehicle Lumber Yard, Furniture or Large Appliance Store 1 per 200 sq. ft. Motel or Hotel 1 per rental unit + 1 per employee on largest shift + 1 per 150 sq. ft. conference or meeting area plus required spaces for restaurant and lounge Restaurant, Tavern, Night Club Lounge or Dance Hall 1 per 100 sq. ft. Vehicle Repair 1 per 100 sq. ft. or 3 per each service bay, whichever is greater Vehicle Sales 1 per 300 sq. ft. + 1 per 1,000 s.f. outdoor display area Veterinary Services 4 per doctor plus one per employee  
E. Recreation and Entertainment 
Type of Use Minimum Parking Spaces Required Bowling Alley 5 per lane + spaces for restaurant Golf Courses 4 per tee Golf Driving Range 1 per tee + 1 per employee on largest shift Miniature Golf 1.5 per hole + 1 per employee on largest shift Skating Rink (Ice or Roller) 1 per 300 sq. ft. Theater, Auditorium or Assembly Hall 1 per 3 patrons based on maximum capacity  
F. Mixed Use 
Type of Use Maximum Parking Spaces Required Mixed use development See Table 5-G  
(Ord. No. 106-2009; Ord. No. 74-2010; Ord. No. 96-2010; Ord. No. 65-2014, §§ 2, 3, 12-8-2014 ; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 44-2016 , § 4, 10-24-2016; Ord. No. 16-2017 , §§ 6, 7, 4-10-2017; Ord. No. 54-2017 , §§ 16-18, 12-11-2017) 
§ 6.04 - STORMWATER AND DRAINAGE STANDARDS. 
(A)  Purpose and applicability: The purpose of these stormwater drainage standards is to provide adequate facilities to accommodate stormwater runoff created by a development project, either through on-site or off-site improvements or alterations to the existing drainage system. 
(B)  Stormwater design manual: 
(1)  The stormwater design (Stormwater Design Manual, published by the Mid-Ohio Regional Planning Commission, June 1977) is hereby adopted by the City, and the policies, standards, specifications and provisions contained therein shall apply to the development of all subdivisions in the City. 
(2)  The most current Ohio Environmental Protection Agency's "Authorization for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activity under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System" Post-construction stormwater management requirements shall apply to the development of all subdivisions in the City. 
(C)  Contract of sale prior to preliminary plat: No person, firm, or corporation, proposing to make or having made a subdivision within the territorial jurisdiction of this UDO shall enter into any contract for the sale of, or shall offer to sell any subdivision or any part thereof, or shall proceed with any construction work on such proposed subdivision, including grading, until he or it has obtained from BZAP the approval of the preliminary plan of the proposed subdivision has been obtained from BZAP. Such preliminary plan and subdivision, in addition to meeting the requirements of the UDO, shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
(D)  Drainage system requirements: Every subdivision shall be provided with a stormwater sewer or drainage system adequate to serve the area being platted in accordance with standards as part of the stormwater design manual adopted by the City and otherwise meeting the approval of BZAP and Council. 
(1)  No lot, required yard, court, building setback area, parking area or other space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make the area or dimension less than the minimum required by the UDO. No part of a yard, court, parking area or other space provided about, or for, any building or structure for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this UDO, shall be included as part of a yard, court, parking area or other space required under this UDO for another building or structure; and 
(2)  No surface of a storage facility shall be altered or covered as to decrease the perviousness thereof. 
(E)  Paving of lots in residential districts: The requirements of Section 6.04 shall apply to all residential districts within the City. 
(F)  Hydrologic and hydraulic studies: A hydrologic and hydraulic study of the subdivision shall be submitted with each preliminary plan. These studies will be used to establish the adequacy of the drainage system of the development site. As part of these studies, the adequacy of storm drainage facilities necessary to carry the runoff from the initial storm design shall be shown. Also the flow routes and drainageways necessary to convey the 100-year storm (the emergency flow way) through the development shall be shown. Necessary easements shall be shown. 
These studies will also be used to establish the adequacy of the drainage system of the proposed development to receive and convey the initial and major storms from dominant (upstream) property. 
These studies will also be used to establish the adequacy of the drainage system of the proposed development so as not to create or worsen drainage problems downstream. As part of these studies, storage facilities, when required, will be located and identified by type. The post-development rate of run-off shall be the same as the pre-development rate. 
(G)  Improvements required: The following improvements are required: 
(1)  Development in flood area: If the required hydrologic and hydraulic studies reveal that the proposed development is in an area with flooding or drainage problems, BZAP may approve the plat, provided the subdivider legally binds himself to make such improvements as, in the judgment of BZAP, will render the subdivision safe, acceptable for the intended use and in compliance with city standards. In this case, the subdivider shall post a surety performance bond pursuant to ORC § 4715.12 running to the City, sufficient to cover the cost of such improvements as estimated by the officials having jurisdiction. In order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the people, BZAP will reject any proposed subdivision where periodic flooding renders the site incapable of meeting the standards adopted by the City for the five-year storm and regional flood. 
(2)  Development to increase flooding: If the required hydrologic and hydraulic studies reveal that the proposed development would increase runoff beyond the standards adopted by the City, then the development permit shall be denied unless one (1) or more of the following requirements acceptable to the City, are met: 
(a)  On-site storage: Provide on-site storage of stormwater that results from the proposed development, and provide release mechanisms to limit the storm runoff from the storage facility in accordance with the design standards adopted by the City; 
(b)  Off-site storage: Provide, or contribute proportional funding for, off-site storage facilities that will control storm runoff so that runoff rates are not increased beyond the standards adopted by the City. In using off-site storage, an engineering study must be done to show that property located between the proposed development and the storage facilities will not be damaged by increased runoff; and 
(c)  Improvements of existing drainage system: Improve the existing drainage system, in accordance with the design standards adopted by the City, to accommodate safely the increased runoff from the proposed development. Care must be exercised in utilizing this option so that the natural environment of the existing drainage system is not adversely affected. 
(3)  Provision of adequate facilities: Adequate facilities to provide for the drainage of lots and public ways within each subdivision shall be installed in accordance with the specifications of the City Engineer. Initial drainage systems shall be designed to accommodate a minimum five-year frequency storm runoff, and collector drainage facilities shall be located within street rights-of-way whenever practicable. In the event these collector facilities cannot be located within the street rights-of-way, then they shall be located adjacent to side or rear lot lines where easements shall be provided to, and along, the facilities. 
(4)  Outleting drainage: All stormwater flow from the proposed subdivision including flows from upstream areas passing through, and further including increased flows attributable to changes in time of concentration or changes in the former runoff factor (imperviousness), shall be conveyed to the proper outlet for the entire tributary area via a natural channel or an artificial channel either or both of which shall be improved so as to be of adequate capacity. 
(5)  Design standards: All improvements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards established by the design manual and adopted by the City. 
(H)  Soil sediment regulations: This section is intended and adopted for the purpose of regulating earth-disturbing activities to control sediment pollution and to protect the storm drainage system and water resources from sedimentation, both of which are caused by accelerated soil erosion during development or construction. 
(1)  General requirement: No person owning or responsible for a development area or any earth moving activity, shall cause or allow earth-disturbing activities except in compliance with the standards and criteria of Subsection (C) and the applicable items below: 
(a)  When a proposed development area involves less than one (1) acre, all earth-disturbing activities shall be subjected to surveillance and site investigation by the Director of Community Development to determine compliance with the standards and regulations; 
(b)  When a proposed development area involves one (1) acre or more, the responsible person is required to obtain permit coverage from the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and a stormwater management permit from the City of Upper Arlington, and shall develop and obtain approval of a sediment control plan prior to any earth-disturbing the responsible person shall develop and obtain approval of a sediment control plan prior to any earth-disturbing activity. Such a plan shall include specific requirements of the design manual adopted by the City, and be filed with the preliminary plat; 
(c)  A statement of policy for sediment control (a continuing narrative plan) in conjunction with standard operations, such as the installation of transmission lines by utility companies or road and highway construction or maintenance and stream channel improvement or maintenance, by public entities or agencies, may be approved by the Director of Community Development in lieu of a specific plan for each development; and 
(d)  In all construction or earth-disturbing work contracted to be done by the City, the specifications shall include the criteria listed in Subsection 6.04(I)(2). 
(2)  Standards and criteria: Meeting the following standards and criteria does not relieve any person from liability for sediment damage to another person's property. 
To control sediment pollution from sheet and rill erosion, no development area shall have a predicted average annual soil loss (as calculated by the universal soil loss equation) leaving the development area which exceeds fifteen (15) tons per acre the first year commencing from the time of initial earth disturbance and five (5) tons per acre for any other year. 
In order to control sediment pollution of water resources, the owner or person responsible for the development area shall use conservation planning and practices to maintain the level of conservation established by the following standards: 
(a)  Timing of sediment-trapping practices: Sediment control practices shall be functional throughout earth-disturbing activity. Settling facilities, perimeter controls and other practices intended to trap sediment shall be implemented as the first step of grading or construction and within seven (7) days from the start of grubbing. They shall continue to function until the upslope development area is re-stabilized. 
(b)  Stabilization of denuded areas: Denuded areas shall have soil stabilization applied within seven (7) days if they are to remain dormant for more than twenty-one (21) days. Areas within fifty (50) feet of a stream must be seeded within two (2) days if they are to remain dormant for more than twenty-one (21) days. Permanent or temporary soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas within seven (7) days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site, and shall also be applied within seven (7) days to denuded areas which may not be at final grade, but which will remain dormant (undisturbed) for longer than twenty-one (21) days. Temporary seeding and mulching may be disturbed several times during construction and replacement applications will be required. The design standards contained in the latest edition of Rainwater and Land Development, published by Ohio Department of Natural Resources, shall be used to determine appropriate stabilization specifications and methods. 
(c)  Settling facilities: Concentrated stormwater runoff from denuded areas shall be filtered or diverted to a settling facility. The minimum capacity of the sediment basin to the elevation of the crest of the pipe spillway shall be sixty-seven (67) cubic yards (0.04 acre-feet) for each acre within the drainage area that will be disturbed by construction during the designed life of the sediment basin. If other areas within the drainage area are actively eroding, additional sediment capacity must be added (volume will be determined based on site conditions). The depth of the sediment settling pond must be less than or equal to five (5) feet. The configuration between inlets and the outlet of the basin must provide at least two (2) units of length for each one (1) unit of width (> 2:1 length: width ratio). The City Engineer will consider alternate methods, proposed by the developer, for accumulating, processing and storing sedimentation, so long as the methods selected meet "Best Management Practices" standards. 
(d)  Sediment barriers: Sheet flow runoff from denuded areas shall be filtered or diverted to a settling facility. Sediment barriers such as sediment fence or diversions to settling facilities shall protect adjacent properties and water resources from sediment transported by sheet flow. 
(e)  Storm sewer inlet protection: All storm sewer inlets which accept water runoff from the development area shall be protected so that sediment-laden water will not enter the storm sewer systems without first being filtered or otherwise treated to remove sediment, unless the storm sewer system drains to a settling facility. 
(f)  Working in or crossing streams: Streams including bed and banks shall be re-stabilized immediately after in-channel work is completed, interrupted or stopped. To the extent practicable, construction vehicles shall be kept out of streams. Where in-channel work is necessary, precautions shall be taken to stabilize the work area during construction to minimize erosion. If a live (wet) stream must be crossed by construction vehicles regularly during construction, a temporary stream crossing shall be provided. Existing stream bank vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practical and the crossing shall be as narrow as possible. 
(g)  Construction access routes: Measures shall be taken to prevent soil transport onto surfaces where runoff is not checked by sediment controls, or onto public roads. 
(h)  Sloughing and dumping: No soil, rock, debris or any other material shall be dumped or placed into a water resource or into such proximity that it may readily slough, slip, or erode into a water resource unless such dumping or placing is authorized by the City Engineer, and, where applicable, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, for such purposes as, but not limited to, constructing bridges, utility lines, culverts and erosion control structures. Unstable soils prone to slipping or landsliding shall not be graded, excavated, filled or have loads imposed upon them unless the work is done in accordance with a qualified professional engineer's recommendations to correct, eliminate or adequately address the problems. 
(i)  Cut and fill slopes: Cut and fill slopes shall be designed and constructed in a manner which will minimize erosion. Consideration shall be given to the length and steepness of the slope, soil type, upslope drainage area, groundwater conditions and slope stabilization. 
(j)  Stabilization of outfalls and channels: Outfalls and constructed or modified channels shall be designed and constructed to withstand the expected velocity of flow from a post-development, ten-year frequency storm without eroding. 
(k)  Preservation of natural watercourses: Existing streams and channels shall not be altered or channeled without express permission from the City, and shall be preserved with their natural tree or vegetation canopy intact as a means to prevent their pollution from runoff containing sediment. The buffer area necessary to protect such watercourses shall be determined by the City Engineer. The engineer may rely, as a guide for determining appropriate buffer area, on the latest edition of Rainwater and Land Development, published by Ohio Department of Natural Resources for Streams and Watercourses. When the City Engineer determines that in his opinion prohibiting channelization of an existing natural watercourse would cause an undue hardship for the development of property subject to these regulations, he may permit such alteration after reviewing plans outlining the extent and nature of the channelization or alteration. Additionally, whenever such watercourse is being considered for alteration, the group seeking permission to alter the watercourse shall provide the names of the owners of the three (3) next lower riparian properties under wholly different ownership, and such property owners shall be notified in writing of the intended watercourse alteration. 
(l)  De-watering: Sediment laden water that is removed from trenches or other facilities shall be directed to a sediment-settling pond or other equally effective sediment control device. Dewatering activities shall not cause turbid discharges to surface waters. At no time can untreated discharge from any sediment laden depression, structural or non-structural, be pumped directly into a stream, onto the street, or into a storm sewer inlet. 
(m)  Establishment of Permanent Vegetation: Permanent vegetation shall not be considered established until ground cover is achieved which, in the opinion of the Community Development Department, provides adequate cover and is mature enough to control soil erosion satisfactorily and to survive adverse weather conditions. 
(n)  Maintenance: All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control practices shall be designed and constructed to minimize maintenance requirements. They shall be maintained and repaired as needed to assure continued performance of their intended function. The person or entity responsible for the continued maintenance of permanent erosion controls shall be identified to the satisfaction of the Community Development Department. 
(3)  Plan content: The preliminary plan of a proposed development area shall contain the following information to set forth how the standards and criteria established by this section will be met: 
(a)  Identification and location of off-site areas susceptible to sediment deposits or to erosion caused by accelerated runoff; 
(b)  Identification and location of off-site areas affecting potential accelerated runoff and erosion control; 
(c)  Existing topography of the development area and adjacent land within approximately one hundred (100) feet of the boundaries. A topographic map should contain a two-foot contour interval to portray the conformation and drainage pattern of the area; 
(d)  The location of existing buildings, structures, utilities, water bodies, location of receiving streams or surface waters, wetlands, drainage facilities, vegetative cover, paved areas (streets, roads, driveways, sidewalks, etc.), and other significant natural or man-made features on the development area and adjacent land within approximately two hundred (200) feet of the boundaries; 
(e)  A general description of the predominant soil types, their location, and their limitations for the proposed use; 
(f)  Proposed use of the development area including present development and ultimate utilization with detail on soil cover both vegetative and impervious, and if available, the quality of any discharge from the site; 
(g)  All proposed earth disturbances including: 
i.  Areas of excavation, grading, and filling; 
ii.  The finished slope, stated in feet horizontal to feet vertical, of cut and fill slopes; 
iii.  Kinds of utilities and proposed areas of installation; 
iv.  Proposed paved and covered areas in square feet or to scale on a plan map; 
v.  Makeup of surface soil as developed (upper six (6) inches) on areas not covered by buildings, structures, or pavement. The description shall be in such terms as: original surface, soil, subsoil, sandy, heavy clay, stony, etc.; 
vi.  Proposed kind of cover on areas not covered by buildings, structures, or pavement. The description shall be in such terms as: lawn, turf grass, shrubbery, trees, forest cover, rip-rap, mulch, etc.; and 
vii.  Proposed location of any in-stream activities including stream crossings. 
(h)  Provisions for temporary and permanent erosion control; 
(i)  Provisions for the management of stormwater, including the control of accelerated runoff, to a stable receiving outlet; 
(j)  Provisions for maintenance of control facilities including easements to insure short as well as long term erosion and sediment pollution control and stormwater management; 
(k)  Proposed construction sequence and time schedule for all earth-disturbing activities and installation of provisions for erosion and sediment pollution control and stormwater management; 
(l)  Design computations and applicable assumptions for all structural measures for erosion and sediment pollution control and water management. Volume and velocity of flow must be given for all surface water conveyance measures and pipe outfalls; 
(m)  Seeding mixtures and rates, lime and fertilizer application rates, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures; 
(n)  Title, scale, direction, legend, and date of all plan maps; 
(o)  Name and address of the person(s) preparing the plan, the owner, and the person responsible for the development area; 
(p)  Certification that all earth disturbance, construction, and development will be done pursuant to the plan; and 
(q)  BZAP may either waive specific requirements for plan detail or require additional information if needed to show that the work will conform to the basic requirements of this UDO. 
(I)  Easements and access: Flood control or storm drainage facilities access shall be controlled as follows: 
(1)  Access to flood control or storm drainage ditches, channels, and storage facilities, shall be by means of easements. Such easements shall be not less than 15 feet in width, exclusive of the width of the ditch, channel, or other facility it is to serve, and an easement of this type shall be provided on one (1) side of a flood control or storm drainage ditch, channel, or similar type facility; 
(2)  Access along flood control or storm drainage ditches and channels, shall be by means of easements. Such easement shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet in width, exclusive of the width of the ditch, channel, or other facility it is to serve, and an easement of this type shall be provided on both sides of a flood control or storm drainage ditch, channel, or similar facility; 
(3)  Access along the initial drainage system shall be by means of easements. Such easement shall be not less than twenty (20) feet in width, exclusive of the ditch, channel or other facility, with a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width on one (1) side of the centerline; 
(4)  Access around storage facilities shall be by a fifteen-foot easement measured from the line of the design high water level and shall include the storage facility itself; 
(5)  Easements for the emergency flow ways shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width; and 
(6)  Flood control or storm drainage easements containing underground facilities shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet, exclusive of the facility itself, with a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width on one (1) side of the facility. 
(J)  Grading and drainage plans required: The following shall be required: 
(1)  Grading and drainage plans shall be submitted with each application for a development permit. The results of all hydrologic and hydraulic studies including the 100-year flood contour elevation must be clearly shown on all site plans where applicable. In addition, a soils investigation report to evaluate possible drainage and erosion problems may be required at the option of the City Engineer where unstable slopes or other site conditions warrant such study. Detailed information shall be included in the plans and reports as required by the design manual; 
(2)  All lots shall be graded in such a manner that stormwater will drain there from and there will not be any undrained depressions. Grading shall be accomplished in such a manner that it will not obstruct the natural drainage of adjoining and adjacent properties to the subdivision; and 
(3)  Wherever possible, with exceptions being made where the topography of an area does not permit such grading practice, or where other drainage ways are provided, lots shall be graded from the rear lot line to the street. Where a lot abuts directly on two (2) streets, the grade shall be from the corner of the lot which is diagonally opposed to the corner of the two (2) streets on which the lot abuts. This regulation is included in a desire to reduce the amount of water standing in yards to minimum. Therefore, where it is not possible to grade a lot in the prescribed manner, the owner or developer shall provide for the adequate drainage of any and all low areas and tie such drainage into and make it a part of the storm sewer of the development and the City, as directed by the City Engineer, with approval of such drainage subject to inspection by the engineer, along with the inspection of other storm sewer installations. 
(K)  Cost of drainage improvements: The following requirements will determine the proportions of drainage improvement costs resulting from the proposed development: 
(1)  If all the proposed drainage improvements are contained within and are solely for the benefit of the proposed development, then the total cost of these improvements will be borne by the developer of the proposed development; 
(2)  If some of the proposed drainage improvements are not contained within the proposed development but are necessitated by and accrue benefits solely to the proposed development then the total costs of these improvements will be borne by the developer of the proposed development; 
(3)  If off-site drainage improvements are required as the result of more than one (1) development then the costs of these improvements will be proportioned among the developers benefited according to the computation procedures for prorating the drainage costs established and adopted by the City; 
(4)  If a developer wants to develop a portion of an area draining to a proposed off-site drainage improvement, before this improvement is constructed, he may, with the approval of the City, use either of the following options: 
(a)  Construct the proposed off-site drainage improvement which will serve the entire area draining to this facility; or 
(b)  Provide the funds pursuant to this Subsection 6.04(L), for the construction of this drainage facility and request the City to construct the improvement. The developer may then proceed with the improvements of his land upon the drainage facility improvements being made. The City will collect, on pro-rata basis, any excess funds plus interest expended by this developer beyond his proportionate share of the cost of such improvements from future properties within the watershed served by such drainage improvements when such properties are developed within a period of ten (10) years from the date that the drainage improvements are financed or constructed. These funds plus interest, if collected, will be refunded to the initial developer or his assigns. 
(5)  If the City chooses to provide drainage facilities, the cost of these facilities will be prorated and assessed as a development cost when and if development occurs on the affected lands. 
(L)  Security for construction: After approval of improvement plans by applicable authorities, but prior to City Engineer plat signature, the subdivider shall: 
(1)  Satisfactorily complete required street, roadway, stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation control, and waterline and sanitary sewer improvements; or 
(2)  Provide satisfactory construction and performance sureties for the improvements. 
(M)  Use and release of security: Should the subdivider fail to adequately implement or complete improvements, the subdivider and subdivision may be subject to enforcement measures. The City Engineer may complete required improvements with the securities. Securities may be released at times and in amounts deemed appropriate by the City Engineer. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of surety shall be held until the site has become stabilized and final acceptance of all improvements is made. 
(N)  Maintenance: Any portion of the drainage system, including on-site and off-site storage facilities, that is constructed by the developer will be continuously maintained by the owner or owners subsequent in title of the affected lands unless it is officially accepted by the City Engineer for city maintenance. The developer shall cause the maintenance obligation to be inserted in the chain of title to the affected lands as a covenant running with the land in favor of the City. 
(O)  Violations: The following shall apply: 
(1)  Violations and penalties: It shall be unlawful to locate, erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, change, maintain or use any building or land in violation of any of the provisions of this UDO of the Codified Ordinances, or any amendment or supplement thereto adopted by the City. Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who violates any of the provisions of this UDO of the Codified Ordinances, or any amendment or supplement thereto, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each and every day during which such illegal location, erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement, change, maintenance, or use continues, shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(2)  Remedies: In case any building is or is proposed to be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, changed, maintained or used, or any land is or is proposed to be used in violation of this UDO of the Codified Ordinances, or any amendment or supplement thereto, the City Council, the City Manager, the City Attorney, the Director of Community Development or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specially damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedies provided by laws, institute appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use: to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said building structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 6.05 - FLOODPLAIN DESIGN STANDARDS. 
(A)  General provisions: 
(1)  Lands to which this Ordinance applies: This ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Upper Arlington, Ohio as identified by FEMA, including any additional flood hazard areas annexed by the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio that are not identified on the effective flood insurance rate map. 
(2)  Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard: The areas of special flood hazard have been identified by the FEMA in a scientific and engineering report entitled, Flood Insurance Study for Franklin County and Incorporated Communities. This study, with accompanying flood boundary and floodway maps and/or flood insurance rate maps dated March 16, 2004 and any revisions thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. The flood insurance study is on file in the Upper Arlington Community Development Department, Upper Arlington Municipal Services Center, 3600 Tremont Road. 
(3)  Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and all other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance, unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit as stated in Subsection 4.07(I). 
(4)  Abrogation and greater restrictions: This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(5)  Interpretation: In this interpretation and application of this Ordinance, all provisions shall be: 
(a)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(b)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(c)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. Where a provision of this Ordinance may be in conflict with a state law, such state law shall take precedence over the ordinance. 
(6)  Warning and disclaimer of liability: The degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of Upper Arlington, Ohio, any officer or employee thereof, or the FEMA, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(B)  General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required: 
(1)  Compensatory storage requirement. 
(a)  Fill within the area(s) of special flood hazard shall result in no net loss of natural floodplain storage. The volume of the loss of floodwater storage due to filling in the special flood hazard area shall be offset by providing an equal volume of flood storage by excavation or other compensatory measures at or adjacent to the development site. 
(b)  Volumetric calculations demonstrating compensatory storage have been provided in Subsection 6.05(B)(1)(a). 
(2)  Anchoring. 
(a)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; and 
(b)  All manufactured homes not otherwise regulated by the Ohio Revised Code pertaining to manufactured home parks shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
(3)  Construction materials and methods. 
(a)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(b)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and 
(c)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(4)  Utilities: The following standards apply to all water supply, sanitary sewerage and waste disposal systems not otherwise regulated by the Ohio Revised Code: 
(a)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; 
(b)  New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(c)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(5)  Subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home subdivisions, shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and 
(d)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home subdivisions, shall meet the specific standards of Subsection 6.05(C)(4). 
(6)  Standards in areas of special flood hazard without base flood elevation data: In all areas of special flood hazard identified as zone A on the flood insurance rate map where base flood elevation data are not available from any source, new construction and substantial improvements of any residential, commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent natural grade. 
(C)  Specific standards: In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in Subsection 6.05(A)(2), basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard or Subsection 4.06(D)(2), use of other base flood elevation and floodway data, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. 
(a)  New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the base flood elevation. 
(b)  In AO zones indicated on the flood boundary and floodway maps, new construction and substantial improvements shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number on the community's flood insurance rate map (at least two (2) feet, if no depth number is specified), and adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. 
(a)  New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
i.  Be flood proofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the base flood elevation in order to be eligible for lower flood insurance rates. The structure should be flood proofed at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation; 
ii.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
iii.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the standards of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the officials as set forth in Subsection 4.06(D). 
(b)  In AO zones indicated on the flood boundary and floodway maps, new construction and substantial improvements shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest community's flood insurance rate map (at least two (2) feet, if no depth number is specified); or be flood proofed to that level consistent with the flood proofing standards of this section, and adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(3)  Accessory structures: A relief to the elevation or dry flood proofing standards may be granted for accessory structures (i.e., sheds, detached garages) containing five hundred seventy-six (576) square feet or less in gross floor area. Such structures must meet the encroachment provisions of Subsection 6.05(D) and the following additional standards: 
(a)  They shall not be used for human habitation; 
(b)  They shall be designed to have low flood damage potential; 
(c)  They shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
(d)  They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation; and 
(e)  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or flood proofed. 
(4)  Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles: The following standards shall apply to all new and substantially improved manufactured homes not subject to the manufactured home requirements of ORC § 3733.01: 
(a)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with Subsection 6.05(B)(1); and 
(b)  Manufactured homes shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation. 
(5)  Enclosures below the lowest floor: The following standards apply to all new and substantially improved residential and non-residential structures which are elevated to or above the base flood elevation using pilings, columns or posts. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on the exterior by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must: 
(a)  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or 
(b)  Must meet or exceed the following criteria: 
i.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area shall be provided; and 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and, openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other openings provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(6)  Subdivisions and large developments: In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have not been provided in accordance with Subsection 6.05(A)(2), basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, or Subsection 4.06(D)(2), use of other base flood elevation data, the following standards apply to all subdivision proposals, including manufactured home subdivisions, and other proposed developments containing at least fifty (50) lots or acres (whichever is less): 
(a)  The applicant shall provide base flood elevation data performed in accordance with standard engineering practices; and 
(b)  If Subsection 6.05(b)(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvement shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Subsection 6.05(B), general standards, and Subsection 6.05(C), specific standards. 
(D)  Floodways: 
(1)  Areas with floodways: The flood insurance study referenced in Subsection 6.05(A)(2) identifies a segment within areas of special flood hazard known as a floodway. Floodways may also be delineated in other sources of flood information as specified in Subsection 4.06(D). The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential. The following provisions apply within all delineated floodway areas: 
(a)  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practices demonstrates that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(b)  If Subsection 6.05(D)(1)(a) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Subsection 6.05(C), specific standards. 
(c)  Any encroachment within the floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations can only be granted upon the prior approval of the FEMA. Such request must be submitted by the Director of Community Development to the FEMA and must meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(2)  Areas without floodways: In all areas of special flood hazard where FEMA has provided base flood elevation data set forth in Subsection 6.05(A)(2), but FEMA has delineated a floodway, the following provisions apply: 
(a)  New construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall only be permitted, if it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point. 
(b)  If the above conditions are satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 6.05, floodplain design standards. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 6.06 - SIGNS. 
A.  Purpose, Intent, and Findings: Signs can obstruct views, distract or confuse motorists, displace alternative uses for land, lead to visual clutter, harm community aesthetics, and pose other problems that call for regulation. The City has significant and compelling interests in reducing these harms; these regulations are designed to be content-neutral and narrowly tailored to these interests, and to leave ample alternative channels of communication available. The purposes of these sign regulations are: 
1.  To encourage the proper development and use of planned graphic signage systems and to permit and regulate signs in such a way as to support and complement land use objectives set forth in the Master Plan. 
2.  To preserve the non-commercial character of residential neighborhoods, and to provide reasonable yet appropriate conditions for identifying businesses and services rendered in commercial districts by controlling the size, type and design of signs in relation to the type and size of establishment. 
3.  To reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards by restricting signs and lights that increase the probability of accidents by distracting attention or obstructing vision. 
4.  To preserve order and cleanliness, maintain open spaces and avoid the appearance of clutter, protect property values, to encourage architectural harmony and design standards, and prevent nuisances; signs are as susceptible to becoming nuisances to adjacent properties or the community in general, for example by excessive brightness or glare causing light pollution and distracting drivers, as noise, odors, debris and like characteristics and are therefore subject to regulation designed to prevent such nuisances from developing. 
5.  To protect the public peace, general health, safety and welfare, convenience and comfort, and to protect and encourage a more attractive economic, business and overall physical appearance of the community, all signs and signing systems are subject to the regulations that follow in this Section. 
B.  Permit Required: No permanent sign except those specifically excluded in Section 6.06 C, shall hereafter be erected, replaced, constructed or maintained within the limits of the City of Upper Arlington until a permit for the same has been issued by the Department of Development and payment of a fee in the amount specified in Section 1.10. 
1.  The application for a sign permit shall be on a form specified by the Community Development Department and shall include two (2) sets of scale drawings, which shall include a complete description of the sign and an elevation of the sign. An elevation of the building upon which the sign will be mounted shall also be required for building mounted signs; these drawings shall be stamped by a registered architect or engineer. 
2.  Permit applications will be evaluated by the Community Development Department to determine that the proposed sign would comply with the criteria in this Section or previously approved graphics plan. If the sign would not require BZAP review, and if the Community Development Department has not denied the permit application within 30 business days of the application's submittal, the application shall be deemed granted and a permit will issue. If the sign requires BZAP review under the terms of this Section, then a graphics plan or variance application will need to be submitted for BZAP review. 
3.  Decisions of the Community Development Department or of BZAP may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in UDO §4.10. 
4.  If the structure of a sign requires a permit under the Building Code, then approval of an application under this Section shall be conditioned upon compliance with all Building Code requirements. Processing of building permit applications and other approvals under the Building Code shall not be subject to the time limits established in Section 6.06(B)(2). The applicant may display a temporary sign while the application for the permanent sign is pending approval under the Building Code, and such temporary sign will not count toward the applicant's total permitted temporary signs during the pendency of the application. It will count toward the applicant's total permitted permanent signs. 
C.  Permit Not Required. 
1.  Traffic Control Signs: Traffic control signs which are necessary for the regulation of traffic and parking areas on private property in nonresidential districts do not require a permit. No such sign shall include advertising material. 
2.  Flags: Flags may be erected and displayed without a permit, subject to the following: 
a.  No more than three flags may be flown per parcel. 
b.  The maximum height for a flag pole shall be 20 feet as measured from established grade line to the top of the pole. 
3.  Barber Poles or Signs and Other Signs Required by Federal, State, or Local Law: Barber shops may display either a barber pole or a window sign reading Barber without a permit. If a pole is displayed, it may not exceed 28 inches in height. Where a federal, state, or local law requires a property owner to post a sign on the owner's property to warn of a danger or to prohibit access, no permit is required. However, the sign must otherwise comply with the size, construction, and other requirements of this Code unless such requirements conflict with the federal, state, or local law requiring posting of the sign. 
4.  Window Signs: Signs incorporated into a window display may be displayed without a permit, provided such signs are in conformance with the other requirements of this Section. 
5.  Temporary Signs and Banners: Temporary signs and banners may be displayed without a permit provided such signs are in conformance with the other requirements of this Section. 
6.  Traffic Control Devices: Except as provided in Subsection 6.06(J), control devices erected by the City, state, or federal governments for purposes of directing or regulating traffic or identifying street, place, or landmark names, are not subject to this Section. The placement of such signs serves the City's compelling interest in maintaining traffic and pedestrian safety. 
D.  General Conditions and Requirements. 
1.  Prohibited Signs: The following signs are prohibited: 
a.  Except for building mounted signs, free-standing signs and window signs, and temporary signs and banners as otherwise permitted in this Section, all signs visible from outdoors. 
b.  Flashing, animation or full-video, scrolling, moving or creating the illusion of movement, rotating signs with text or graphics, intermittently lighted signs or other mechanically or manually rotated or eye-catching devices, or flashing or running lights giving the illusion of movement, including time and temperature devices. 
c.  A sign of any kind that causes, creates or allows public viewing of any adult material describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any sidewalk, public or private right-of-way, or any property other than the lot on which the business is located. 
d.  Signs with changeable copy, digital or manual. 
e.  Inflatable signs, sails, feather flags or balloons used to advertise or direct attention. 
f.  Mobile billboards. 
g.  Signs mounted on or attached to a pole (not including flags, as noted above). 
h.  Messages or graphics projected onto a surface from an external or detached source. 
i.  Wall-wraps or building-size supergraphics. 
j.  Signs which closely resemble or approximate the shape, form, and color of official traffic control devices or signals, where such sign is within 15 feet of any public right-of-way and facing a direction of travel on such right-of-way. 
k.  Mural or pictorial signs. 
2.  Prohibited Locations: Signs shall not be installed in any of the following locations: 
a.  No sign shall be located where the sign would obstruct or interfere with a required doorway, other required means of ingress or egress, or traffic visibility. At an intersection of two right-of-way lines, no sign shall be located within an intersection clearance zone formed by a line connecting the two right-of-way lines at points 30 feet back along each line from their point of intersection (See definition and graphic for Intersection Clearance Zone in Section 2.02). Where more than two right-of-way lines intersect, or where the intersection is of an irregular or unusual configuration, BZAP shall determine the appropriate intersection clearance zone so that sight lines and visibility will be maintained, for purposes of maintaining traffic and pedestrian safety. 
b.  No sign shall be attached to the standard of a free-standing sign, other than on the display surface of such sign. 
c.  No sign shall be attached to or painted or otherwise displayed on a roof, bench, light standard, gasoline pump, outdoor patio fence, umbrella, fence, wall, post, tree or other structure, or to any portable supporting device. 
d.  Except for temporary signs and banners used to advertise special commercial events, no sign or banner shall be installed off premises. 
e.  No sign shall be placed in public right-of-way. No sign shall be placed on City property without prior written permission of the City. 
3.  Design: The shape, form and colors of signs shall conform to the following: 
a.  No sign shall closely resemble or approximate the shape, form and color of an official traffic sign, signal or device where such sign is within 15 feet of any public right-of-way and facing a direction of travel on such right-of-way. 
b.  No more than four colors are permitted to be used on a sign or signs in aggregate on any one building except for a registered trademark that is comprised of more than four colors and which is used for identification of the sign user. For the purpose of this Section, black and white shall be considered colors. 
4.  Illumination: The illumination of signs shall conform to the following: 
a.  Signs illuminated or equipped in any way with electric devices or appliances shall conform to the provisions of the current applicable Building Code. 
b.  Signs illuminated by fluorescent lamps shall be limited to 425 milliamperes or by transformers to 30 milliamperes. Fluorescent lamps of 800 milliamperes may be used provided the spacing between each lamp is no less than nine inches from center to center of the lamps and such lamps are not closer than five inches from center of lamp to inside face or faces of sign. 
c.  Except for window signs, neon tube-type lighting shall be powered, at the maximum, by 60 milliampere transformers and only when such neon tube-type lighting is used to backlight silhouetted letters or for the internal illumination of plastic faced signs or letters. Neon tube-type lighting used for internal illumination of plastic faced signs shall not be visible to the eye and shall not be closer than one inch to the plastic face or letter of any sign. 
d.  Internally illuminated signs shall illuminate letters, numbers and graphic symbols only. All other elements of the sign and its structure shall be opaque so that the background of the sign shall not be internally illuminated. 
e.  Externally illuminated signs shall be illuminated by a white, stationary light not exceeding 600 lumens (or 10 watt fluorescent or LED), directed solely at the sign with a full cutoff fixture and/or shield to eliminate glare and off-site illumination. 
f.  Signs shall not be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 PM and 6:00 AM unless the business is open for business outside those hours, in which case the sign shall be illuminated only during those business hours. 
5.  Construction: 
a.  Signs shall be so constructed that they will withstand a wind pressure of at least 30 pounds per square foot of surface, and will be otherwise fastened, suspended or supported so that they will be in conformance with the applicable provisions of the current Building Code and otherwise shall not be a menace to persons or property. 
b.  All permanent signs shall be constructed of non-combustible material. 
c.  All signs, canopies and awnings, which are constructed on, over, or within five feet (5') of a public thoroughfare, shall have no nails, tacks, wires, or other hazardous projections protruding therefrom. 
6.  Comprehensive Graphics Plan Required: To avoid visual clutter and visual blight, to improve wayfinding, to decrease distraction for motorists and pedestrians, and to encourage economic development and placemaking as contemplated by the Master Plan in the City's Planned Mixed Use Districts (PMUDs), a comprehensive graphics plan shall be required for all projects located in a PMUD. This shall be reviewed by BZAP for signage types, locations, color scheme, sizes, illumination, compatibility with architecture, and establishment of unity of design for the development. In evaluating a Comprehensive Graphics Plan, this Section shall serve as a reference but the Comprehensive Graphics Plan may supersede this Section's requirements; provided, however, that any deviation from this Section's requirements in a Comprehensive Graphics Plan shall not impair the City's aesthetic objectives, traffic and pedestrian safety, or the City's other interests as noted in this Section. After adoption of a comprehensive graphics plan, all new individual signs shall be reviewed by the Community Development Department for conformance with such graphics plans. The Community Development Director shall determine whether minor amendments to graphics plans, other than those related to the specific types of signage permitted, shall require BZAP review. 
BZAP has the right to rescind any approval, or any subsequent approvals, if the graphic design criteria required are not adhered to by the owners, tenants, or other parties permitted to erect signs by future owners. 
7.  Right to Substitute Message: Subject to the landowner's consent, a non-commercial message of any type may be substituted for any duly permitted or allowed commercial message or any duly permitted or allowed non-commercial message; provided, that the sign abides by the provisions of Section 6.06, without consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary within Section 6.06. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular non-commercial message over any other non-commercial message. This provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel nor does it affect the requirement that a sign must comply with all other regulations set forth in Section 6.06. 
E.  Permanent Signs: 
1.  General: 
a.  All permanent signs shall conform to the general conditions and requirements contained in Section 6.06 D and pertinent regulations contained herein respective to their type (e.g. building mounted or free-standing). 
b.  A site may contain both building mounted and free-standing signs in compliance with this Section. When a free-standing sign is constructed, the maximum permitted sign area of a building mounted sign is not permitted to be more than 50 percent of that otherwise permitted. As a condition of free-standing sign approval, existing building mounted signs must be replaced or reduced in area to comply with the provisions of this section as necessary. 
c.  Permanent signs shall be maintained in good appearance, repair, and safe working condition. 
2.  Building Mounted Signs: Permanent building mounted signs shall comply with the following: 
a.  Only one building mounted sign per street elevation is permitted, and no more than two building-mounted signs are permitted for a building with more than one street frontage. A sign shall only be mounted on the building which houses the business establishment advertised by such sign, except as otherwise specifically authorized by this Section. 
b.  Building mounted signs shall be located on or along a wall of the building along the street elevation. Signs shall not project above the roof line or the cap of parapets of such building, whichever is higher. Signage shall not face a residential district unless the distance from the signage to the nearest residential property line is at least 150 feet. In the case of a building that does not front a public street, the drives and parking spaces adjacent to such building shall be considered as public streets for the purpose of this Section. 
c.  Signs shall be parallel to the wall on which they are installed, and shall be as nearly flush with such wall as is practical. 
d.  One blade sign is permitted per street frontage and is not counted as a building-mounted sign, subject to the following: 
i.  One sign, not more than 15 square feet in area, projecting outward from the building wall not more than four feet, is permitted to be erected at each entrance to such building. 
ii.  No part of any sign shall be less than eight feet above the sidewalk or ground level where such sign projects forward of the wall on which it is mounted to such an extent as to constitute a hazard or inconvenience to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. No part of any sign shall be closer than 18 inches to either end of the building face (including any wall extension) on which it is erected. Where more than one sign is erected on the same face of a building, there shall be a distance of at least three feet between signs. 
e.  The total sign area on any one side of a building is not permitted to exceed more than one and one-third times the allowable message area for such side computed in accordance with the following rules: 
i.  Except as required in Section 6.06 E.1.b, the maximum aggregate message area of all exterior building mounted signs of every nature shall not exceed one and one-half square feet for each lineal foot of street frontage of the business space. 
ii.  In the case of a corner lot, outparcel or other situation where the building site abuts more than one public street (not including alleys), the applicant shall specify which is the primary frontage, and message areas will be permitted on the basis of the area authorized above for each lineal foot of primary street frontage and one-half the permitted amount for non-primary street frontage. 
iii.  No part of any sign shall be less than eight feet above the sidewalk or ground level where such sign projects forward of the wall on which it is mounted to such an extent as to constitute a hazard or inconvenience to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. No part of any sign shall be closer than 18 inches to either end of the building face (including any wall extension) on which it is erected. Where more than one sign is erected on the same face of a building, there shall be a distance of at least three feet between signs. 
f.  The message area shall be limited to identification of the name of the business, the business address and the type of business maintained or operated on the premises, except that 20 percent of the permitted message area is permitted to contain business descriptions, explanations and representations including, but not limited to, slogans, price lists, testimonials and guarantees. 
g.  Building mounted signs that are not on a street elevation shall not be illuminated, shall not be greater than four square feet in area, and shall contain text only. No permit shall be required for such signs, and the area thereof shall not count toward the total square footage of sign area permitted. 
3.  Free Standing Signs: Permanent free-standing signs shall comply with the following: 

Free Standing Sign
a.  Only one free-standing sign per street frontage is permitted. 
b.  A written application for free-standing signs shall be filed with the Community Development Department, together with a drawing of the proposed sign showing its design, size, height, color, materials, typefaces, type sizes, graphic logo's and other graphic features which are part of the sign, shown both to scale and dimensioned on illustrative drawings. A site drawing showing the dimensions of the site and the location of the proposed sign shall also be provided. 
c.  Sign pedestals shall be brick or stone compatible with the material used on the principal building. Landscaping shall be provided at the base of the free-standing sign. It shall consist of evergreens, perennials, or both. Annuals may be added seasonally. Landscaping shall be maintained so that it does not obstruct the view of vehicle operators or pedestrians entering or exiting any driveway, parking area, or sidewalk. Landscape maintenance and plant replacement shall be performed as needed and shall not be considered to be a modification of the sign. 
d.  A free-standing single identifier sign shall comply with the following requirements: 
i.  The maximum sign height and overall height of the sign shall comply with Table 6-H. Sign pedestals shall not be included as part of the total sign area, but shall be included in the calculation of total overall sign height. 
ii.  The maximum message area permitted, including text, graphics and symbols, is specified in Table 6-H. 
iii.  The sign area, sign message area or slogan area of any one surface in aggregate shall not exceed that stipulated in Table 6-H. The message area permitted on all free-standing signs, including text, graphics and symbols, is defined in Table 6-H. The maximum area permitted for business descriptions, explanations and representations including, but not limited to, slogans, price lists, testimonials and guarantees is specified in Table 6-H and is denoted as slogan area. The remainder of the message area shall be limited to identification of the name of the business, the business address and the type of business maintained or operated on the premises. 
iv.  No part of the sign will be closer to any right-of-way line or property line than 15 feet. 
v.  No part of the sign message shall be closer than 18 inches to the highest grade elevation around the base of the sign. This 18 inch band shall not be included as part of the total sign area, but shall be included in the calculation of the total sign height. 
vi.  Sign faces shall be perpendicular to the nearest path of vehicular travel whenever practical. 
vii.  When a sign is designed and arranged to be visible from two or more roads at an intersection, the most restrictive among the combined regulations shall apply. Protected turn lanes shall not be included in the number of lanes counted. 
Table 6-H: Graphic Element Regulations Free Standing Single User Identifiers {Two Lanes} Speed 
*Any speed not listed shall resort to the next lowest mph level Maximum Permitted Sign Area Per Face Maximum Permitted Message Area Per Face Maximum Permitted Slogan Area Per Face must be included in message area Permitted Sign Width/Height width/height proportion shall not be less than 2.5:1 Minimum Width Maximum Height Sign Overall 0-25 mph 9.0 s.f. 4.5 s.f. 0.9 s.f. 4.7' 1.9' 5.0' 35 mph 12.0 s.f. 6.0 s.f. 1.2 s.f. 5.6' 2.2' 5.5' 45 mph 18.0 s.f. 9.0 s.f. 1.8 s.f. 6.7' 2.7' 6.0'  
Table 6-H continued Graphic Element Regulations Free Standing Single User Identifiers {Four Lanes} Speed 
*Any speed not listed shall resort to the next lowest mph level Maximum Permitted Sign Area Per Face Maximum Permitted Message Area Per Face Maximum Permitted Slogan Area Per Face must be included in message area Permitted Sign Width/Height width/height proportion shall not be less than 2.5:1 Minimum Width Maximum Height Sign Overall 0-25 mph 10.0 s.f. 5.0 s.f. 1.0 s.f. 5.1' 2.0' 5.0' 35 mph 20.0 s.f. 10.0 s.f. 2.0 s.f. 7.1' 2.8' 5.5' 45 mph 33.0 s.f. 16.5 s.f. 3.3 s.f. 9.1' 3.6' 6.0'  
e.  To avoid visual clutter and visual blight, to improve wayfinding, to decrease distraction for motorists and pedestrians, and to encourage economic development and placemaking as contemplated by the Master Plan in the City's commercial and PMUDs, a free-standing main site identifier sign shall comply with the following requirements: 
i.  Where more than one business enterprise is located on a single tract of land, having an entrance or entrances or parking area or areas used in common by the customers of such establishments, only one main site identifier is permitted for the entire tract. The existence and boundaries of tract shall be determined by community of use, rather than by the ownership thereof, it being intended by this provision to limit each shopping center or similar joint operation to one main site identifier, except in the case of a shopping center which is contiguous to two streets which do not intersect each other at a point adjacent to such shopping center, in which case one main site identifier sign, fronting on each street, may be authorized. 
ii.  The maximum sign height and overall height of such sign shall comply with Table 6-I. Sign pedestals shall not be included as part of the total sign area, but shall be included in the calculation of total overall sign height. 
iii.  The sign area, message area or slogan area of all surfaces in aggregate shall not exceed twice the area stipulated in Table 6-I. The maximum message area permitted on all free-standing signs, including text, graphics and symbols, is specified in Table 6-I. The maximum area permitted for business descriptions, explanations and representations including, but not limited to, slogans, price lists, testimonials and guarantees is specified in Table 6-I and is denoted as slogan area. The remainder of the message area shall be limited to identification of the name of the business, the business address and the type of business maintained or operated on the premises. 
iv.  No part of the sign will be closer to any right-of-way line or property line than 15 feet. 
v.  Sign messages shall be at least 18 inches above the highest grade elevation around the base of the sign. This 18 inch band shall not be included as part of the total sign area, but shall be included in the calculation of the total sign height. 
vi.  Sign faces shall be perpendicular to the nearest path of vehicular travel whenever practical. 
vii.  When a sign is designed and arranged to be visible from two or more roads at an intersection, the most restrictive among the combined regulations shall apply. Protected turn lanes shall not be included in the number of lanes counted. 
viii.  BZAP has the right to rescind any approval, or any subsequent approvals, if the graphic design criteria required are not adhered to by the owners, his tenants, or other parties permitted to erect signs by future owners. 
ix.  It shall be unlawful to display both a building sign and a main site identifier sign for the same parcel of land and/or building or center, except in conformity with the exemptions provided in this Ordinance, and unless BZAP grants specific main site identifier signage approval under the criteria outlined herein. 
Table 6-I: Graphic Design Element Regulations for Free Standing Main Site Identifiers {Two Lanes} Speed 
*Any speed not listed shall resort to the lowest mph level Maximum Permitted Sign Area Per Face Maximum Permitted Message Area Per Face Maximum Permitted Slogan Area Per Face must be included in message area Permitted Sign Width/Height width/height proportion shall not be less than 2.5:1 Minimum Width Maximum Height Sign Overall 0-25 mph 18.0 s.f. 9.2 s.f. 1.84 s.f. 6.8' 2.7' 5.0' 35 mph 32.0 s.f. 16.0 s.f. 3.2 s.f. 9.0' 3.6' 5.5' 45 mph 50.0 s.f. 25.0 s.f. 5.0 s.f. 11.2' 4.5' 6.0'  
Table 6-I Graphic Design Element Regulations for Free Standing Main Site Identifiers {Four Lanes} Speed 
*Any speed not listed shall resort to the lowest mph level Maximum Permitted Sign Area Per Face Maximum Permitted Message Area Per Face Maximum Permitted Slogan Area Per Face must be included in message area Permitted Sign Width/Height width/height proportion shall not be less than 2.5:1 Minimum Width Maximum Height Sign Overall 0-25 mph 26.0 s.f. 13.0 s.f. 2.6 s.f. 9.75' 3.9' 5.0' 35 mph 54.0 s.f. 27.5 s.f. 5.5 s.f. 11.7' 4.7' 5.5' 45 mph 90.0 s.f. 45.0 s.f. 9.0 s.f. 15.0' 6.0' 6.0'  
F.  Temporary Signs and Banners: In order to preserve the character of residential neighborhoods, reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards, maintain open spaces and avoid the appearance of clutter, protect property values, and prevent nuisances, temporary signs and banners, other than those governed by Section 6.06H, shall comply with the general conditions and requirements contained in Section 6.06 and the following specific requirements: 
1.  Temporary Signs and Banners on Residential Property: 
a.  Temporary Signs and Banners on Residential Property: Temporary signs are allowed on residential property and are subject to the following conditions: 
i.  Location: Signs and banners shall be located on the property. Signs and banners shall not be located in the public right-of-way. 
ii.  Maximum Area: A sign and banners shall be a maximum of eight square feet per side and 16 square feet total area for two-faced signs. 
iii.  Maximum Height: A sign or banner shall be a maximum four feet above grade if free-standing and shall not be attached to any roof or roof element if building mounted. 
iv.  Maximum Number Permitted: No more than five such signs or banners per lot are permitted. In addition to the five permitted signs or banners per lot, the property shall be permitted an additional one sign or banner per street frontage if the property or a unit of the property is under construction or is on the market for sale or lease. 
v.  Maximum Permitted Duration: Commercial construction or commercial real estate signs or banners must be removed within five days after the sale, lease or completion of the improvement. All signs or banners shall be removed if the City Manager or designee determines the sign or banner to be deteriorated, as defined in Section 2.02, or when displayed in a non-compliant location, as defined in Section 6.06, or when displayed for more than three (3) months. 
vi.  Illumination of temporary signs and banners is prohibited. 
vii.  Changeable copy/text are prohibited on temporary signs and banners. 
2.  Temporary Signs and Banners on Non-Residential Property: Temporary signs and banners erected on non-residential property are allowed, subject to the following conditions: 
i.  Design: Temporary signs and banners must be professional in good appearance and repair. All signs and banners shall be removed if the City Manager or designee determines the sign or banner to be deteriorated, as defined in Section 2.02, or when displayed in a non-compliant location, as defined in Section 6.06, or when displayed for more than three (3) months. 
ii.  Maximum Area: Free-standing temporary signs and banners shall not exceed 20 square feet per side and 40 square feet total area. Building mounted single-faced signs and banners may not exceed 60 square feet in area. 
iii.  Location: Signs and banners may be located on the property. Signs and banners shall not be located in the public right-of-way. 
iv.  Maximum Height: A sign or banner shall be no more than six feet above grade if free-standing and shall not be attached to any roof or roof element if building-mounted. 
v.  Maximum Permitted Number: Maximum Permitted Number: One sign or banner per street frontage is permitted, up to two (2) commercial signs or banners. The total number of all temporary signs and banners, whether commercial or noncommercial, permitted on the premises shall not exceed four. 
vi.  Maximum Permitted Duration: Signs shall be removed if the City Manager or designee determines the sign or banner to be deteriorated, as defined in Section 2.02, or when displayed in a non-compliant location, as defined in Section 6.06. To avoid visual clutter, confusion for pedestrians and motorists, and misleading the public, if the sign is a commercial sign and it is advertising a commercial event on a specific day, it shall be installed no more than ten days prior to the advertised event and removed no later than 48 hours after the advertised event. A-frame signs may be displayed on-site during hours of operation. 
If the sign or banner is advertising the improvement, sale, or lease of the property during a period when it is being improved, or is being offered for sale or lease, such sign shall be removed no later than five days after the sale, lease or completion of the improvement. 
vii.  Illumination of temporary signs and banners is prohibited. 
viii.  Changeable copy/text are prohibited on temporary signs and banners. 
3.  Temporary Signs and Banners on City Property or Located within the Public Right-of-Way: 
a.  All signs not placed by the City, or not with the prior written permission of the City, including temporary signs and banners, are prohibited in the public right-of-way. 
b.  The Code Compliance Officer or designee shall remove signs on City property or located within the public right-of-way as set forth below: 
i.  The Code Compliance Officer or designee shall remove all signs that are erected on City property or within the public right-of-way that have not been placed by the City or that have not been placed pursuant to the express authority of the City acting in its proprietary capacity. The Code Compliance Officer or designee shall not be required to provide prior notice of the removal to the adjacent property owner, or to the presumptive owner of the sign if identified on the sign. 
ii.  Unauthorized signs placed in the right-of-way or on City property shall be considered abandoned property. Any sign removed pursuant to this section may be disposed of without notice or compensation. 
c.  Exemption: Traffic control signals and devices installed by the City, state, or federal governments; boundary and landmark markers; and public notices by these governmental bodies are exempt from this provision. This exemption serves the purposes of sign regulation because the placement of the signs and devices exempted is found to improve vehicle and pedestrian safety by providing a means for the control of traffic; improving vehicular and pedestrian wayfinding; and avoiding hazardous distraction of motorists and pedestrians. Moreover, the City finds that its proprietary interests in the City's rights-of-way are served best by limiting placement to the City, state, or federal government. 
G.  Window Signs. Window signs are permitted to be physically affixed to, painted on, or placed within two feet of windows so as to be viewed from outside the building subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Location: Window signs may only be placed in ground level windows. 
2.  Area: Window signs are limited to 50% per window. 
The use of opaque film will reduce the total window area by the same amount. 
3.  Maintenance: Window signs must be maintained in good appearance and repair. All signs shall be removed if the City Manager or designee determines the sign to be deteriorated, as defined in Section 2.02, or when displayed in a non-compliant location. 
4.  Illumination: Is not permitted, except from a concealed light source. Blinking window signs are prohibited. 
H.  R-Districts-Signs Prohibited: To preserve the residential character of R-districts, to maintain property values, and to avoid visual clutter in R-districts, except for temporary signs specifically permitted under Subsection 6.06(F), signs are prohibited in any R-district. Signs shall not be attached to any building, except that the Board may authorize signs attached to a building in the R-4 district upon finding that such signs are reasonably required in connection with the proposed use and that they will comply with the provisions of this Chapter and any conditions and restrictions as the Board may deem necessary for the protection and enjoyment of other property in or adjacent to such district. 
I.  Non-Conforming Signs. 
1.  Except as otherwise specifically provided, nothing in this Section shall require the removal or discontinuance of a legally existing permanent sign which is attached to the realty, as distinguished from a temporary or portable sign, that is not altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended or relocated, and the same shall be deemed a non-conforming use under the terms of this Ordinance. 
2.  No sign shall hereafter be altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended or relocated except in conformity with the provisions of this Section. The repainting and/or refacing of signs shall not be deemed to be an alteration within the meaning of this Ordinance so long as the repainting or refacing constitutes an exact replica of the existing sign face. 
3.  Commercial signs which advertise an abandoned business shall be removed within 60 days after the business ceases operation. 
J.  Government Speech. 
1.  Signs, banners and other noticing devices relating to economic development activities and any and all other matters of civic and cultural benefit as determined by the City may be erected and displayed on City Property or private property, with permission of the property owner, that is determined to be appropriate by the City for government speech to assist in the enhancement of civic and cultural events and the economic development of the City, subject to approval from the City Manager. 
2.  Unless specifically authorized by the Codified Ordinances, or any applicable state or federal law as recognized by the City, no signs, banners or other noticing devices may be displayed on City Property, except in or on a traditional public forum and in accordance with the Codified Ordinances. Any unauthorized sign, banner or other noticing device posted on City Property may be summarily removed by the City as a trespass and a public nuisance. It is prohibited and unlawful to display a sign on City Property unless permitted by the City Manager in accordance with the provisions of the Codified Ordinances. 
3.  The following signs may be erected and displayed on City Property, subject to approval by the City Manager in accordance with the provisions of the Codified Ordinances: 
(a)  Traffic control and traffic directional signs erected by the City including, but not limited to, temporary traffic and traffic direction signs. 
(b)  Official notices required or authorized by controlling law. 
(c)  Signs placed by the City in furtherance of its governmental functions including, but not limited to, governmental directional signs and commercial signs authorized by City Manager. 
(d)  Civic event signs which relate to civic events as determined to be of significance and importance by the City or City-sponsored events that express the City's own message. 
(e)  Signs placed by the City on City Property that express the City's own message, such as governmental directional signs. 
(f)  Signs placed by another governmental entity with the City's prior written permission. 
4.  Additionally, the City may locate governmental directional signs at its discretion on City property to allow persons to be directed to areas within the City subject to approval by the City Manager pursuant to the provisions of the Codified Ordinances. 
K.  Variances: Applications for variances from the time, place, and manner regulations in this Section shall be processed as provided in UDO Section 4.09. However, the standards for approval of a sign variance shall be as follows in this subsection. All of the following factors shall be found by the BZAP prior to approval of a sign variance: 
1.  That the variance will not impair any of the regulatory purposes provided within this sign code; 
2.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land or structure involved and which are not applicable generally to other lands or structures in the same zoning districts. Examples of such special conditions or circumstances are: exceptional irregularity, narrowness, shallowness, or steepness of the lot, or adjacency to nonconforming and inharmonious uses, structures, or conditions; 
3.  That the variance is the minimum necessary to resolve the practical difficulties prompting the variance request; 
4.  That the essential character of the neighborhood would not be substantially altered; 
5.  That adjoining properties will not suffer substantial detriment as a result of the variance; 
6.  That the variance would not adversely affect the delivery of governmental services such as public safety services response, or water, sewer, or trash pickup; and 
7.  That the special conditions or circumstances on the property were not caused by the current owner who is requesting the variance. 
Variances shall not be granted where the special conditions and circumstances are the result of actions by the current owner of the property. 
L.  Severability: If any provision of this Section or the application thereof is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this Section, which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application, and to this end the provisions of this Section are hereby declared severable. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 42-2017 , § 4, 6-26-2017; Ord. No. 53-2017 , § 5, 12-11-2017) 
§ 6.07 - LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND BUFFERING. 
(A)  Purpose: The purpose of these landscape regulations is to establish the minimum standards for the provision, installation and maintenance of the landscaped environment within Upper Arlington. All landscaping, screening and buffering are subject to the regulations that follow in this chapter. 
(1)  The intent is to protect and enhance the visual appearance and natural beauty of Upper Arlington by encouraging the preservation of existing trees and requiring the planting of new trees and vegetation. 
(2)  To protect and enhance property values by providing reasonable yet appropriate conditions for buffering and screening buildings and uses from adjacent properties. 
(3)  To provide ecological benefits including: reduced stormwater runoff, reduced erosion, improved air and water quality, and to help promote energy conservation through the reduction in heat island effects and heat gain/loss. 
(B)  Applicability: These requirements shall apply to new and existing development through a landscape plan which is part of a development plan, site plan or major subdivision application. Such landscape plan shall be approved prior to the installation of any plant material. All landscaping shall be installed and permanently maintained in accordance with the approved landscape plan, and shall be replaced if damaged, removed or destroyed. Minor amendments to the landscape plan, such as tree location or species selection, may be approved by the City Forester. 
(C)  Tree preservation and habitat protection: All existing on-site healthy trees shall be preserved to the fullest extent reasonable, unless directed otherwise by BZAP and/or the City Forester. Special consideration should be given to mature or exceptional specimens. If appropriate, a habitat protection area shall be established to protect stream banks, wetlands, steep slopes, wildlife scenic views and other unique natural resources. 
(D)  Development coverage: Site development coverage shall not exceed the percentages listed in Table 5-F and Table 5-G. Permeable paving surfaces are encouraged as a means to mitigate stormwater runoff. Patios and sport courts which exceed 500 square feet and are within ten feet of a property line require approval of drainage and grading plan. 
(E)  Recommended tree species: The following types and minimum sizes (at installation) of landscape plants are recommended in Upper Arlington. Trees not on this list may be substituted with approval from the City Forester. 
Table 6-J: Minimum Sizes for Landscape Plants 
Type Tree Type Examples Description Minimum Size A Sugar Maple, Zelkova, Red Oak, Honeylocust Deciduous tree that matures over 30' Height 3" Cal B Crabapple, Winter King Hawthorn, Flowering Dogwood, Redbud Deciduous tree that matures less than 30' height, single stem 2" Cal C Serviceberry, Sweetbay Magnolia Deciduous tree that matures less than 30' height, multi stem 8' Ht D White Pine, Norway Spruce, Colorado Spruce, White Fir Evergreen tree that matures over 30' height 8' Ht E Techny Arborvitae, Ketleeri Juniper Evergreen tree that matures less than 30' height 6' Ht F Border Forsythia, Viburnum, Oak-Leaf Hydrangea, Burning Bush Evergreen or deciduous shrub that matures over 6' height 3' Ht G Alpine Currant, Anthony Water Spirea, Itea Evergreen or deciduous shrub that matures less than 6' height 2' Ht H Andorra Juniper, Everlow Yew, Mugo Pine Evergreen or deciduous shrub that matures over 4' spread 18" Spread  
(F)  Streetscape: There shall be one Type A or B or similar tree planted along or within the City's right-of-way for each twenty-five (25) feet of street frontage. These required street trees may be planted in side and/or rear yards as Type C or D or similar trees. Decorative landscape beds within the City's right-of-way may be permitted, subject to approval by the City Forester. 
(G)  Foundation plantings: 
(1)  All building facades fronting on a public street or plaza, where the building is greater than four (4) feet from the sidewalk, shall have continuous foundation plantings consisting of Type G or H or similar plants. 
(2)  In the case of additions to existing buildings, the facades of both the addition and the existing building shall be landscaped with continuous foundation plantings of Type G or H or similar plants. 
(3)  Foundation plantings may be accommodated in planters or clustered in landscaped beds when continuous plantings are not feasible. 
(H)  Trash containers, loading areas and mechanical devices: Trash containers and loading areas shall be shielded from view with either an opaque wall or fence that is compatible with the principal structure. Trash containers are to have an opaque gate that is to remain closed when not in use. In addition to the wall or fence, a landscape buffer of either Type F, G or H plants shall be installed on the side(s) which impact adjacent property owners. All such walls, fences, and gates shall exceed the height of the dumpster by a minimum of one foot and shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height. Commercial mechanical devices, including but not limited to, air conditioners, generators and heat pumps shall be screened to minimize visual and noise impacts. Utility structures shall be screened per the provisions of Article 6.10(C)(11). 

(I)  Minimum landscape buffer: Any property within a multi-family residence district, neighborhood business district, community business district, conditional business district, planned mixed use district or planned shopping center district shall contain a minimum landscape buffer of at least ten feet in width, except street frontages. The minimum landscape buffer shall provide the following, unless otherwise approved by the Board of Zoning and Planning: 
(1)  Fence or wall: A six-foot tall high-quality wood fence or masonry wall shall be installed along side and rear property lines within the landscape buffer. If adjacent to a residential district, the fence or wall may project in front of the adjacent residential building line if reduced to a maximum of three and one-half (3.5) feet in height. 
(2)  Fence or wall screening: The fence or masonry wall along side and rear property lines shall be screened with at least one Type G or H or similar shrub planted every three (3) feet within the landscape buffer. 
(3)  Canopy and shielding: At least one Type A, B, C or D or similar tree shall be installed a minimum of every twenty (20) feet within the landscape buffer and shall exceed the height of the adjacent fence at installation. 
(J)  Parking area landscaping: Any surface parking area containing five (5) or more parking spaces in a one-family residence district, one-to-four family residence district, multi-family residence district, neighborhood business district, community business district, conditional business district, planned mixed use district or planned shopping center district shall be required to provide the following landscaping: 
(1)  Landscape islands: One landscape island shall be installed to divide parking areas in the above districts, except the planned mixed use district and planning shopping center district, into bays of not more than ten (10) parking spaces per bay. For parking areas in the planned mixed use district and planning shopping center district, one landscape island shall divide the parking area into bays of not more than fifteen (15) parking spaces. The minimum width of a landscape island is eight (8) feet; however, alternative designs meeting the general code intent may be approved. At least one Type A, B or C or similar tree shall be planted in each required landscape island, and shrubbery, hedges or other landscape plants shall be used to compliment the tree. 
(2)  Interior greenspace ratio: Interior parking lot landscaping shall cover a minimum of eight (8) percent of the surface parking area. 
(3)  Minimum landscape buffer: A landscape buffer around the parking area that complies with the requirements of UDO Article 6.07(I). 
(4)  Adjacent to public right-of-way: A minimum ten-foot wide landscape buffer shall be located between the parking lot and the right-of-way. A hedge, stone wall or other durable landscape barrier of Type G or similar plants shall extend the entire length of the landscape buffer. One Type A or similar tree shall be planted for each twenty (20) feet of length of the landscape buffer, but may be relocated elsewhere on the property if approved by the City Forester. 
(5)  Landscaping at driveway and street intersections: In order to maintain the safety and visibility of pedestrians and motor vehicles, all landscaping that exceeds proscribed heights shall be planted outside of the intersection clearance zone and sight visibility triangles. 
(6)  Shopping cart corrals: The perimeter of a shopping cart corral area shall be designed with a landscape buffer or hedge of Type H or similar plants. The buffer or hedge may be tied into other landscape islands. The landscaped cart corral may count toward landscape island requirements if a Type A, B, or C or similar tree is planted. Vertical signage or identification is prohibited. 

(K)  Rain barrels: Rain barrels are encouraged but shall not be located nearer to any street than the nearest wall of the principal building and shall maintain a setback of at least three (3) feet from side and rear property lines. The rain barrel should match the color of the adjacent structure. A complete rain barrel system shall consist of the holding tank, downspout connector/diverter, a sealed lid or mosquito screen, a hose bib and an overflow connected to a storm sewer or an approved location. 
(L)  Rain gardens: Rain gardens are encouraged, but shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from building foundations and a minimum of fifteen (15) from property lines. Rain gardens shall be subject to review and approval of the Chief Building Official and shall be constructed in accordance with the latest edition of the "Rain Garden Guidelines for Southwest Ohio" published by the Ohio State University Extension, Hamilton County. Rain gardens installed in the right-of-way by the City or a utility company shall not be subject to these regulations. 
(M)  Green roofs: Green roofing systems are encouraged, but shall meet all fire and wind requirements for roof systems, as determined by the Chief Building Official. All systems shall include design load verification submitted by a licensed design professional. 
(N)  Community and private gardens: Community and private gardens for edible produce shall be properly maintained and cared for, and shall not be located in City right-of-way. Community gardens may be permitted on private property with approval of the property owner. No community garden shall be located in a front yard. 
(O)  Compost bins: Compost bins are permitted, provided that such materials are contained in a bin or enclosure, are properly turned and maintained, and do not create or cause a nuisance to adjacent property owners. The compost bin shall be located behind the nearest wall of the principal building and shall maintain a setback of at least three feet from side and rear property lines. Compost scrap piles are not permitted. 
( Ord. No. 9-2015, §§ 1, 2, 4-27-2015 ; Ord. No. 54-2017 , § 19, 12-11-2017) 
§ 6.08 - OUTDOOR LIGHTING STANDARDS. 
(A)  The purpose of these outdoor lighting standards is to provide adequate illumination for safety and security, improve nighttime visibility through glare reduction and lighting uniformity, reduce sky-glow to increase night sky access, and to reduce overall light pollution. The intent is also to promote energy efficient, cost effective and high quality outdoor lighting systems. 
(B)  Applicability: All non-residential developments are required to provide outdoor lighting for all exterior doorways, pedestrian pathways, and parking and loading/service areas. Single-family residential and all commercial development is subject to the light trespass criteria as noted in Subsection 6.08(D) of this Ordinance. High intensity light beams in the form of outdoor search lights, lasers or strobe lights are prohibited. 
(C)  Minimum site lighting criteria: All outdoor lighting shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  0.5 footcandles minimum maintained: As measured at grade in all parking and loading areas and pedestrian pathways, actual site measurement compliance shall not drop below this stated minimum. For design purposes, the light loss factor (LLF) shall be calculated per current Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) standards. 
(2)  Lighting uniformity shall not exceed: 
(a)  10:1 maximum to minimum light levels. 
(b)  4:1 average to minimum light levels. 
(3)  Pole mounted luminaire overall height limitations: Height shall be measured from finished grade to top of fixture. 
Office, commercial & institutional 25 feet maximum Mixed use 30 feet maximum  
(D)  Light trespass criteria: Light originating on-site shall not be permitted to exceed the following values when measured at grade fifteen (15) feet beyond the property line for the following adjacent uses: 
Single-family 0.1 footcandles Multi-family 0.2 footcandles Office, commercial & institutional 0.60 footcandles Mixed use 0.60 footcandles  
Outdoor sports facilities will be reviewed for compliance with regard to the intent of these exterior lighting standards to minimize the impact of light trespass and glare on all surrounding properties and public rights-of-way. 
(E)  Glare control criteria: In order to eliminate glare, all fixtures shall be mounted horizontal to the ground and meet the following: 
(1)  All other outdoor lighting, including but not limited to parking lots, loading/service areas, pedestrian pathways, doorways, architectural, accent, landscape, signage, decorative, security, floodlighting, or area lighting shall meet Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) full cutoff classification. 
(2)  Directional control shields may be required in order to limit stray light. These are to be aimed and controlled so that the directed light is confined to the object intended to be illuminated. 
(3)  No portion of the lamp, reflector, lens, or refracting system may extend beyond the housing or shield, nor shall any illumination occur upward from a reflected light source. 
(F)  Non-essential illumination: All non-essential lighting shall be turned off by 10:00 p.m. or when not in use. The use of timers or motion sensors is encouraged. Public spaces that are frequented at night should stay illuminated until closed. 
(G)  Energy efficiency and dark skies: In order to promote energy efficiency and dark skies, light-emitting diode (LED) and induction lighting shall be considered before incandescent, halogen, florescent, or high pressure sodium lamp fixtures. Narrow band amber LED (NBALED), Phosphor-converted amber LED (PCALED), Filtered LED, Low Temperature (1800K-2700K) white LED or Low-Pressure Sodium (LPS) are all encouraged. 
(H)  Lighting plan submittal criteria: See Subsection 4.07(K) for submittal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 106-2009; Ord. No. 44-2016 , § 5, 10-24-2016) 
§ 6.09 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES. 
(A)  Purpose: Accessory structures may be erected upon a lot on which a principal structure already exists. The use of the accessory structure must be secondary and incidental to the principal structure and use. An accessory structure that is attached to the main building shall comply with all the requirements of these regulations that are applicable to the principal building. 
(B)  Permit required: A certificate of zoning compliance is required to be issued before an accessory structure is constructed or an accessory use may occur on a parcel or in a building (See Article 4, development procedures). A major accessory structure or use shall be approved by BZAP and a minor accessory structure or use shall be approved by the Director of Community Development. A building permit is required for any accessory structure that exceeds two hundred (200) square feet in area. See Table 5-f for size limitations. 
(C)  General provisions: The following general provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Types: 
(a)  Storage structures: Any structure used solely for storage of materials, supplies, tools and similar items. 
(b)  Recreational structures: Any structure used for recreational activity, including but not limited to, goal nets, backstops, trampolines, half-pipes, quarter-pipes, ramps, swimming pool houses, playhouses and playground equipment. Basketball goals and portable lacrosse, hockey and small soccer goals, as well as small, free-standing neighborhood book exchange boxes and small giving pantries in the front of the principal residence are exempt from the restrictions noted in this section. 
(c)  Pet structures: Any structure used to house or contain family pets. 
(d)  Mechanical devices: Any device incidental to the operation or use of the principal building, including but not limited to, air conditioners, electric generators, heaters and rain barrels. 
(e)  Patio structures: Any detached, permanent structure used primarily for outdoor entertaining, cooking or dining purposes, including but not limited to: pergolas, trellises, outdoor fireplaces, kitchens or bars. 
(2)  Location: 
(a)  No accessory structure shall be located in a reserve, preservation/do not disturb area or public right-of-way. An accessory structure may be located within a platted easement with approval of an Easement Encroachment Permit when no site excavation work is performed. 
(b)  No accessory structure shall be located in front of a platted building line or in a front yard. 
(c)  Storage structures are to maintain a minimum setback of three (3) feet from side and rear property lines. 
(d)  Recreational, patio, and pet structures are to maintain a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from side and rear property lines. 
(e)  Mechanical devices, including wires, pipes, supports, or other appurtenances shall not be located in any front yard, nearer to any street than the front face of the principal building in question, or nearer to any side or rear property line than three (3) feet. 
(f)  All generators, including wires, pipes, supports, or other appurtenances, must be located within the buildable area of the lot, in addition to being behind the front face of the principal building. 
(3)  Number/Size: 
(a)  Only one (1) storage structure; 
(b)  Only one (1) recreational structure; 
(c)  Only one (1) pet structure; and. 
(d)  The total square footage of all non-patio accessory structures shall not exceed the accessory cover limit specified in Table 5-F. 
(4)  Height/Noise: 
(a)  No storage structure shall exceed ten (10) feet in height. 
(b)  No patio or recreational structure shall exceed twelve (12) feet in height. A pergola or trellis shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. 
(c)  No pet structure shall exceed six (6) feet in height. 
(d)  Mechanical devices shall not exceed eighty (80) inches in height. 
(e)  Mechanical devices shall not exceed sixty (60) decibels in sound output when measured at the property line. 
(5)  Aesthetic consideration: The vistas of adjacent property owners shall be considered with the installation and maintenance of storage structures and generators. As viewed from neighboring property lines, no more than fifty percent (50%) of said structure or generator shall be visible during all seasons of the year. Fifty percent (50%) opacity can be achieved by use of the following methods: 
(a)  Existing or new vegetation. 
(b)  Existing or new fencing. 
(c)  Existing structures (detached garages, neighboring accessory structures, etc.). 
(6)  Temporary exceptions/modifications to this section: The Director of Development is authorized to grant temporary exceptions to or modifications of this section in special circumstances where a necessity exists for the use of a vehicle described in Subsection 6.09(D)(6) and the prohibitions contained in said section would constitute a real hardship. Such special circumstances may include, but are not limited to, the location of a field office required for a construction project. Such permission shall be limited to the time during which the use of such vehicle is reasonably necessary for the project for which such exception was granted. 
(7)  Keeping of livestock: The keeping of livestock on any property, other than those properties zoned for agricultural use, shall be prohibited unless otherwise approved by the Board of Zoning and Planning. 
(D)  Standards: The following standards are presented by accessory use and/or building type. 
(1)  Detached garages and carports: 
(a)  Setbacks: No detached garage or carport shall be permitted nearer to any front lot line than sixty (60) feet. For corner lots, the detached garage or carport can be built along the front setback line when proposed along the longer of the street frontages. A detached garage or carport shall maintain a minimum side and rear yard setback of at least three (3) feet and shall not occupy any easement. In the River Ridge Addition only, existing carports may be enclosed to create a garage if there are no changes to the footprint and if an additional story is not included. Such enclosure shall be compatible with the principal residence and include fence or other landscape screening adjacent to the structure. 
(b)  Timing of construction: No detached garage or carport shall be erected or constructed prior to the erection or construction of the principal or main building, except in conjunction with the same. 
(c)  Quantity: There shall be no more than one (1) detached garage or carport per dwelling unit. 
(d)  Height: Detached garage or carports located outside of the buildable area of the lot shall not exceed the height limitations specified in Table 5-F for detached garages and carports. Detached garages or carports located completely within the buildable area of the lot shall not exceed the height limitations specified in Table 5-F for principal buildings. 
(e)  Detached garage dormers: Dormers are not permitted except when they face one (1) or more streets contiguous to a property line. 
(f)  Detached garage area limits: Detached garages or carports located outside of the buildable area of the lot shall not exceed the detached garage building cover limit specified in Table 5-F. The 870-square foot limit shall not apply to detached garages located in multi-family residential districts, only the detached garage cover limit. 
(g)  Detached garage roof and plate height: The top plate wall height supporting all roofs for detached garages and carports outside of the buildable area of the lot shall not exceed nine (9.5) feet and six inches above the parking floor elevation. 
(h)  Driveway required: All detached garages and carports are required to have a hard surface driveway that consists of an approved impervious material and shall have a minimum width of eight (8) feet. 
(i)  Attached roof structures: Pergolas, trellises and other roof structures that are attached to the detached garage shall meet all provisions within this Section. 
(2)  Decks and balconies: 
(a)  Location: Decks may be located in an interior side yard or rear yard as long as they are at least three (3) feet from the side and rear property lines, do not occupy any part of a platted easement, and are subject to the limitations described below. Unless utilized for a front porch or entrance platform per the requirements of Article 6.01(D), no deck shall project into the front yard. Detached or floating decks must be located within the buildable area of the lot, and are subject to limitations described below for encroaching decks. Balconies shall be attached or contiguous to the principal structure or building, and located completely within the buildable area. 
(b)  Encroachments: The following requirements apply only to decks that encroach into required yards and shall not apply to decks that are located entirely within the buildable area: 
i.  The deck platform shall not exceed two (2) feet above grade at any point within six (6) feet of the deck's perimeter. 
ii.  The deck shall have no walls or roof planes, or permanently attached benches, seats, or other structures of any kind, except a guardrail, which may be up to forty-two (42) inches in height above the top of the deck. 
(3)  Home offices and occupations: 
(a)  Permitted uses: A home office or occupation is permitted as an accessory use in a dwelling unit in any residential area. All provisions of this UDO pertaining to residential uses shall be met. In addition, all special conditions specified in this UDO shall apply. 
(b)  Additional permitted uses: Additional home offices and occupations not listed in Table 5-B may be permitted when, in the opinion of the Director of Community Development, these uses are similar in nature and will not violate any of the conditions noted below. 
(c)  Prohibited uses: Therefore, the uses specified in Table 5-B shall not be permitted as accessory home offices and occupations in a residential zone because of their potential to impair the use and value of a residentially zoned area. 
(d)  Additional prohibited uses: Additional home offices and occupations not listed in Table 5-B may be prohibited when, in the opinion of the Director of Community Development, these uses are similar in nature or will violate one (1) or more of the conditions noted below. 
(e)  Conditions: The following conditions and limits of activity apply to all home occupations within the City: 
i.  Business traffic: No traffic shall be generated by any home occupation unreasonably greater in volume or different in nature than would otherwise normally occur in the residential neighborhood in which it is located; 
ii.  Construction alterations: All structural alterations must comply with the building code when the scope of these alterations exceeds the building code's definition of accessory use; 
iii.  Employees/Independent contractors: No more than two (2) employees or independent contractors shall be on the premises at any given time, unless they are residents of the premises; 
iv.  Signage: There shall be no advertising, signs, display, or other indications of the home office or occupation in the yard, on the exterior of the dwelling or visible from anywhere outside the dwelling; 
v.  Business area: The home office or occupation shall be conducted within the principal structure or dwelling unit. It may be located anywhere within the dwelling unit, but its total area shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) or five hundred (500) square feet, whichever is the lesser, of the habitable square footage of the premises, which is entirely above grade. The entire structure must comply with the building code when this area exceeds the State of Ohio's definition of accessory use; 
vi.  Hazard: No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, radioactive, or other restricted materials are used or stored on the site, and no process may be used which is hazardous to public health, safety, morals, or general welfare; 
vii.  Performance: No plumbing, electrical wiring or equipment or apparatus of any kind may be installed or used that would create or increase the threat of fire, explosion, radiation, noise, odor, smoke, particulate, or other nuisance or hazard of any kind; 
viii.  Interference: Electrical or mechanical equipment that creates visible or audible interference in radio or television receivers, or causes fluctuations in line voltage outside the dwelling unit, or that creates noise not normally associated with residential uses shall be prohibited. The lack of adequate shielding of neighboring receivers shall not be a defense to interference claims; 
ix.  Storage: Storage of equipment or materials used in the home office or occupation is permitted in addition to the business area limits specified above, as long as it does not further reduce the habitable space at the premises. Both storage areas and business areas must comply with the building code when these areas separately or collectively exceed the State of Ohio's definition of accessory use. There shall be no display or storage of equipment, materials, goods, or supplies used in the conduct of the home occupation outside of an enclosed building; 
x.  Employee/Independent contractor parking: If the Director of Community Development determines that a parking nuisance is being created by a home occupation, the provisions of Subsection 3.06(A) may be invoked to remove this nuisance from the neighborhood; 
xi.  Vehicle graphics: No passenger car as defined in ORC § 4501.01 as amended, with the home office or occupation name, descriptive wording, and/or identifying graphics on it shall exceed the graphic limitations identified in Subsection 6.09(D)(6)(b) for parking of trucks and trailers on private property when parked on the premises outside of a completely enclosed building; 
xii.  Appearance: There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home office or occupation when viewed from off the premises, except for the parking specifically permitted in these special conditions; 
xiii.  Residency: The owner, operator or officer of the home office or occupation shall reside in the dwelling unit in which the business operates; and 
xiv.  Multiple home offices and occupations: More than one (1) home office or occupation may be permitted within an individual dwelling unit, provided all other standards and criteria applicable to home office and occupations are complied with. Such criteria shall be applied cumulatively to all home offices and occupations within the same dwelling. 
(4)  Home sales: 
(a)  Home sale: Means a sale of personal property to the general public conducted in or on any property within a residential zoning district, to include, without limitation, garage sales, patio sales, yard sales, porch sales, driveway sales, motor vehicle sales, and the sale of boats, trailers, motorcycles, motor homes and the like. 
(b)  Prohibitions: No person shall sell or offer for sale at such home sale any merchandise that has been purchased, consigned or otherwise acquired for purposes of resale. The offering of new merchandise for sale shall be evidence that such merchandise was acquired by the resident for purpose of resale. No person shall sell or offer at such sale any personal property except such as has been owned and maintained by such person or members of his family on or in connection with the premises on which such sale is held. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to not-for-profit corporations, churches, temples, schools, fraternities, sororities, associations, clubs or lodges. Such organizations may conduct sales of personal property donated to them on real estate owned or occupied by such organizations subject to the other provisions of Subsection 6.09(D)(6). 
(c)  Frequency and duration of sales: Only one such sale may be conducted on any parcel of real estate in any six-month period, which sale shall be limited to not more than three (3) consecutive days or two (2) consecutive weekends of two (2) days each. No sale may commence before the hour of 8:00 a.m. or extend later than 8:00 p.m. This subsection shall not apply to the sale of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, motorcycles or motor homes. 
(d)  Other conditions of sales: Personal property offered for sale may be displayed in the front, side or rear yard of any such premises provided that such personal property is not located within a right-of-way or otherwise obstructs clear vision All signage shall be consistent with the provision of Subsection 6.06(F)(3). Only one such sign may be displayed and its display shall be limited to the dates and hours during which the sale is held. Such sign shall not be larger than four (4) square feet in area, shall not be illuminated or animated, and shall not contain any advertising material unrelated to the conduct of the sale. No sign may be displayed for the sale of a motor vehicle, boat, trailer, motorcycle or motor home on the premises. 
(e)  Sale of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, motorcycles and motor homes: The following provisions shall apply in the case of any motor vehicle, boat, trailer, motorcycle or motor home offered for sale: 
i.  Such vehicles may be displayed for sale only upon an impervious surface on any portion of the lot, including those located in any front, rear or side yards, provided that the vehicle is not parked in the City's right-of-way. Only one such item may be displayed at any time; 
ii.  No person shall park or leave standing the above named vehicles upon any property not owned or controlled by such person for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale; 
iii.  Not more than two (2) signs, each of which shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area, may be displayed for the sale of such item upon or in the motor vehicle, boat, trailer, motorcycle or motor home only, provided that such signs shall not be illuminated or animated; and 
iv.  Any such motor vehicle, boat, trailer, motorcycle or motor home displayed for sale must be in operating condition and capable of being immediately moved under its own power if self-propelled or if not self-propelled by towing by ordinary means available upon the premises. This subsection shall not apply to corporations not-for-profits, churches, temples, schools, fraternities, sororities, associations, clubs, lodges, or any form of business, whether sole proprietorship, partnership, or corporation, carried on for profit whether formally organized or not. 
v.  Motor vehicles, boats, trailers, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, watercraft and recreational trailers offered for sale shall comply with the requirements of this section and Subsections 6.09(D)(6) and 6.09(D)(7). 
(f)  Exemptions: Except as provided in Subsection 6.09(D)(4)(b), (d), and (e) above, the provisions of Subsection 6.09(D) shall not apply to a sale of property publicized solely by classified newspaper advertising, which describes or identifies the specific property offered for sale and does not designate the date, hours or location of the sale other than by stating the name, address or telephone number of the seller. 
(5)  Parking of motor vehicles: 
(a)  Restrictions: In any zoning district, an automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle as defined in Section 2.02 shall not remain on any non-impervious parking surface (such as lawn) of any lot for a period of more than four (4) hours. All vehicles parked or stored on private property other than in completely enclosed buildings shall be in operable condition and bear proper tags and validation stickers. For purposes of this section, a motor vehicle shall be deemed inoperable when any of the following conditions exist: 
i.  One (1) or more wheels are missing; 
ii.  One (1) or more tires are missing; 
iii.  One (1) or more tires are flat; 
iv.  One (1) or more windows are cracked, broken or missing; 
v.  The windshield is shattered or missing; 
vi.  Parts necessary for the operation of the vehicle are missing; or 
vii.  When the vehicle is not capable of being started and driven from the location in question; or 
viii.  When an invalid license plate is displayed on the vehicle. 
(b)  No parking: No motor vehicle shall be parked, stored or allowed to remain on a driveway within the City's right-of-way, or in violation of Subsection 6.09(D)(5)(a), except for emergency vehicles as defined in section 2.02. 
(c)  Collector's Vehicles: In accordance with ORC § 4513.65, collector's vehicles as defined in Section 2.02 may be kept on private property with the permission of the person having the right to possession of the property, except that the vehicle must bear current registration, be parked on an impervious surface in compliance with the UDO and be concealed by means plant material or landscape design elements which obscure the visibility of the parked vehicle from adjacent residential property and public right-of-way. 
(6)  Parking of trucks and trailers on private property: 
(a)  Required screening: No motor vehicle having more than four (4) tires, and no trailer having more than two (2) tires, shall be parked, stored or allowed to remain for more than two (2) hours in any twenty-four-hour period on any lot or parcel of land in this City, unless fully contained within an enclosed structure. No vehicle excepted from the definition of motor vehicle, excluding motorized bicycles, no matter how many tires, shall be parked, stored or allowed to remain for more than two (2) hours in any twenty-four-hour period on any lot or parcel of land in this City, unless fully contained within an enclosed structure. 
(b)  Restrictions for unscreened parking: Any motor vehicle with no more than four (4) tires, and any trailer with no more than two (2) tires, may be parked, stored or allowed to remain outside of a fully enclosed structure, subject to the following conditions: 
i.  All such vehicles and trailers, when parked more than two (2) hours in any twenty-four-hour period, shall be located no closer to any street than the building setback line or the most remote wall of the building elevation facing the street, whichever is further from the street; 
ii.  All such vehicles or trailers, shall be parked at least three (3) feet from any side lot line. A side yard facing a street on a corner lot shall be considered a front yard; 
iii.  Only one such vehicle or trailer may be parked outside of a fully enclosed building at any one (1) dwelling unit, and may not be parked outside in addition to a recreational vehicle, trailer or boat parked in compliance with Subsection 6.09(D)(7); 
iv.  Any equipment and/or load attached to, or supported by, such vehicle must be totally enclosed within this vehicle to conceal it from external observation; and 
v.  Graphics are permitted on the sides of such vehicles only. Graphics are limited to the front passenger doors or to ten percent (10%) of the total area of each side of the vehicle, whichever is less. Said area shall be measured behind the cab or behind the front passenger door on a pick-up or van. Graphics are computed for and permitted on each side of the vehicle. No more than three (3) colors, exclusive of vehicle color, may be used. For the purposes of this UDO, black and white are considered colors. 
vi.  All such vehicles or trailers shall be in operable condition as provided for in Subsection 6.09(D)(5) and shall not be parked or stored on any non-impervious parking surface (such as a lawn) of any lot for a period of more than four (4) hours. 
(c)  Exemption for noncommercial vehicles: Passenger cars which qualify as noncommercial motor vehicles, as defined in ORC § 4501.01, are exempt from the requirements of this UDO. 
(d)  Exemptions for temporary vehicle usage: This UDO shall not apply to recreational vehicles, watercraft or recreational trailers as defined in Subsection 6.09(D)(7), or to such vehicles used for conveying the necessary tools and materials to premises where labor, using such tools and materials, is to be performed during the time of parking such vehicles, or to the time during which such vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer is being loaded or unloaded, or used to deliver or hoist property or merchandise for completion of delivery, if such loading, unloading or other activities referred to in this provision are conducted diligently and without unnecessary delay. 
(7)  Parking of recreational vehicles, watercraft and recreational trailers on private property: This UDO addresses three (3) types of equipment generically called recreational vehicles, watercraft and recreational trailers, (hereinafter referred to as vehicles), which are further defined below: 
(a)  Definition of recreation trailers: Types of recreational trailers include, but are not limited to, any form of device, equipment, or machinery on wheels, or a single wheel, that is intended to be pulled by a motor vehicle, whether or not attached to a motor vehicle. This shall include every vehicle designed and utilized for the sole purpose of transporting any boat, auto, snowmobile, recreational habitation, and the like, which does not have motor power, but is designed to be drawn by another vehicle. 
(b)  Definition of watercraft: Types of watercraft include, but are not limited to, any of the following when used or capable of being used for transportation on the water: 
i.  A boat, or similar personal watercraft, operated by machinery either permanently or temporarily affixed; 
ii.  A sailboat other than a sailboard; 
iii.  An inflatable, manually propelled boat having a hull identification number meeting the requirements of the United States Coast Guard; and 
iv.  A canoe or rowboat. 
(c)  Definition of recreational vehicles: See Article 2: Definition, Recreational Vehicle. 
(d)  Specifications: All vehicles shall meet the following conditions when parked in any zoning district within the City: 
i.  Location/Screening: When located outside an enclosed structure, all such vehicles must be parked on an impervious surface within the buildable area of any given lot, and be screened from the view of surrounding neighbors and passing motorists. The use of tarpaulins and/or location within an open-sided carport does not qualify as adequate screening. If an objection to the degree of obscurity is received by the Director of Community Development, the Director shall determine if adequate screening, or obscurity exists. The opinion of the Director of Community Development may be appealed to BZAP by any party affected by this opinion, pursuant to Section 4.10. The extent of owner liability for obscurity is limited to the erection of a six-foot opaque wooden fence screening the vehicle from view from all abutting property owners and streets. 
ii.  Parking beyond buildable area: No vehicle which is parked, stored or allowed to remain on a lot within the City shall remain for more than two (2) hours in any twenty-four-hour period outside the buildable area of that lot, except that a vehicle may be parked outside of the buildable area for not more than five (5) full or five (5) partial days in any thirty-day period when being loaded or unloaded. For purposes of this Ordinance, the term partial day shall mean more than two (2) hours cumulatively in any twenty-four-hour period. 
iii.  Improvements: No vehicle shall be parked, stored or allowed to remain on a lot or parcel of land which is not improved with a principal building. 
iv.  Habitation/Guest occupancy: A vehicle may not be used for overnight sleeping or living while parked on private property within the City, except that a vehicle may be parked on private property inside or outside the buildable area for a period not to exceed in the aggregate, seventy-two (72) hours in any thirty-day period, if the owner or person in charge of such vehicle is a bona fide guest of the occupant or occupants of such private property. 
v.  Storage: No materials of any kind shall be temporarily or permanently placed or stored beneath, or on top of, parked vehicles. 
vi.  Registration: All recreational vehicles and recreational trailers shall be operable and have borne valid registration and licenses within the most recent twelve-month period. All watercraft shall be operable and have been registered within the most recent twelve-month period. Operable in the case of a powered vehicle means a vehicle capable of being started and driven from the location in question. Operable in the case of a non-powered or waterborne vehicle means a vehicle capable of being towed from the location in question. 
vii.  Indoor storage: Parking vehicles under roof within a permanent enclosure is encouraged. 
viii.  Maintenance/Condition: A vehicle is inadequately maintained, and shall be removed from the City, when all of the following conditions are met: 
a)  The vehicle is three (3) years or older; and 
b)  The vehicle is extensively damaged. Such damage may include but is not limited to any of the following: broken windows or windshield, missing wheels, tires, motor or transmission; and/or the vehicle is apparently inoperable. 
ix.  Ownership: The vehicle must be owned by a resident on whose lot it is parked, unless it qualifies for the guest occupancy exception above. 
x.  Safety: The vehicle shall not be parked in an unsafe manner. 
xi.  Commercial use of vehicle: Any vehicle used partially or wholly for commercial purposes shall be governed by Subsection 6.09(D)(5), commercial purpose may include, but is not limited to: 
a)  Advertising on the vehicle indicating a non-residential use; or 
b)  The use of the vehicle for entertainment of customers related to a business purpose. 
xii.  Construction/Delivery: The other provisions of this section notwithstanding, this section shall not apply to such vehicles used for conveying the necessary tools and materials to premises where labor, using such tools and materials, is to be performed, during the time of parking such vehicles or to the time during which such vehicle is being loaded or unloaded or used to deliver or hoist property or merchandise for completion of delivery, if such loading, unloading or other activities referred to in this provision are conducted diligently and without unnecessary delay. 
xiii.  Watercraft length: Watercraft may not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in length as measured from bow to stern. 
xiv.  Number of vehicles: Only one such vehicle may be parked outside of a fully enclosed building at any parcel and shall not be parked outside in addition to a truck or trailer in compliance with Subsection 6.09(D)(6). 
(8)  Authority to grant parking exceptions: The City Manager is authorized to grant temporary exceptions to or modifications in special circumstances where a necessity exists for the use of a vehicle described in Subsections 6.09(D)(6)(c) and (d) hereof, and the prohibitions contained in said section would constitute a real hardship. Such special circumstances may include, but are not limited to, the location of a field office required for a construction project. Such permission shall be limited to the time during which the use of such vehicle is reasonably necessary for the project for which such exception was granted. 
(9)  Antenna and antenna towers: Antenna means any system of wires, poles, rods or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of television broadcast signals, direct britches signals, direct britches satellite services or multi-channel multi-point distribution services, as defined and regulated by 47 C.F.R. Statute 1.4000. Antenna tower means any structure, greater than twenty-five (25) feet in height, used for the primary purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas as defined above, including foundation, guys and other components thereof. 
No antenna tower or tower mast shall be located in or occupy any part of a required front or side yard. Antennas, antenna towers, including foundation guys and other components thereof, shall not project over any property line. No antenna tower or tower mast shall extend more than sixty (60) feet above the ground site on which it is located. If mounted on the roof of a dwelling or other building, an antenna tower or mast shall not extend more than twenty (20) feet above the highest ridge of the roof nor more than twenty (20) feet above the ground level immediately below. 
Not more than one (1) antenna tower with antennas or not more than one (1) satellite ground station as defined in this section shall be erected on any lot or parcel of land, whether the same is free-standing, attached to a building wall or mounted on a building roof; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply to a tower or antenna attached to a wall or mounted on the roof of a residence which does not project more than six (6) feet above the highest ridge of the roof, and if the maximum horizontal dimension of such tower and antenna does not exceed twelve (12) feet. 
(10)  Regulation of dish-type satellite signal receiving antennas: The purpose of these regulations is to regulate the proper development and use of dish-type satellite signal receiving antennas in order to ensure safe installation, and to protect and enhance the overall physical appearance of the community. All dish-type satellite signal receiving antennas are subject to the provisions set forth in this section. 
Satellite signal receiving antennas which are one (1) meter or more in diameter located in all zones, and two (2) meters or more in diameter located in industrial or commercial districts shall comply with the following restrictions so that the health, safety and aesthetic objectives of the community can be accomplished: 
(a)  A satellite antenna may be mounted on a roof as long as it does not project above the ridge of the roof to which it is attached; or if attached to a flat roof, it may not project more than three (3) feet above the coping or parapet of said roof. 
(b)  A satellite antenna shall not be mounted upon architectural features including but not limited to towers, cupolas, spires or chimneys. 
(c)  A satellite antenna may be ground mounted if no portion of the antenna exceeds a height of six (6) feet above the elevation of the ground site on which it is located; and shall be erected on a foundation designed to support the loads intended. Where the ground under the foundation has been raised to a higher level than the surrounding surface, the permissible height of the satellite antenna shall be reduced by the height of such mound or raised surface. 
(d)  A satellite antenna may be mounted to the side or rear walls of the principal building, but may not project above adjacent roof edge, ridge, and/or eave lines. 
(e)  A satellite antenna shall not be visible from the street, except when either located on the side or rear wall of the building, in the rear yard, or in the buildable area adjacent to the rear yard and behind the principal structure. 
(f)  Satellite antennas shall not be erected in the City without a zoning compliance and an electrical permit. A building permit is also required when a foundation is involved. 
(11)  Gazebos, pavilions and other open-sided structures: These structures are defined as a free-standing, unheated structure which is unenclosed except for a structural system supporting a roof, and screen panels which may be used to enclose the open spaces between structural elements. The structure must meet the following minimum design criteria: 
(a)  All open-sided structures are limited to one (1) story; and the height to the top of the highest roof ridge beam, or to the highest point of any other roof form, from the finished floor may not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
(b)  The area may not exceed two hundred (200) square feet. 
(c)  Materials: All finished roof surfaces, except for flat roofs, shall be either metal, seal-tab asphalt shingles, clay tile, slate or wood shingles. All other finish surfaces shall be either wood, brick, stone, screen or any combination thereof. 
(d)  All structures shall be located in the rear yard buildable area. 
(e)  Illumination of the structure exterior is prohibited. Illumination within the structure shall not exceed seventy (70) footcandles measured at a horizontal plane three (3) feet above the finished floor. 
(f)  If the structure is built on a mound, deck, or other elevated surface, the height of this elevated surface at its highest point above grade shall be added to the height of the structure to determine the overall height of the structure being measured. 
(g)  These regulations shall not apply when an open-sided structure is attached to the principal residence and is within the buildable area of the lot. 
(12)  Private swimming pools and hot tubs: 
(a)  Location, area and height: 
i.  All hot tubs shall be located within the buildable area. In the event a proposed hot tub has more than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of area on the water surface when filled to capacity, all regulations for swimming pools shall apply; 
ii.  No swimming pool or part thereof (including walkways, decking and associated equipment located around the pool) shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet to the side or rear line of the lot or nearer to any street than a distance ten (10) feet greater than the building setback line. The swimming pool water surface area shall not exceed the percentage of lot area specified in Table 5-F; 
iii.  The top of the walls, decks or walks of any swimming pool shall not project more than two (2) feet above the average finished grade of the pool site or portion of the lot immediately surrounding the pool; 
iv.  Swimming pool accessories are limited to diving boards, slides and lights designed to illuminate the pool and the immediate surrounding area. None of these accessories may exceed ten (10) feet in height, such height to include handrails, supports and other safety devices, and may not cover a ground surface area in excess of thirty (30) square feet; 
v.  Swimming pool equipment shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet from side and rear property lines, and shall not occupy any part of an easement; and 
vi.  Swimming pool equipment shall not exceed sixty (60) decibels in sound output when measured at the property line. 
(b)  Fences: 
i.  Every swimming pool (including existing pools) shall be completely enclosed by a fence of sturdy construction not less than forty-eight (48) inches in height, measured from the level of the ground where located, which shall be of such design and construction as to effectually prevent a child from crawling or otherwise passing though or under such fence. Each gate in such fence shall be provided with a secure lock and shall be kept locked at all times when the depth of water in the pool exceeds eighteen (18) inches, unless said pool is in use or is under the immediate observation of a responsible person. No part of any fence shall be located between the building setback line and the street on which the lot or parcel abuts. 
(c)  Lights: All lights used for illuminating such swimming pool, hot tub or the surrounding areas shall be so designed, located and installed as to confine the direct beams thereof to the lot or parcel on which the pool is located, and so as not to constitute a nuisance or undue annoyance to occupants of abutting property. 
(d)  Drainage: Provisions shall be made for drainage of swimming pools or hot tubs in compliance with the Ohio Plumbing Code and EPA standards. 
(e)  Permits and operation: 
i.  No person shall locate, construct or install any swimming pool or make any change therein or in the appurtenances thereof without having first submitted an application and plans therefore to, and having obtained a permit from the Department of Community Development and the health commissioner; 
ii.  Such permit shall not be issued unless and until the plans and specifications shall have been approved as to structural safety and compliance with this UDO by the Director of Community Development; 
iii.  Every swimming pool, including existing swimming pools, shall be provided with a filtration system approved by the Board of Health; and 
iv.  No person shall use, operate, repair or maintain any swimming pool or hot tub in violation of any of the provisions of this UDO or of any lawful order of the Director of Community Development, or in violation of any regulation of the Board of Health or any order of the health commissioner issued pursuant thereto. 
(f)  Application of requirements: All provisions of this UDO shall apply to private or noncommercial swimming pools and hot tubs. The provisions of Subsections 6.09 (D)(12)(b)-(f), inclusive, shall apply to all swimming pools. 
(13)  Fences: 
(a)  Purpose: The purpose of these fence regulations is to preserve and protect property values, to enhance safety and security, to provide privacy, and to improve the visual environment. 
(b)  Applicability: No fence, wall or barrier, other than a temporary construction or snow fence, shall be constructed, erected, installed or substantially replaced on any property without an approved fence permit from the Community Development Department. Minor repairs and maintenance do not require a fence permit. An underground/invisible pet fence shall not be subject to the limitations associated with fences, but shall not be located in city right-of-way. 
(c)  Prohibited fences: The following fences are prohibited: 
i.  Fences or walls having wire, metal prongs, spikes, or cutting points or edges of any kind whatsoever, or which is charged with electric current. Picket fences shall have points blunted. Chain link fences shall be coated with black, brown, or dark green vinyl, plastic, or other similar material. 
ii.  No fence or fences shall be constructed so that there are two (2) more or less parallel fences in the same yard on one (1) property unless there is a distance of at least five (5) feet between the fences or their appurtenances. This section is not intended to prohibit adjoining property owners from erecting abutting fences along a shared property line. 
(d)  Location and height: Fences may be located in yards as follows: 
i.  Front yard: As measured from the building setback line to the City right-of-way line: 
A.  Fences may extend fifteen (15) feet forward of the building line, provided such fence does not exceed three and one-half (3.5) feet in height, as measured above the elevation of the surface of the ground at such point. 
B.  Fence posts may exceed the height of the fence by a maximum of six (6) inches. 
ii.  Side and rear yards: 
A.  Fences shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, as measured above the elevation of the surface of the ground at such point. 
B.  Fence posts may exceed the height of the fence by a maximum of six (6) inches. 
iii.  For purposes of determining the location and height requirements, each yard abutting upon a street shall be considered as a front yard on each respective street. 
iv.  Fences or walls located completely within the buildable area are not subject to these height limitations. 
v.  Property line location: The accurate determination of the property line is the responsibility of the property owner or contractor securing the fence permit. The issuance of a fence permit does not indicate city review or approval of the property line location. 
(e)  Supporting elements: Fences or walls supported by posts on the side of the fence or wall shall be erected so that exposed posts and supporting cross elements face the property upon which the fence or wall is being constructed. This provision shall not apply if adjacent property owners file, with the Director of Community Development, written consent to have the fence erected so that such posts and cross elements face their property. Fences shall be erected so that no exposed posts or supporting cross elements face public property. This section shall not apply if the fence is the same on both sides, such as split rail or board and batten fences. 
(f)  Construction on a mound: Where a fence, wall, ornamental feature or hedge is constructed on a mound, or where the ground under the same has been raised to a higher level than the surrounding surface, the permissible height of the fence, wall, ornamental feature or hedge shall be reduced by the height of such mound or raised surface. 
(g)  Ornamental features: May be located in yards as follows: 
1.  Shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches in height. 
2.  Shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in total length. 
3.  Shall not be located in city right-of-way, but may be located in any yard, provided they conform to intersection clearance zone requirements. 
(h)  Retaining walls: Dry-stacked decorative stone walls and entry features: May be located as follows: 
1.  Shall not be located in city right-of-way, but may be located in the front yard, provided they conform to intersection clearance zone requirements. 
2.  Shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height, if located in a front yard. 
3.  Retaining walls shall be constructed per the Residential Code of Ohio. 
(i)  Swimming pool fences: Every swimming pool shall be completely enclosed by a fence of sturdy construction not less than forty-eight (48) inches in height, as measured on the side of the fence that faces away from the swimming pool. Refer to Appendix G of the Residential Code of Ohio for additional requirements pertaining to swimming pool fences. 
(14)  Portable storage units: 
(a)  Specifications: All portable storage units and/or collection boxes shall meet the following conditions when located in any zoning district in the City: 
i.  Duration: 
 Residential properties and uses - Portable storage units shall be permitted for a period not to exceed five (5) days and no permit shall be required. Collection boxes shall not be permitted on residential properties. 
 Non-residential properties and uses - Portable storage units and/or collection boxes shall be permitted for a period not to exceed five (5) days and no permit shall be required. The period may be extended to not more than twenty-one (21) days by permit only. Not more than two (2) permits shall be issued in any one (1) calendar year. 
 For the purposes of this section, non-residential shall mean all commercial, office and institutional properties and uses. 
ii.  Location: Portable storage units shall be internally located and not located at the perimeter of any property. Containers shall be located on an impervious surface and shall not obstruct right-of-way vision clearance at any time. 
iii.  Number: Not more than one (1) unit per property is permitted. 
iv.  PMUD: Portable storage units shall not be permitted in any planned mixed-use district unless otherwise approved as part of a final development plan. 
v.  Prohibited: Semi-trailer donation centers shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Exceptions: The specifications noted above shall not apply to the following: 
i.  Temporary construction sites, provided the portable unit is removed within sixty (60) days from the final occupancy issue date. 
ii.  When necessary to facilitate clean up and/or restoration activities resulting from natural disasters or fire for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days provided that a permit is obtained. 
iii.  Portable storage units used for the collection and storage of articles donated to a recognized charitable or educational organization may be approved by the Director of Community Development provided such unit will not be objectionable to contiguous properties or properties located directly across the street. Such approval may be subject to reasonable health, safety and welfare conditions as to the location, size, type and maintenance of such unit. Portable storage units shall not be permitted in any planned mixed-use district unless otherwise approved as part of a final development plan. 
(15)  Outdoor display - General: All business, services or processing shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except for the sale of automotive fuel, lubricants, fluids and such outdoor display or storage of vehicles, materials and equipment at service stations, as hereinbefore specifically authorized or as may be authorized by the Board. Merchandise may be displayed on the sidewalk, or walkway, immediately in front of and adjacent to business establishments provided: 
(a)  No less than four (4) feet of uninterrupted pedestrian waking space is provided. 
(b)  Stacked merchandise shall not be displayed any closer to any entrance or exit than a distance equal to the actual height of the stacked materials; but in no event shall any merchandise be located any closer than three (3) feet from any entrance or exit. 
(c)  No merchandise shall be stacked higher than five (5) feet excepting merchandise that itself is higher than five (5) feet such as trees. 
(d)  Bagged or boxed material shall be stacked neatly and safely so as not to endanger pedestrians. 
(e)  No bulk or loose material may be piled. Plants, flowers, shrubs or trees shall not interfere with the required walking space. 
(f)  No signs, whirligigs or pennants (other than descriptions and price tags) may be used. 
(g)  This subsection does not relieve the business proprietor from obtaining the consent of the property owner(s) to use such private sidewalks. 
(16)  Temporary sales trailer specifications: All temporary sales trailers require a certificate of zoning compliance and shall meet the following conditions: 
(a)  Duration: Temporary sales trailers shall be permitted for a period not to exceed the shorter of three hundred sixty-five (365) days from the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance or within ten (10) days of occupancy of the sales unit within the building; 
(b)  Location: The trailer shall be permitted in any non-residential zoning district and shall be located on the site as to provide safe access to the structure, be served by adequate parking, and shall not cause undo traffic congestion on the site; 
(c)  Number: Not more than one (1) trailer per development is permitted; 
(d)  Maximum size and height: Temporary sales trailers shall not exceed 720 square feet in size and 11'-6? in height; 
(e)  Hours of operation: Temporary sales trailers shall only operate between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. each day; 
(f)  Lighting/Screening: Temporary sales trailers shall have lights near the entrance and shall have a skirt around the entire trailer base. An approved landscape plan shall be required; 
(g)  Access: Temporary sales trailers shall have an ADA compliant ramp; 
(h)  Signage: Only one (1) sign up to thirty-two (32) square feet is allowed; 
(i)  Outdoor storage: Outdoor storage is strictly prohibited; 
(j)  Extensions: The Director of Community Development may extend the duration or hours of operation after considering the unique conditions and circumstances of the property and the impact on adjacent property owners. 
(17)  Solar panels: A solar photovoltaic panel, or solar hot air or water panel collector device, which relies upon solar radiation as an energy source for the generation of electricity or transfer of stored heat, shall comply with the following restrictions: 
(a)  Location: 
1.  Ground mounted solar panels exceeding two (2) square feet in area shall be located in a side or rear yard only, shall maintain a setback of ten (10) feet from property lines, and shall not be located in a platted easement. However, utility companies may install solar panels within an easement, subject to aesthetic considerations and Subsection 6.10(C)(11). 
2.  Roof and flush-mounted solar panels may be located on any roof structure which meets setback requirements. 
(b)  Height: 
1.  Ground mounted solar panels shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
2.  Roof and flush-mounted solar panels shall not project vertically above the peak of the roof to which it is attached, or project vertically more than five (5) feet above a flat roof installation. 
(c)  Aesthetic consideration: Ground mounted solar panels shall be fully screened from adjacent properties by fencing or structures (detached garages, neighboring accessory structures, etc) or a combination of evergreen and deciduous plantings. 
(d)  Exemptions: Solar panels less than two (2) square feet in area and those installed within the right-of-way by a utility company pursuant to Subsection 6.10(C)(11) or by the City are not subject to the regulations set forth above. 
(18)  Handicap ramps: 
(a)  Location: All handicap ramps shall be attached or contiguous to the principal structure or principal building. Ramps may be located in a front yard, interior side yard or rear yard, as long as they are at least three (3) feet from the side and rear property lines and do not occupy any part of a platted easement. 
(b)  Screening: Ramps projecting into the front yard setback must be screened with evergreen landscaping to a fifty (50) minimum percent opacity. 
(Ord. No. 106-2009; Ord. No. 8-2012; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 21-2016, §§ 9-12, 5-9-2016 ; Ord. No. 16-2017 , § 8, 4-10-2017; Ord. No. 54-2017 , §§ 20-22, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 32-2018 , §§ 9, 10, 4-23-2018; Ord. No. 35-2018 , § 4, 5-29-2018) 
§ 6.10 - CONDITIONAL USES. 
(A)  Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish the provisions of conditional uses where such uses may be allowed in specific zoning districts. 
(B)  General provisions: The following general provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Administration: Any owner of property in the City may submit an application to the City requesting a conditional use permit. The procedure required prior to authorization of a conditional use shall be as prescribed in Article 4, development procedures. 
(2)  Development standards: A conditional use, and its accessory uses, shall be permitted in a zoning district only when the use, and its location, extent, and method of development will not substantially alter the character of the area or interfere with the use of adjacent lots in the manner prescribed for the zoning district. The districts in which these uses are permitted are identified in Tables 5-A, 5-B, 5-C, and 5-D, Use Standards. In addition, the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed use, in terms of the decision standards, shall be reviewed, and the special standards in Subsection (C) shall be fully addressed. 
(3)  Compatibility: If not otherwise stated in the following standards, the standards established in the underlying district in which the conditional use is proposed to be located shall apply to the conditional use. 
(C)  Special standards: This section presents the standards applicable to the specific conditional uses listed. Unless otherwise noted, the development standards of the zoning district and UDO shall apply: 
(1)  Bar, lounge, and tavern: 
(a)  Purpose: The use shall be for the purpose of selling food and beverages, including alcoholic beverages, to be consumed on the premises. 
(b)  Standards: 
i.  Such establishment shall be located at least two hundred fifty (250) feet from a residential district, churches and schools. 
ii.  All activities shall take place in a fully enclosed sound-resistant building, with closed windows and double-door entrances that provide a sound lock. 
iii.  The site shall be kept free of litter and debris. 
iv.  The use of bars, lounges or taverns shall be no later than 2:00 a.m. unless otherwise specified in the approval. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Day care, child (type A) and/or adult: 
(a)  Purpose: The use shall be for the purpose of providing temporary care for a portion of the day to children and/or adults. A day care facility also may be operated as an accessory use to a place of worship, school, or other public or semi-public organization. 
(b)  Standards: 
i.  Minimum lot area shall be one and one-half (1.5) acres and the minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet. 
ii.  There shall be on the site a safe outdoor play space or recreation area which is enclosed or otherwise protected from traffic or other hazards. The space shall contain no less than sixty (60) square feet per client and shall provide an opportunity for supervised outdoor play or recreation each day in suitable weather. The area shall be enclosed by a fence or wall a minimum of five (5) feet in height. However, when the recreational area abuts a residential property, it shall instead be enclosed by a solid wood fence or masonry wall at least six (6) feet high along the property. 
iii.  Required parking shall be on the same lot as the principle use. 
iv.  An on-site drop off shall be provided at the main entrance to the facility with cueing area sufficient to accommodate eight (8) automobiles for facilities with twenty (20) or fewer clients plus one (1) additional vehicle for each additional ten (10) clients served. 
v.  Access to an arterial or collector street is required or access shall be provided in a manner that does not cause heavy traffic on residential streets. 
vi.  The City may require additional fencing, screening, or other measures necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of clients using day care centers in commercial, industrial, or other high hazard areas. It may also deny a request to locate a facility in such areas based on these considerations. 
vii.  All day care centers shall provide evidence of comprehensive liability insurance insuring against damage to property or physical injury, in combined single limit form, in an amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per person authorized to be cared for. 
viii.  The facility will comply with all applicable codes, as well as the specific requirements for child and/or adult day care facilities as set forth in ORC § 5104. 
ix.  Use of outdoor recreational areas shall be limited to between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(4)  Free-standing drive-through structures: 
(a)  Purpose: The use shall be for retail or service establishments which provide a designated place where people can drive up in automobiles and conduct the major portion of business without having to get out of their automobiles or where the serving of the automobile is the major business. Drive-through uses include but are not limited to drive-through restaurants that prepare and/or dispense food or beverages and do not provide a place for all its customers to eat inside the building or which serve food or beverages for carry out; drive-in theaters, drive-in eating and drinking places, establishments where customers may serve themselves and may eat or drink the food or beverages on the premises; and drive-in banks. 
(b)  Standards: 
i.  Minimum lot area shall be one and one-half (1.5) acres or sufficient area to accommodate the primary use and drive-through structure. 
ii.  Drive-through menu board signs shall include free-standing, pole, pylon and monument signs. One (1) drive-through menu board sign is permitted only when all of the following conditions are fulfilled: the sign is located on the property to which it refers; the sign is not visible from the public right-of-way; the sign does not exceed six (6) feet in height; and the sign is located at least seventy-five (75) feet from a residential zone. 
iii.  All outdoor storage must be completely screened from view from adjacent properties and the street. 
iv.  Loud speaker systems shall be approved as part of the site plan and shall not create a nuisance for adjacent properties. Lighting shall be regulated in accordance with Section 6.08. 
v.  No portion of the structure or its appurtenances, including ancillary, associated, or auxiliary equipment, shall be located in front of the established building line and at least one hundred (100) feet from any adjacent residential property or district. A solid wood fence, masonry wall, or hedge at least six (6) feet high shall be required along the property line on any side of the site adjacent to a residential property. 
vi.  Such facilities shall be located on a major street in an area least disruptive to pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Access shall be from an arterial street or commercial collector or shall be provided in a manner that does not cause heavy impact on residential streets. Access drives shall be one hundred (100) feet from an intersection. One (1) access drive per street frontage shall be permitted and interconnecting circulation aisles between parcels shall be provided in cross access easements. 
vii.  The circulation areas shall provide smooth, continuous flow with efficient, non-conflicting movement throughout the site. Major pedestrian movements shall not conflict with major vehicular circulation movements. 
viii.  Every parking and loading space shall have sufficient access and maneuvering area. All maneuvering areas shall be on the same lot as the use the area is intended to serve. 
ix.  Off-street cueing space for eight (8) vehicles shall be provided for every drive-through facility. Cueing spaces shall not block or otherwise interfere with parking or site circulation patterns. Customer and employee parking shall be separated from drive-through activities and customer parking shall be located in the area with highest accessibility to customer sales. 
x.  This use may be permitted when it can be demonstrated at the time of conditional use request that the use is distributed and properly integrated into the site plan to avoid congestion, to minimize conflict points between auto traffic and pedestrians, to reduce the number of curb cuts and to prevent strip type development. 
xi.  Hours of operation shall be limited to between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., if the drive-through is adjacent to a residential use. Drive-throughs adjacent to non-residential uses may operate no longer than 11:00 p.m. or as specified in the approval. 
(5)  Hotel, lodge, and motel: 
(a)  Purpose: The use shall be for the purpose of providing overnight accommodation to transient guests for compensation. 
(b)  Standards: 
i.  Parking and service areas shall be completely screened from view by a six-foot solid fence, wall or evergreen hedge when adjacent to a residential use. 
ii.  Access to an arterial or collector street is required. Sufficient area shall be provided to accommodate vehicular loading, unloading and drop-off without conflicting with parking and drive-aisles. 
iii.  The use shall be located on a major street. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Motor vehicle-oriented business: 
(a)  Purpose: The use shall be for the purpose of providing services to motor vehicles, including but not limited to car washes, gasoline service stations and motor vehicle repair stations. It is exclusive of drive-through structures, such as restaurants, banks, etc. 
(b)  Standards: 
i.  Facilities shall be compatible with the surrounding area with sufficient site area to accommodate existing and future uses. 
ii.  All outdoor storage must be completely screened from view from adjacent properties and the street. 
iii.  Car wash facilities where vehicles are moved through the facility by a chain conveyor, rollover, or other similar methods shall be equipped with blow dryers to prevent excess water from pooling within the right-of-way. 
iv.  All hydraulic hoists, oil pits and all lubricants, greasing and repair equipment shall be enclosed entirely within a building. No outdoor assembly or repair of motor vehicles shall be permitted. 
v.  No portion of the structure or its appurtenances, including ancillary, associated, or auxiliary equipment shall be located in front of the established building line. 
vi.  All outdoor display areas, canopies, and any buildings used for service shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any adjacent residential property or district. 
vii.  All outdoor display areas, gasoline pumps, canopies, and any buildings used for service or repair work shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any adjacent residential property or district. 
viii.  A solid wood fence, masonry wall, or hedge at least six (6) feet high shall be required along the property line adjacent to a residential property. 
ix.  The minimum distance of driveways from intersections shall be two hundred (200) feet. The minimum distance of driveways to an entrance of a school, place of worship, cemetery, or day care center shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
x.  Access shall be from an arterial street or collector or shall be provided in a manner that does not cause heavy impact on residential streets. Access drives shall be two hundred (200) feet from an intersection; one (1) access drive per street frontage shall be permitted. Interconnecting circulation aisles between parcels shall be provided. 
xi.  The circulation areas shall provide smooth, continuous flow with efficient, non-conflicting movement throughout the site. Major vehicular circulation movements shall not conflict with major pedestrian movements. Access to an arterial or collector street is required. 
xii.  Every parking and loading space shall have sufficient access and maneuvering area. All maneuvering areas shall be on the same lot as the use the area is intended to serve. 
xiii.  Five (5) off-street cueing spaces shall be provided for the facility. Cueing spaces shall not block or otherwise interfere with parking or circulation on the site. 
xiv.  Off-street, cueing space shall be provided for two (2) vehicles for each gasoline pump island located on the site. Cueing spaces shall not block or otherwise interfere with parking or site circulation patterns. Customer and employee parking shall be separated from drive-through activities and customer parking shall be located in the area with highest accessibility to customer sales. 
xv.  All areas not paved or covered by the building shall be landscaped and all landscaped areas shall be separated from all paved areas by six-inch high curbing. 
xvi.  Car wash facilities shall not operate when the outdoor temperature is below 32 degrees Fahrenheit. 
xvii.  All repair work shall be performed entirely within a motor vehicle repair station. During the time work is performed on a vehicle, the vehicle shall be entirely within the building. 
(8)  Motor vehicle dealer (including new and used): 
(a)  Purpose: The use shall be for the display or sale of new or used passenger motor vehicles, motorcycles, or trucks and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repair of passenger motor vehicles, motorcycles, or trucks to be displayed and sold on the premises. 
(b)  Standards: 
i.  Minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre and the minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet. 
ii.  For parking and display of automobiles, the front yard minimum dimensions shall be twenty (20) feet, and the side/rear yard minimum dimensions shall be twenty (20) feet. 
iii.  All outdoor display, storage, and sales facilities and areas shall be screened to their full height from the views from adjacent property view and shall be maintained in a neat and orderly condition. 
iv.  The outdoor display of goods for sale shall not be located in areas intended for traffic circulation according to the site plan. Access to an arterial or collector street is required. 
v.  All stored goods, merchandise, vehicles, or implements must be secured against theft, vandalism, or loss. All outdoor display, storage, and sales facilities shall be limited to those shown on the approved site plan. 
(9)  Convenience food stores and related drive-in and drive-through facilities; and fast food restaurants: 
(a)  Purpose: The use shall be for the sale of food for consumption on the premises and/or pick-up via drive-in or drive-through facility. 
(b)  Standards: 
i.  Minimum lot area shall be seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet, except those uses with drive-in or drive-through facilities shall be located on lots with a minimum area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet. 
ii.  All structures, including drive-in or drive-through windows and lanes, shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from any residential property. 
iii.  A solid wood fence or masonry wall six (6) feet high shall be constructed where a convenience food store, drive-in or drive-through store or fast food restaurant is located adjacent to a residential property. 
iv.  Stacking space for eight (8) vehicles shall be provided for every drive-in and drive-through facility. Stacking spaces shall not block or otherwise interfere with site circulation patterns. 
v.  Customer and employee parking shall be separated from drive-in and drive-through activities and customer parking shall be located in the area with highest accessibility to dining or sales areas. 
vi.  The circulation system shall provide smooth, continuous traffic flow with efficient, non-conflicting movement throughout the site. Major pedestrian movements shall not conflict with major vehicular circulation movements. 
vii.  Access shall be from an arterial street or commercial collector or shall be provided in a manner that does not cause heavy traffic on residential streets. 
(10)  Wind energy conversion systems. Wind energy conversion systems: any device, such as a wind charger, windmill, or wind turbine, and associated facilities including the support structure of the system such as a tower, that converts wind energy into electrical energy, shall comply with the following restrictions: 
(a)  Setbacks: Wind energy conversion systems shall meet the minimum yard setback requirements as forth in the Unified Development Ordinance for the zoning district in which the system is proposed to be located. All new systems shall provide the minimum setback defined by the equation in this section. Setback distances shall be measured from the property line on which the system is located to the closest point on the perimeter of the turbine blade. 
Section 1.01 EQUATION 
Wind Energy Conversion System Setback = 2T-40 
{Where T = maximum support tower height} 
(b)  Aesthetic consideration: The wind turbine shall be either white or gray monochrome in color and advertising or identification of any kind on the system is prohibited, except for applicable warning and equipment information signage required by the manufacturer or by federal, state or local regulations. Lighting shall be limited only to what is required by the Federal Aviation Administration and noise levels shall not exceed fifty (50) decibels. 
(c)  Maintenance: All wind energy conversion systems shall be kept in good repair and free from rust, damaged supports, framework or other components. 
Abandoned or unused towers: All abandoned or unused wind energy conversion systems shall be removed within twelve (12) months of the cessation of operations unless an extension is granted by the Board. After the wind energy conversion system is removed, the owner or operator shall restore the site to its original, or to an improved, condition. 
(11)  Utility structures: 
(a)  Purpose: The use shall be for the purpose of allowing the installation of utility structures within any yard or right-of-way. 
(b)  Certificate of zoning compliance: 
i.  A certificate of zoning compliance issued by the Director of Community Development shall be required for the following utility structures: 
1.  New small utility structures located in the front yard or right-of-way. 
2.  New medium utility structures regardless of location. 
3.  New large utility structures located in the side or rear yard. 
4.  Replacement of large utility structures in the front yard or right-of-way. 
ii.  The Director of Community Development shall review the application submitted by the utility company and any written concerns submitted by the property owner and all property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the utility structure. 
iii.  The Director of Community Development may issue a certificate of zoning compliance approving the utility structure as a conditional use if it meets the location guidelines and screening criteria and all unused utility structures are promptly removed. 
(c)  Conditional use permit: 
i.  A conditional use permit approved by the Board shall be required for the following utility structures: 
1.  New large utility structures located in the front yard or right-of-way. 
2.  New utility poles located in the front yard or right-of-way. 
ii.  The board shall conduct a public hearing to determine whether the utility structure meets the location guidelines and screening criteria. 
(d)  No approval required: No certificate of zoning compliance or conditional use permit is required for the following utility structures: 
i.  New small utility structures in the side or rear yard. 
ii.  New utility poles in the side or rear yard. 
iii.  Replacement of small or medium utility structures regardless of location, provided that all unused utility structures are promptly removed. 
iv.  Replacement of large utility structures in the side or rear yard, provided that all unused utility structures are promptly removed. 
v.  Replacement of utility poles regardless of location, provided that all unused utility structures are promptly removed. 
(e)  Notification requirements: 
i.  If a certificate of zoning compliance or conditional use permit is required, the utility company shall provide for written notice to the property owner and all property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the utility structure. 
ii.  The written notice may be hand-delivered or sent by ordinary mail. 
iii.  The utility company may request the Community Development Department to provide the written notice for a fee. 
iv.  A certificate of zoning compliance or a conditional use permit may not be issued until at least ten (10) days after the written notice has been hand-delivered or mailed. 
v.  If the utility structure does not require a certificate of zoning compliance or conditional use permit, then the utility company shall provide post-installation notification to the Director of Community Development within thirty (30) days. 
(f)  Size classifications: 
i.  Small utility structures shall be less than thirty (30) inches in height above grade, less than eighteen (18) inches in width, and less than eighteen (18) inches in depth. 
ii.  Medium utility structures shall be thirty (30) inches to fifty-four (54) inches in height above grade, eighteen (18) inches to fifty (50) inches in width, and eighteen (18) inches to thirty-six (36) inches in depth. 
iii.  Large utility structures shall be greater than fifty-four (54) inches in height above grade, greater than fifty (50) inches in width, and greater than thirty-six (36) inches in depth. 
iv.  If all three (3) dimensions do not fall within the same size classification, then the utility structure will be classified based on the dimension that falls within the largest classification. 
(g)  Location guidelines: 
i.  Utility structures should not be placed within the intersection clearance zone and should have a ten-foot minimum clearance from fire hydrants. 
ii.  Utility structures should be located within the public right-of-way, a platted utility easement, or a private utility easement. 
iii.  Utility structures should be coordinated with existing utility structures, reducing the total number of utility structures, providing the most effective screening, and minimizing the impact on existing trees should be considered in locating utility structures. 
(h)  Screening criteria: 
i.  The utility company shall minimize the visual impact of the utility structure, including size, color, and screening. 
ii.  The vistas of the property owner and adjacent property owners shall be considered with a goal of obtaining fifty percent (50%) opacity as viewed from neighboring property lines. Fifty percent (50%) opacity should be obtained upon installation. However, the Director of Community Development may permit planting to be postponed due to seasonal conditions. Fifty percent (50%) opacity shall not be required for utility poles or for wires and cables. 
iii.  Screening can be achieved by the use of the following methods: 
1.  Existing or new vegetation. 
2.  Existing or new fencing. 
3.  Existing structures (detached garages, neighboring accessory structures, etc.). 
(i)  Temporary approvals: 
i.  The Director of Community Development may grant a utility company temporary approval of a utility structure when it is necessary in order to provide essential services in an emergency or to a new customer. 
ii.  If immediate action is required, a utility company has temporary approval to take whatever action is necessary in order to respond to an emergency. As soon as is practicable, the utility company shall notify the Director of Community Development of the emergency and the action taken. 
iii.  Within five (5) days after obtaining temporary approval, the utility company shall file for a certificate of zoning compliance or for a conditional use. 
iv.  Temporary approvals shall expire after ninety (90) days. 
v.  Temporary approvals are conditioned upon the utility company relocating or removing the utility structure within one hundred twenty (120) days if a certificate of zoning compliance or conditional use permit is not granted for the utility structure. 
(j)  Appeals: 
i.  Except as provided herein, appeals shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.10 of the UDO. 
ii.  The Director of Community Development's decision to issue or deny a certificate of zoning compliance for new medium and large utility structures in the side or rear yards and for replacement large structures in the front yard or right-of-way may be appealed to the City Manager. 
iii.  The City Manager's decision on appeal to issue or deny a certificate of zoning compliance for new medium and large utility structures in the side or rear yards and for replacement large structures in the front yard or right-of-way may be appealed to the Board. 
iv.  The Director of Community Development's decision to issue or deny a certificate of zoning compliance for new small and medium structures in the front yard or right-of-way may be appealed to the Board. 
v.  Any decision of the Board may be appealed to City Council. 
vi.  All appeals involving utility structures must be made within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the action being appealed. 
vii.  Any decision to issue a certificate of zoning compliance or conditional use permit shall not take effect prior to the expiration of the appeal period. 
(k)  Exception: Subsection 6.10(C)(11) shall not apply to a utility structure that is physically attached to a building, such as a meter or service box or to the wiring, cable, pipe, or conduit that provides utility service from a service main to the individual property, or to gas meter regulators. 
(l)  Fees: 
i.  The fee for a certificate of zoning compliance set forth in C.O. ch. 401 shall be waived. 
ii.  The fee for a conditional use set forth in C.O. ch. 401 shall apply. 
(m)  Summary of requirements: Table 6-K summarizes the utility structure requirements under the UDO. 
Table 6-K: Utility Structure Review Requirements 
Type of Utility Structure Location of Utility Structure Size 1 or Type New or Replacement Front Yard or Right-of-Way Side Yard Rear Yard SMALL New DOCD Review - CZC No Review No Review <30? height Screening required Post Notice to City Post Notice to City <18? width 
<18? depth 10 day notice to property owner w/in 100' No Screening No Screening Appeal DOCD Decision to BZAP w/in 10 days Appeal BZAP Decision to CC w/in 10 days Replacement No Review No Review No Review Post Notice to the City Post Notice to the City Post Notice to the City No Screening No Screening No Screening MEDIUM New DOCD Review - CZC DOCD Review - CZC DOCD Review - CZC 30-54? height Screening required Screening required Screening required 18-50? width 
18-36? depth 10 day notice to property owners w/in 100' 10 day notice to property owners w/in 100' 10 day notice to property owners w/in 100' Appeal DOCD Decision to BZAP w/in 10 days Appeal DOCD Decision to CM w/in 10 days Appeal DOCD Decision to CM w/in 10 days Appeal BZAP Decision to CC w/in 10 days Appeal CM decision to BZAP w/in 10 days Appeal CM decision to BZAP w/in 10 days Appeal BZAP Decision to CC w/in 10 days Appeal BZAP Decision to CC w/in 10 days Replacement No Review No Review No Review Post Notice to the City Post Notice to the City Post Notice to the City No Screening No Screening No Screening LARGE New BZAP Review - CUP DOCD Review - CZC DOCD Review - CZC <54? height Screening required Screening required Screening required <50? width 
<36? depth 10 day notice to property owners w/in 100' 10 day notice to property owners w/in 100' 10 day notice to property owners w/in 100' Appeal BZAP Decision to CC w/in 10 days Appeal DOCD Decision to CM w/in 10 days Appeal DOCD Decision to CM w/in 10 days Appeal CM decision to BZAP w/in 10 days Appeal CM decision to BZAP w/in 10 days Appeal BZAP Decision to CC w/in 10 days Appeal BZAP Decision to CC w/in 10 days Replacement DOCD Review - CZC No Review No Review Screening required Post Notice to the City Post Notice to the City 10 day notice to property owners w/in 100' No Screening No Screening Appeal DOCD Decision to CM w/in 10 days Appeal CM decision to BZAP w/in 10 days Appeal BZAP Decision to CC w/in 10 days POLES New BZAP Review - CUP No Review No Review Screening required Post Notice to the City Post Notice to the City 10 day notice to property owners w/in 100' No Screening No Screening Appeal BZAP Decision to CC w/in 10 days Replacement No Review No Review No Review Post Notice to the City Post Notice to the City Post Notice to the City No Screening No Screening No Screening  
NOTE: BZAP = Board of Zoning and Planning; DOCD = Director of Community Development; CZC = Certificate of Zoning Compliance; CUP = Condition Use Permit 
Standards apply to right-of-ways, yards, utility easements and private easements. 
All unused utility structures, including poles, must be removed upon the installation of a new or replaced structure. 
1 If a structure exceeds one of the size dimensions, it shall be classified as the next higher size. Height is measured from grade level. 
( Ord. No. 62-2015, § 5, 11-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 38-2018 , § 4, 4-23-2018; Ord. No. 22-2019 , § 3, 4-8-2019) 
§ 6.11 - WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES. 
(A)  Applicability. The provisions of this Section 6.11 shall apply to all wireless communication facilities regardless of the zoning district in which they are located, unless such facilities are small cell facilities located in the city right-of-way or wireless support structures located in the city right-of-way, in which case Chapter 933 of the Codified Ordinances shall apply. Nothing herein supersedes the applicability of Ohio Revised Code section 4939 to small cell facilities and wireless support structures in City right-of-way. Underlying zoning district regulations and other provisions of the Codified Ordinances shall still apply to wireless communication facilities when not superseded by regulations within this Section 6.11, Chapter 933 of the Codified Ordinances, or section 4939 of the Ohio Revised Code. Any wireless overlay zone shall not apply to small cell facilities and wireless support structures in the right-of-way. In the case of conflict with other provisions of the Codified Ordinances, with the exception of Chapter 933 of the Codified Ordinances, the regulations of this Section 6.11 shall control. Wireless communication facilities shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities or private utilities. 
(1)  New towers and antennas: All new wireless communication facilities in the City of Upper Arlington shall be subject to these regulations unless otherwise subject to Chapter 933 of the Codified Ordinances. 
(2)  Preexisting towers or antennas: Preexisting towers or preexisting antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this Section 6.11 other than the requirements of Subsection 6.11(M), Subsection 6.11(N), and Subsection 6.11(G)(8), sections 11, 12 and 13. No additions, alterations or modifications shall be made to any preexisting wireless communication facilities that do not comply with Section 6.11 without BZAP review and City Council approval, except for repairs and routine maintenance or when such addition, alteration, or modification is permitted as of right under federal law. For purposes of this section, repair and routine maintenance shall include replacement of an existing antenna with a new antenna of the same size and appearance in the same location, provided that no modification of the antenna tower or base station is required. Replacement antennas and equipment require approval of a building permit. New antennas and equipment require approval of a wireless facilities permit. 
(B)  Permitted and conditional use locations: 
(1)  General: Antennas shall not be permitted in any location except a) those areas designated wireless communication district ("WCD") on the WCD overlay map and b) on City-owned land, rights-of-way and parks if approved by City Council. A different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of wireless telecommunication facilities on such lot when it is located in a WCD overlay zone. 
(2)  Permitted use locations: Any location for use as a no impact antenna facility as defined by Section 2.02 and all public property as defined by Section 2.06, which is designated WCD on the WCD overlay district map attached to and incorporated herein by reference as Exhibit A, excluding small cell facilities located in city right-of-way, shall be a principally permitted location for wireless communications facilities, except for antenna towers or antenna support structures in the right-of-way and antenna towers with an antenna tower height as defined in Section 2.02 exceeding forty (40) feet. Permitted uses must be implemented in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.11. 
(3)  Conditional use locations: Wireless communication facilities shall be a conditional use in any of the locations identified within the overlay districts designated WCD on the WCD overlay map attached to and incorporated herein by reference as Exhibit A and which are not permitted locations as described in Subsection (B)(2). Antenna towers with an antenna tower height exceeding forty (40) feet but less than fifty-five (55) feet and antenna support structures are a conditional use in the right-of-way adjacent to all residential districts and planned districts and not subject to section 933.24 of C.O. ch. 933. Antenna towers with an antenna tower height exceeding forty (40) feet but less than seventy-five (75) feet and antenna support structures are a conditional use in the right-of-way adjacent to all commercial districts and not subject to section 933.24 of C.O. ch. 933. Approved conditional uses must be implemented in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.11. If a right-of-way is adjacent to a commercial district and a residential or planned district, than the residential or planned district provisions shall apply. 
(4)  Prohibited use locations: Antenna towers exceeding fifty-five (55) feet are a prohibited use in the right-of-way in all residential districts and planned districts. Antenna towers exceeding seventy-five (75) feet are a prohibited use in the right-of-way in all commercial districts. Antennas shall not be permitted on City-owned decorative street lights. 
(C)  Approval procedures for permitted uses: 
(1)  General: Permitted locations and uses identified in Subsection 6.11(B)(2) shall not require the approval of BZAP or City Council, except when the antenna tower height as defined in Section 2.02 exceeds forty (40) feet. When an antenna tower and/or antenna exceeds forty (40) feet in height it shall be considered a conditional use. 
(2)  Design standards: All proposed wireless communication facilities must meet the design standards as set out in Subsection 6.11(G) herein as approved by the Community Development Department. All proposed small cell facilities and wireless support structures must meet the design guidelines as set forth in Chapter 933 of the Codified Ordinances. 
(3)  License or lease: In all cases a license or lease authorizing a wireless communication facility must be approved by the City Council. 
(D)  Approval procedures for conditional uses: 
(1)  General: In accordance with the provisions of Section 3.02, conditional use approval for all wireless communication facilities shall be required for locations designated WCD on the WCD overlay map which are not permitted locations. 
(2)  BZAP review: A wireless communication facility shall not be constructed or erected except upon a permit issued by the City after approval by BZAP. BZAP shall conduct a public hearing with advance notice of the hearing published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and the applicant shall notify by certified mail all property owners within a distance equal to seven (7) times the proposed tower height, rounded to the nearest ten-foot increment, from any part of the subject property on which the tower is to be located. A dimension of five (5) feet shall be rounded up to the next ten-foot increment. The foregoing requirement of public notice and hearing may be waived by BZAP for the construction of a new antenna on an existing structure which application does not require the construction of a new tower or associated facilities. 
(a)  In granting conditional use approval, BZAP may impose conditions to the extent BZAP concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower or antenna on adjoining properties. 
(b)  Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by an Ohio licensed professional engineer. 
(c)  An applicant for a conditional use shall submit the information described in this section and a non-refundable fee as established in the fee schedule to reimburse the City for the costs of reviewing and providing legal notice for the application. 
(3)  City Council review: Approval of BZAP of the granting of a permit shall become effective only following review and public hearing by City Council. The requirement of a public hearing before City Council may be waived by City Council if either: 
(a)  The application is for co-location on an existing antenna tower; or 
(b)  The application is for location on an existing building and is otherwise implemented in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.11. 
(4)  Notification: The applicant shall notify all of the property owners of the parcel or parcels proposed for antenna tower location, and all owners of land within the prescribed notification area of the time and place of the public meeting at which such application will be considered. Such notices shall be served by first class mail and be posted according to the time limit specified in Section 4.04. 
(E)  Multiple antenna and tower plan: So as to lessen proliferation, the City of Upper Arlington encourages the users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of multiple users on a single site. Applications for approval of multiple user sites shall be given priority in the evaluation process. 
(F)  Submittal requirements: Permit applicants for principally or conditionally permitted wireless communication facilities shall submit the following information: 
(1)  Survey of existing conditions: A survey for the entire property shall be prepared by a surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Ohio. This survey shall indicate all observable physical features on the site and on property abutting the site, ownership of the property and of all property abutting the site, underground and overhead utilities, easements, deed restrictions, property line bearings and distances. Topography at two-foot intervals shall be shown for the entire property or within at least a one hundred fifty-foot radius of the tower, whichever is less. Spot elevations may be used when contour intervals are impractical. 
(2)  Legal description: Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel if applicable. 
(3)  Site development proposal: A scaled site plan and specifications clearly indicating the location of all new and existing underground and overhead facilities. This shall include, but not be limited to, the proposed tower, antenna and associated buildings, uses and structures on the same and adjacent properties, underground and overhead utilities, and exterior lighting. Adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, parking and other information deemed necessary by BZAP for a review of the application shall also be shown. 
(4)  Setback dimensions: Setback dimensions shall show the distance between each property line and the closest point on the perimeter of the tower structure, excluding guy wires and other similar miscellaneous stabilizers whose collapse would not endanger surrounding property. 
(5)  Grading and landscaping plan: A proposed site grading and landscape plan showing specific landscape materials, sizes and species proposed. Land contours shall be shown at two-foot intervals and the surface drainage concept shall be indicated for the entire property, or within at least a one hundred fifty-foot radius of the tower, whichever is less. Spot elevations may be substituted where contour elevations are impractical. 
(6)  Antenna and towers: Plans, elevation drawings and material specifications for all proposed antenna tower, antenna support structure, and antenna. 
(7)  Buildings: Building plans, elevation drawings and material specifications for all proposed buildings, structures, fences, walls and gates. 
(8)  Fences: Shall include a plan and elevations drawn to scale together with a material specification for all security enclosures. 
(9)  Certification of compliance: A written certification from a registered professional engineer of compliance with all applicable federal, state, county or local laws including all provisions with this Ordinance. Additionally, prior to receiving final inspection by the Community Development Department documented certification shall be submitted to the FCC, with a copy to the City certifying that the wireless communication facility complies with all current FCC regulations for non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER). 
(10)  Co-location statement: A notarized statement by a registered professional engineer, hired by the applicant, that verifies that construction of the tower will accommodate co-location of additional antennas for future use and also states the ultimate height needed for the co-location capacity required. 
(11)  Lease agreement: A copy of the proposed antenna tower site lease agreement including all easements and access rights. 
(12)  Inventory: 
(a)  List of applicant locations: Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the building official an inventory of its the applicant's existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, and its existing small cell facilities and wireless support structures, that are either within the jurisdiction of the City of Upper Arlington or within two (2) miles of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The City may share such information with other applicants seeking to locate antennas with the jurisdiction of the City, provided, however, that the City is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(b)  Specification of backhaul providers: Identification of the entities providing the wireline backhaul facility for the tower(s) or antenna(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in the City. 
(13)  Justification: A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other structures or technology not requiring the use of the proposed new tower. 
(a)  Existing facilities not available. A demonstration that a technically suitable location is not reasonably available on an existing tower, building or structure. 
(b)  Co-location rejected. If another tower is technically suitable the applicant must show that the applicant has requested to co-locate and that the request was rejected by the owner of the tower, building or structure. 
(14)  Master plan of provider: A description of the feasible locations of future towers or antennas within the City based upon existing physical, engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower or antenna is erected. 
(15)  Radio frequency (RF) engineer testimony: Testimony shall be made by a radio frequency engineer at all required public hearings and he/she shall attest to the engineering need for the tower height requested. 
(G)  Design standards: For the protection of the public health, welfare and safety, all principally and conditionally permitted wireless communication facilities shall meet or exceed the following standards. 
(1)  Co-location: As a condition of issuing a permit to construct and operate a tower in the City, the owner/operator of the tower is required to allow co-location until said tower has reached full antenna capacity, but in no event shall the tower be able to accommodate fewer than one (1) additional antenna for one (1) additional provider. Antenna towers are not permitted to be built to a height which exceeds the applicant's service need as substantiated by the testimony of a radio frequency engineer. If the tower must be extended in the future to accommodate co-location, the initial tower foundation must be designed to support this co-location capacity, and the tower must be designed to accommodate this extension capability. The antenna tower setback defined in Subsection 6.11(G)(3) below must be based on the ultimate co-location tower height planned. The ultimate height must be specified on the drawings submitted. Tower height shall not be extended until co-locators are installed. Agreement to this provision must be included in the lease by the landowner, if different from the owner/operator of the tower. Written documentation must be presented to BZAP and the Council evidencing that the landowner of the property on which the tower is to be located has agreed to the terms of the section as well as the requirements, regulations and standards established in this Chapter. As an additional condition of issuing the permit to construct and operate the tower in the City, the owner/operator of the tower is required to sign a statement that all disputes with future providers concerning co-location and the terms and conditions of co-location shall be submitted to commercial arbitration under a system selected by the parties but if the parties are unable to agree, then under the auspices of the Commercial Arbitration Provisions of the American Arbitration Association. 
(2)  Separation: There shall be a separation of at least one-quarter (1/4) mile between new antenna towers. BZAP may waive this requirement with the approval of City Council for the purposes of clustering of towers and placement of towers on electric high tension towers. 
(3)  Setbacks and lot area: Wireless communication facilities shall meet the minimum yard setback requirements as forth in the zoning code for the zoning district in which the antenna and/or tower is proposed to be located. The lot on which the facility is located shall meet all lot area requirements for that zoning district. All new antenna towers shall provide the minimum setback defined by the equation in this section whenever the tower property is adjacent to private residential property lines or is on the opposite side of the street from private residential property lines. Setback distances shall be measured from the property line on which the wireless communication facility is located to the closest point on the perimeter of the antenna tower, excluding guy wires and other similar miscellaneous stabilizers. 
EQUATION 
Antenna Tower Setback = 2T-40 
{where T = maximum antenna tower height - as defined in Section 2.02} 
Exceptions to antenna tower height and setback requirements: 
(a)  New and replacement antennas located on or attached to the municipal water tower located at 1760 Zollinger Road. 
(b)  New antenna attached to the existing tower and a replacement tower up to 130 feet in height in the general location of the existing antenna tower at 3600 Tremont Road. 
(4)  Antenna tower design: All new and replacement antenna towers in the City of Upper Arlington shall be of stealth design. 
(5)  Materials: Towers shall be galvanized steel and be painted a color approved by the Community Development Department to reduce visual obtrusiveness. If required by the FAA, towers may be painted pursuant to FAA requirements. 
(6)  Service equipment: All cable, conduit, piping, equipment and miscellaneous devices serving wireless telecommunication facilities shall be either buried or concealed within the structures involved, except when otherwise required by the Ohio Basic Building Code and the National Electric Code. 
(7)  Accessory structures: All principle structures, accessory structures, buildings, shelters and equipment enclosures, together with supporting development including, but not limited to, fence enclosures, driveways, gates and miscellaneous pavement serving and supporting the operation of the antenna tower(s) and antenna(s) shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Compatibility: All development including, but not limited to, buildings, shelters, enclosures, driveways, gates and miscellaneous pavement located in residential zones shall meet the zoning standards of the underlying zone, and shall be residential in appearance. Buildings, shelters, enclosures, driveways, gates and miscellaneous pavement located in other zones shall meet the zoning standards of the underlying zone and shall be compatible with the adjacent buildings and neighborhood. 
(b)  Roof-mounted equipment: All roof-mounted wireless communication facilities shall be screened from view, except when this screening will interfere with the signals being transmitted. 
(c)  Roof shape: Principal structures, accessory structures, buildings, shelters, and equipment enclosures greater than six (6) feet in height shall use either gable, pitched or hip roof forms. Flat roofs, mansard roofs, gambrel roofs, shed roofs and other roof forms may only be use when needed for adjacent building design compatibility. Roof-mounted wireless communication facilities shall use roof shapes that are compatible with the supporting building or structure. 
(d)  Roof covering: Roof covering on sloping roofs for principal structures, accessory structures, buildings, shelters, and equipment enclosures greater than six (6) feet in height shall consist of heavy-weight composition shingles (three hundred (300) pounds per square or above), slate, copper, clay tile or similar high-quality roofing material. 
(e)  Exterior walls: All exterior walls of principal structures, accessory structures, buildings, shelters and equipment enclosures greater than six (6) feet in height shall have seventy percent (70%) of the exterior surface faced with brick and/or stone, except when used in a roof-mounted building or structure which is designed to blend with the principal structure's materials and colors. Doors and windows are not included in the exterior surface area used for computation of this requirement. 
(f)  Windows and dormers: Faux windows and dormers shall be used to amplify the residential appearance of principal structures, accessory structures, buildings, shelters and equipment enclosures greater than six (6) feet in height when located in underlying residential zones, except when the wireless communication facility is roof-mounted. 
(g)  City Manager authority: When the antenna and antenna tower is a permitted use and City Council has waived its review authority pursuant to Subsection 6.11(D)(3), the City Manager shall review and approve the final design of all accessory buildings, shelters and enclosures for compliance with this Ordinance prior to the issuance of a building permit. BZAP review is not required. The City Manager may require additional plans, design modifications, material specification changes and impose conditions of approval as he/she feels are necessary to ensure building and/or shelter compatibility with the surrounding area. 
(8)  Storage: Outdoor storage of any supplies, vehicles or equipment related to the use of the facility is prohibited. 
(9)  Fences: Screen fencing shall be provided for aesthetic and public safety reasons when the wireless communication facility is ground based. No impact facilities are not subject to this requirement. Fences shall be opaque. All structural components of the fence shall be substantially hidden and face the interior of the PCS facility, and all materials shall be either stone, brick or wood. A fence six (6) feet in height will be erected completely around the communication tower and any related support facilities. A six-foot wide decorative wrought iron gate no higher than six (6) feet may be provided on one (1) side to accommodate external observation of the interior. 
(10)  Landscape: A landscaped buffer area of not less than ten (10) feet in depth shall be placed between the wireless communication facilities and the public rights-of-way, residential zoning districts, and any adjacent residential uses when the wireless communication facility is ground based. No impact facilities and roof-top facilities are not subject to this requirement. The ten-foot landscape buffer shall consist of a tight screen fence of hardy evergreen shrubbery not less than six (6) feet in height. The landscaping shall be continuously maintained and any dead material shall be promptly removed and replaced with living material of the same species. Additional landscaping buffers may be required by the Board of Zoning and Planning and/or City Council. 
(11)  Illumination: Except as required by law, an antenna or a tower shall not be illuminated and lighting fixtures or signs shall not be attached to the antenna or tower. If lighting is required by FAA regulations, white strobe lights shall not be permitted at night unless no other alternative is permitted by the FAA. Lighting for security purposes shall be permitted at the wireless telecommunication facility with prior approval of the review authority specified in this Ordinance for the application involved. 
(12)  Advertising: No advertising shall be permitted on any wireless telecommunication facility. 
(13)  Security: No trespassing signs shall be posted around the wireless telecommunication facility with a telephone number of a person to contact in the event of an emergency. 
(14)  Certification: Towers and antennas shall be designed and sealed by a registered professional engineer in accordance with the provisions of the Ohio Basic Building Code and the National Electric Code. 
(15)  Underground equipment shelters: Underground equipment shelters shall be required where appropriate screening of equipment cannot be accomplished. Should landscape screening be replaced more than two times, such equipment shall be placed underground in a shelter. 
(16)  City-owned antenna support structures: Notwithstanding any other provisions of the UDO or Codified Ordinances, antennas shall not be permitted on any City-owned antenna support structures without the recommendation of the City Engineer and the approval of the City Manager. 
(H)  Certification of registered professional engineer: Prior to action by the review authority specified in this Ordinance, the City may require a review/report by an independent registered professional engineer engaged by the City and paid for by the applicant pursuant to its reimbursement of city expenses pursuant to Section 6.11. Among other things, the engineer may review and recommend the written certification of the applicant's engineer filed pursuant to Section 6.11, may review and recommend the applicant's propagation studies showing the necessity for the location of the tower, and may review and recommend the structural integrity, electrical integrity and electrical safety of the wireless telecommunication facility in its projected uses so as to assure the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Upper Arlington. 
(I)  Reimbursement of expenses: The applicant shall be responsible for all expenses incurred by the City for any technical engineering services deemed necessary by City Council, the City Attorney, or Community Development Department to perform the reviews required by this Chapter. 
(J)  Denial of request: Any decision to deny a request to place, construct or modify a wireless communication antenna or tower shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record of the proceedings of BZAP and City Council, if applicable. 
(K)  Permits: A wireless communication facility may not be constructed or erected except where located in compliance with Section 6.11. The Community Development Department shall authorize the issuance of permits required by the chapter and shall collect the fees therefore in accordance with the schedule found in Section 1.10. 
(L)  Time limitation for beginning of construction: After issuance of a permit to construct a wireless communication facility, the permit holder shall begin construction within one hundred eighty (180) days and shall complete construction within three hundred sixty (360) days or the permit and approval shall expire. 
As a condition of the permit, BZAP shall require the permit holder and site owner to certify that if construction is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days or completed within three hundred sixty (360) days that the site shall be available for another wireless communications facility. 
(M)  State or federal requirements: All towers/antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by the ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within three (3) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state, county or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
(N)  Termination of use: 
(1)  Removal: The owner or operator shall agree to remove a non-functioning facility within six (6) months of ceasing its use and return the site or antenna support structure to its preexisting condition. The owner of the wireless communication facility shall annually file a declaration with the Community Development Department to the continuing operation of every facility installed subject to this Chapter. The owner/operator of antennas or antenna towers shall provide annually a certification from a registered professional engineer regarding the structural integrity and safety of the antennas or antenna towers in conformance with this Chapter. 
(2)  Bond: The owner or operator shall be required as a condition of issuance of a permit to post a cash or surety bond acceptable to the City Attorney of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per vertical foot from natural grade of the wireless communication tower which bond shall warrant that an abandoned, obsolete or destroyed wireless communication antenna or tower will be removed within six (6) months of cessation of use and abandonment. If the wireless communication facility is not removed within six (6) months of cessation of use or abandonment, the owner or operator shall forfeit this bond, but the obligation to remove the wireless communication facility and restore the site to its preexisting condition shall remain. In the event that a tower is not removed within six (6) months of cessation of operations at a site, the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the municipality and the costs of removal assessed against the property or recovered by other legal means from the owner or operator. Any co-locator shall be required to additionally execute such bond, as principal, to ensure that the bond will be in place during the period of time that the co-locator occupies the tower. 
(O)  Civil action: Whenever any person fails, neglects or refuses to comply with any order of the Community Development Department, under the provisions of Section 6.11, or when any building or other structure is used or occupied so as to be in violation of or not in conformity with any provision of Section 6.11, the Director of Community Development may, in his discretion, institute an appropriate action in law or in equity to retain the execution and violation of Section 6.11, to prevent the occupation or use of such building or other structure and to prevent or terminate any violation of Section 6.11. 
(P)  Remedies cumulative: The exercise of the rights and remedies granted in this Chapter shall in no way preclude or limit the City from exercising any other right or remedy not or hereafter granted to it under the laws of Ohio or the Ordinance of the City. 
(Q)  Severability: If any provision of this Ordinance or the application thereof is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this Ordinance, which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application, and to this end the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared severable. 
(R)  Repeal of ordinances in conflict: All other ordinances of the City of Upper Arlington or portions thereof, which conflict with this or any part of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed. 
(S)  Procedure for district designation: 
(1)  City Council, in accordance with the procedures for amending the zoning map set forth in C.O. § 4.04, may designate any additional area, after review and recommendation by BZAP, as a wireless communications district overlay zone (WCD). Approval of amendment requests will be influenced by the degree to which the proposal meets at least one of the following criteria: 
(a)  The area is a non-residential zone with surrounding buildings and equipment that will obscure the wireless communication tower and antenna from view. 
(b)  The area includes internal tree masses and/or buildings that will obscure a wireless communication facility from view. 
(c)  The area contains an existing building or structure which can accommodate a stealth designed antenna and tower installation. 
(2)  All areas labeled WCD on the WCD overlay map included at the time of enactment of Section 6.11 have met, or are capable of meeting, at least one of the criteria above and are hereby so designated. 
(T)  Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed, upon conviction of the first offense, guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than sixty (60) days or both. Any person convicted of a subsequent violation of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than six (6) months or both. Such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portions thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is committed, permitted or continued. 
EXHIBIT A WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DISTRICT OVERLAY MAP

(Ord. No. 106-2009; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 44-2017 , § 4, 7-5-2017; Ord. No. 47-2018 , §§ 21-24, 6-25-2018) 
§ 6.12 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES. 
(A)  Sexually oriented businesses: Sexually oriented businesses include adult motion picture theaters, sexually oriented business establishments, and adult-only entertainment establishments. 
(B)  Development standards: The following standards shall apply to adult motion picture theaters, sexually oriented business establishments, and adult- only entertainment establishments: 
(1)  No person shall operate, locate, or permit the location of a sexually oriented business, adult motion picture theater, or adult only entertainment establishment within five hundred (500) feet, as measured from nearest property line to nearest property line, of any residential use or district, school, preschool, child day care center, place of worship, park, library, federal, state, county, township, or city building, cemetery, or other civic uses or public use within the City of Upper Arlington. 
(2)  No person shall operate, locate, or permit the location of a sexually oriented business, adult motion picture theater, or adult-only entertainment establishment within two thousand (2,000) feet of another sexually oriented business, adult motion picture theater, or adult-only entertainment establishment as measured from nearest property line to nearest property line. 
(3)  No portion of the exterior of a sexually oriented business establishment shall utilize or contain any flashing lights, search lights, or spot lights, or any other similar lighting systems, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent specifically allowed pursuant to Section 6.06, signs. 
ARTICLE 7. - DESIGN GUIDELINES 

§ 7.01 - PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
(A)  The purpose of the design guidelines is to encourage the best design of improvements to the built environment that are consistent and compatible with the historic character and outstanding residential environment of Upper Arlington, especially its historic district. 
(B)  The design guidelines provide guidance to the development design process regarding site layout; architecture; building materials, treatment and color; landscaping, screening and buffering; signage, and other site improvements. The design guidelines are intended to be flexible in guiding the design process. 
(C)  The design guidelines implement the land use, development, and urban design policies of the master plan. 
(D)  The design guidelines are to be used as a guide in the private development process to represent the City's expectations relative to changes in the built environment. 
(E)  The design guidelines are to be used by city staff, BZAP, City Council, and other boards and commissions in the review, evaluation, and approval of development and improvements to properties. 
§ 7.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS. 
(A)  The design guidelines are to be addressed in all requests for a site plan, development plan, landscape plan, conditional use, accessory use, or sign permit. 
(B)  The applicant shall specifically address relevant design guidelines in the material submitted for development approval, showing evidence that demonstrates consistency with these guidelines. 
(C)  The approving authority shall use these guidelines as a means of evaluating the development proposal and shall have the authority to recommend changes to ensure consistency with these guidelines. 
(D)  The approval of a building permit and subsequent inspection by the City, and the issuance of an occupancy permit, shall ensure that the constructed development fulfills the intent of the approval as related to these guidelines. 
§ 7.03 - INTERPRETATION. 
In situations where the guidelines conflict with a standard or requirement, the standard or requirement shall govern. However, the guideline should be used to identify ways of interpreting compliance with the standard or requirement. 
§ 7.04 - DESIGN PRINCIPLES. 
(A)  To create outstanding business areas in the City that reflect the heritage, design sensitivity, and qualities of the City's historic area. 
(B)  To promote the use of quality and long lasting building materials, as well as building design, landscaping, and site designs. 
(C)  To facilitate the redevelopment of the City's business areas into mixed-use centers that reflect the vision and public consensus of the City's Master Plan. 
(D)  To create a walkable community supported by a safe, pedestrian-friendly, built environment and with alternatives to the automobile. 
(E)  To expand the City's tax base by facilitating quality reinvestment and redevelopment in the City's major business areas. 
(F)  To create areas for community gathering and celebration that reinforce the civic nature of the City's business areas. 
(G)  To integrate business areas into the fabric of the City through connections with the street and sidewalk network, compatibility in design and architecture, and well designed and effective screening and buffering. 
§ 7.05 - SITE PLANNING. 
(A)  Purpose and intent: The placement of structures on a site is critical to meeting the purpose and intent of this article. Placement shall consider the built context of the area, but where that context is suburban in character (low density, large setbacks, extensive surface parking) a new context should be developed that is urban in character and consistent with the master plan. The following standards should apply. See also Section 7.07 and Section 7.08, pedestrian orientation and connectivity. 
(1)  Urban context: Structures shall be sited in a manner that will create an urban physical context, including defining public and pedestrian spaces. Sites should be developed in a coordinated manner to provide order and diversity and avoid a jumbled, confused development. Sites shall provide for connectivity and pedestrian orientation. 
(2)  Setbacks and visual connections: New structures should be built to the right-of-way or street (unless the district standard is different) and clustered to create plazas and pedestrian spaces. When clustering is impractical, a visual link between separate structures shall be established using an arcade system, trellis or other open structure. 

(3)  Building setbacks: A portion of a building setback can be increased an additional five (5) to ten (10) feet from the right-of-way if the setback area is surfaced with brick or similar material and contains outdoor amenities (i.e. seating, dining). 
(4)  Pedestrian orientation: Structures and on-site circulation systems shall be located to minimize pedestrian/vehicle conflicts - while emphasizing a pedestrian orientation. Structures shall be linked to the pedestrian system with such features as concrete sidewalks, textured paving, landscaping or trellises. 

(5)  Outdoor rooms: Spaces between buildings shall be recognized as "outdoor rooms". They shall be defined by recognizable, form giving shapes and details that reflect careful planning and are not simply "left over" spaces. Pedestrian amenities such as shade, benches, fountains, etc. shall be provided. 
(6)  Civic spaces: Civic spaces, such as plazas and squares, shall be provided in centralized locations that create inviting places for social interaction. They should be a minimum of one-half (1/2) acre in size. About fifty percent (50%) of the space of a plaza should open along streets. About seventy-five percent (75%) of the space of a square should open along streets. 
(7)  Freestanding structures: Freestanding, singular commercial structures shall be oriented with their major entry toward the street and sidewalk where access is to be provided, as well as having their major façade parallel to the street. 
(8)  Loading: Loading facilities shall be located to the rear of structures and should be screened, per code. Their placement shall also consider proximity to residential areas to minimize noise impacts. 
(9)  Stormwater: Sites shall be designed to effectively utilize the City's stormwater system to appropriately handle storm runoff. 
(10)  Utilities: Electrical and other wiring to support on-site utilities, such as electricity, telephone, satellite dishes, cable television, internet service, etc. shall be placed underground. All other utility structures shall be located and screened to minimize visual impact. 
§ 7.06 - ARCHITECTURAL TREATMENT. 
(A)  Purpose and intent: Development shall provide a high quality, interesting and long lasting style and should incorporate materials that are appropriate to Upper Arlington's built environment - especially its historic areas. The following describes desirable and undesirable elements: 
(1)  Desirable elements: 
(a)  Richness of surface and texture; 
(b)  Limestone and brick as exterior wall materials; dimensional shingled roofs; 
(c)  Significant wall articulation (such as insets, canopies, wing walls, reveals, pilasters, trellises); 
(d)  Multi-planed, pitched roofs; 
(e)  Roof overhangs and arcades; 
(f)  Regular or traditional window rhythm; 
(g)  Articulated mass and bulk; 
(h)  Pedestrian orientation; 
(i)  Significant landscape and hardscape elements of brick and/or stone; 
(j)  Landscaped and screened parking; 
(k)  Comprehensive sign program with strong pedestrian-scale orientation; and 
(l)  Traditional building design with base, middle and cap. 
(2)  Undesirable elements: 
(a)  Large blank, unarticulated wall surfaces; 
(b)  Unpainted concrete precision block walls; 
(c)  Highly reflective surfaces; 
(d)  Metal, vinyl or plastic siding; stucco, exterior insulated foam systems (e.g., Dryvit) and similar materials except when used as trim; metal roofs (except for standing seam roofs); 
(e)  Square "boxlike" structures; 
(f)  Mix of unrelated styles (e.g., rustic wood shingles and polished chrome); 
(g)  Visible outdoor storage, loading, and equipment areas; 
(h)  Disjointed parking areas and confusing circulation patterns; 
(i)  Lack of pedestrian circulation and connectivity; and 
(j)  Large asphalt and/or concrete paved surfaces. 
(B)  Guidelines: 
(1)  Avoiding box-like structures: Large buildings that give the appearance of "box-like" structures shall be avoided. In general, planes of the exterior walls shall be varied in depth and/or direction. Building height shall be varied so that it appears to be divided into distinct massing elements. The different parts of a building's façade and mass shall be articulated by the use of color, arrangement of façade elements, or a change in materials. Landscaping and architectural detailing can be used at ground level to lessen the impact of a bulky building. Building scale shall be carefully related to the adjacent pedestrian areas. The use of standardized "corporate" architectural styles associated with chain-type businesses shall be strongly discouraged. 

(2)  Building façades: Building façades must provide a visually interesting environment and shall avoid uniform design styles. Upper floors should be distinguished by decreased solid-to-void ratios. The ratio of fenestration to wall of the building façade should be less than thirty-five percent (35%) (sixty-five percent (65%) for retail storefronts). Vertical piers, pilasters or other vertical visual elements shall be creatively used when appropriate to break the plane of long façades. 

(3)  Roof lines: The shape of a building's roof shall be simple and compatible with the buildings to which it is visually linked. In general flat roofs are discouraged. If a residential style is appropriate, roof pitch shall be a minimum of 5/12. This may be especially true where smaller commercial developments are located in predominantly residential areas. 
(4)  Architectural style and materials: Architectural style and materials shall be compatible throughout an area. Each building façade should have no more than two (2) similar wall materials, textures or colors (the trim is excluded). Heavier materials and colors should be located below lighter materials (i.e. stone below siding). Materials shall be long lasting. Brick and limestone are materials characteristic of Upper Arlington and shall comprise at least fifty percent (50%) of exterior walls. Materials such as cementitious or metal panels, siding, stucco or exterior insulated foam systems (EIFS) shall be used on no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of exterior walls. The same proportion of materials should be used on each side of the building. In general, aluminum and vinyl siding and other less durable materials should not be used. Matte finishes are appropriate and not gloss finishes. 
(5)  Drive-thru facilities: Businesses that require the use of drive-thru facilities as accessory uses shall attach those facilities to the principal building. These facilities shall be located to the rear or side of the principal building or heavily screened and shall not be visible to a residential use. 
(6)  Residential buildings along sidewalks: When residential buildings are proposed along sidewalks, the finished floor elevation shall be placed about three-foot above the grade of the sidewalk to provide for the privacy of the occupants. To ensure ADA requirements are met within the development, internal units shall be located at the grade level of sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 16-2017 , § 9, 4-10-2017) 
§ 7.07 - PEDESTRIAN ORIENTATION. 
(A)  Purpose and intent: Development shall emphasize and support a pedestrian-oriented environment. Buildings shall facilitate walking and ease of access by respecting the street. See also Section 7.07 and Section 7.08, pedestrian orientation and connectivity. 
(1)  Entrances: Buildings shall be oriented toward the predominant pedestrian movement route by providing a direct link between the building and the pedestrian walking system. The main entrance to a building shall be located on the primary abutting street or plaza space and articulated by architectural treatments (canopies, awnings, light fixtures, planters) to give dimension and prominence to the opening. Additional primary entrances should be provided on all of the façades of the building that abut a street or sidewalk. Secondary entrances should be provided to parking areas located to the rear or side of buildings. 
(2)  Ground floor opacity: The ground floor of a building facing a public street should contain a minimum of sixty-five percent (65%) unobstructed windows, doors or display areas. 
(3)  On-street parking: On-street parking shall be required to provide separation between pedestrians and street traffic to ensure safety. Textured pavement, landscaping, low walls, light standards, or other treatments may articulate such separation. 
(4)  Off-street parking: Safe pedestrian walks shall be provided that are separated from parking and circulation areas. Parking lots should not lead into buildings, but lead to a sidewalk or the sidewalk system of the development. The pedestrian transition from the parking area to the street should include storefronts and display windows. 
(5)  Street trees: Street trees shall be installed along all pedestrian walkways. Decorative tree grates shall be provided to protect the tree roots and increase the width of the pedestrian walkway. Diversity of street tree species shall be encouraged in order to protect the health and longevity of the City's urban forest. Species selection shall be coordinated through the City Forester. 
(6)  Outdoor dining: General areas appropriate for outdoor dining along public and private streets is encouraged, which will create a stronger pedestrian environment. 

(7)  Outdoor seating: Outdoor seating shall be arranged in a conversational grouping with shade. 
(8)  Storefront design: The design of storefronts along a sidewalk shall encourage pedestrian activity. Variations in individual storefronts should be designed to change at least every fifty (50) feet. Pedestrian entrances should be provided at an average of every fifty (50) feet. 
§ 7.08 - CONNECTIVITY. 
(A)  Purpose and intent: All development shall provide for connectivity between the subject site and adjacent parcels. The internal street and sidewalk system of an area shall interconnect in multiple locations with the community-wide street and sidewalk system to knit the area together with the greater community. See also Section 7.07 pedestrian orientation and Section 7.10 parking and access. 
(1)  Street pattern: In redevelopment areas, a traditional grid street pattern should be used that connects with adjacent streets. A curvilinear street pattern is strongly discouraged. Culs-de-sac and other dead end streets or access points that discourage connectivity are strongly discouraged. 
(2)  Blocks: Large blocks are strongly discouraged. Numerous pedestrian linkages shall be provided throughout a development. Within the Kingsdale Study Area per the Master Plan, blocks should not exceed four hundred (400) feet in length and should provide pedestrian linkages at least every two hundred (200) feet. Within all other study areas, blocks should not exceed two hundred (200) feet in length and should provide pedestrian linkages at least every one hundred (100) feet. 
(3)  Signalized intersections: Potentially signalized, full-movement intersections of collector or local streets with arterials streets shall be provided every one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet (1/4-mile) along arterial streets, unless rendered infeasible due to existing street pattern or existing development. 
(4)  Non-signalized intersections: Non-signalized, potentially limited movement, collector or local street intersections with arterial streets shall be spaced at intervals not to exceed six hundred sixty (660) feet between full movement collector or local street intersections, unless rendered infeasible due to existing street pattern or existing development. Access controls may be required to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(5)  Future connections: All developments shall provide for future public street connections to adjacent developable parcels by providing a local street connection spaced at intervals not to exceed six hundred sixty (660) feet along each abutting development boundary. 
(6)  Sidewalk connections: Sidewalk connections shall be provided between areas, developments within areas and adjacent residential neighborhoods. 

(7)  Through-block connections: Where appropriate, pedestrian paths shall be provided through mid-block locations. These shall be landscaped and lighted for safety. Such paths should regularly abut public streets. 
(8)  Corner radii: Corner radii shall be tight to shorten the distance necessary for walkers to cross at an intersection. 
(9)  Crosswalks: Crosswalks shall be provided at all intersections with minor and major arterials and at mid-block locations with signalization where necessary. Crosswalks shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width. Pavement treatment shall ensure that crosswalks are fully demarcated, such as by the use of pavers. Crosswalks and adjacent sidewalks shall fully meet ADA requirements. Bulb outs shall be used to reduce the distance of the pedestrian crossing and to slow traffic. 
§ 7.09 - GATEWAYS AND ENTRY FEATURES. 
(A)  Purpose and intent: Gateways and entry features are encouraged to announce physical entry to a redevelopment area, provided they are complimentary to the overall physical context. See also signage, Section 6.06 for signature signage elements. 
(1)  Treatment: Gateways shall be articulated by landscaping, textured pavement, and/or decorative walls and fences that compliment the scale and character of the primary building. The site visibility triangle shall be maintained between three (3) and seven (7) feet in height. 
(2)  Gated entries: Gated street entryways into developments shall be prohibited. 
§ 7.10 - PARKING AND ACCESS. 
(A)  Purpose and intent: Parking must be provided to support development, however, its quantity and location shall ensure that parking doesn't dominate a site but compliments the principal uses. Excessive amounts of parking are strongly discouraged. Parking structures are encouraged in redevelopment areas. 

(1)  Parking structures: Parking structures should be placed in the middle of blocks and surrounded by buildings or designed to conceal their appearance. Pedestrian access points, including stairs and elevators, shall be clearly demarcated, but designed to be architecturally compatible with adjacent structures. They shall be landscaped, well lit, and supported with directional signage. See Subsection 6.07(K)(4). 
(2)  Shared parking: The City will encourage shared parking arrangements among compatible land uses (i.e. movie theatre adjacent to office uses). 
(3)  Access drives: For individual, adjacent lots, access drives shall be shared and cross-access easements provided. The spacing of access drives shall meet the requirements of the City Engineer. 
(4)  On-street parking: On-street parking shall be required in redevelopment areas and encouraged in other locations, with the approval of the City Engineer. On-street parking should be metered to encourage turnover. On-street parking within two hundred (200) feet of a use shall be counted towards meeting the code-parking requirement. 
§ 7.11 - STREETSCAPE. 
(A)  Purpose and intent: Within redevelopment areas, an inviting streetscape shall be established on public and private streets, and pedestrian walkways adjacent to parking surface lots and structures. See Section 7.12, traffic calming. 
(1)  Lighting: Lighting levels and fixture heights shall be of a scale and character appropriate to the pedestrian, while providing adequate intensity and dimensions to meet the needs of auto traffic. Vehicular and pedestrian lighting shall be combined to prevent street clutter. A standard style shall be used. 
(2)  Signage: Signs shall be unified in character with the lighting and other ornamentation along the streetscape, and shall be a scale and height that is appropriate for pedestrians, cyclists, and motorists. 
(3)  Tree plantings: Tree plantings unify the streetscape and provide an edge to the roadway. Plantings help provide a comfortable vertical scale, create a cooler microclimate, and can be a visually distinguishing feature. Trees shall be planted densely enough to provide adequate shade for users during the summer months. Species shall be selected to match the scale of the right-of-way and adjacent buildings, to the satisfaction of the Urban Forester. 
(4)  Pavement materials: Pavement materials for sidewalks should be a mixture of concrete, decorative pavers, and other appropriate materials in a unifying pattern within a single development. The pattern should clearly distinguish the active pedestrian zone from the less active street furnishings zone. These patterns should be designed at a scale appropriate to each right-of-way. 
(5)  Street furnishings: High quality street furnishings shall be provided with a unifying style, color and materials per specifications approved by the City. Furnishings may include benches, trash receptacles, bicycle racks, newspaper boxes, directional signage, kiosks, drinking fountains, and lighting. Placement shall be regular and adequate to serve the needs of the streetscape users. 
(6)  Pedestrian zone: The pedestrian zone shall be about five (5) feet in width and provide for unobstructed travel by pedestrians (free of street trees and street furnishings). It is located adjacent to the building. Cast-in-place concrete may be an appropriate material for this zone. 
(7)  Street furnishings zone: The street furnishings zone is located adjacent to the back of the street curb. The width shall be a function of the building setback, width of right-of-way, and related site characteristics. This zone contains all street furniture, street trees and grates, lighting, signage, parking meters, bicycle parking, trash receptacles, newspaper boxes, kiosks, etc. 
§ 7.12 - TRAFFIC CALMING. 
(A)  Purpose and intent: The safety of streets for pedestrians can be improved with the construction of simple improvements to encourage safe walking. Traffic calming slows traffic, thereby creating a safer driving and walking environment. These measures can also have the dual benefit of increasing traffic flow at safe speeds. 

(1)  Landscaped medians: Where appropriate, landscaped medians provide a pedestrian respite in the center of busy two-way arterials. Pedestrian crossings are more pleasant and more predictable, with less disruption to auto traffic. 
(2)  Bulb outs/curb extensions: Extended curbs (bulb outs) shall be used at intersections and mid-block crossings to shorten the time required by pedestrians to cross the vehicular travel lanes, which also reduces delays for motorists. 

(3)  Neck-downs: When the space between curbs is reduced, drivers slow down. Neck-downs can also increase the size of existing park strips and allow for more plantings. 
(4)  Pedestrian crossing islands: At wide intersections or mid-block crossings, islands create a protected area between travel lanes, allowing the pedestrian to cross one half of the traffic flow at a time. 
(5)  Painted or contrasting pavement: The use of painted, stamped, or colored concrete, or contrasting paving material for cross walks provides a strong visual cue for drivers. 
(6)  Mid-block crosswalks: Crosswalks shall be designed with bulb-outs and marked by a different paving material. Signalization may be necessary. 
§ 7.13 - SIGNAGE. 
(A)  Purpose and intent: Signage shall be oriented to the pedestrian and located to slow moving traffic. It shall compliment the character and architecture of the primary building(s). It shall be muted in color, style, materials, and the use of light. 
(1)  Comprehensive signage packages: Comprehensive signage packages shall to create an integrated communication system. 
(2)  Signature signage: Signature signage elements for redevelopment areas and major development components shall be permitted. This element may consist of monument signage or other architectural elements, such as clock towers. Such elements shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height and five (5) feet in width. 
(3)  On-site signage: On-site signage shall be oriented to the pedestrian. Perpendicular hanging wall signs designed of high quality crafted materials are preferred. 
(4)  Banners: Banner systems attached to light standards in parking lots and along public and private streets are encouraged, provided they meet all code requirements. 
§ 7.14 - LANDSCAPING. 
(A)  Purpose and intent: Landscaping shall be used to complement structures, buildings and spaces. Softening hard surfaces is important in areas adjacent to residential neighborhoods. See also Section 7.15, buffering and screening. 
(1)  Mixture of material: The design of planted areas shall provide for a mixture of material based on height, colors, textures, and other factors to create inviting and aesthetically pleasing views. The style of the plantings shall compliment the architectural style of adjacent and nearby buildings. 
(2)  Scale: Landscaping shall be in scale with adjacent structures and be of appropriate size at maturity to accomplish its intended purpose. Street trees shall not block storefronts and therefore could be located between awnings or at fire/common walls. 
(3)  Structure bases: Landscaping around the base of structures shall soften the edge of buildings where appropriate. Landscaping shall be accented at entrances to provide focus for the pedestrian. Where the foundation abuts a sidewalk or outdoor dining area, clusters of complimentary planters shall be used. 

(4)  Setbacks: The building and parking setback along a public street shall be landscaped per code. 
(5)  Off-street parking lots: Trees shall be located throughout off-street parking lots, in between parking rows, and not simply at the end of parking rows. Such trees shall be located in planters and bounded on at least three (3) sides by parking area paving. 
(6)  Native plant material: Wherever feasible, native plant material shall be used to reduce long-term maintenance demands and to ensure survivability. 
(7)  Irrigation: In locations that are stressful to plant material, drip irrigation shall be considered to ensure survivability. 
§ 7.15 - BUFFERING AND SCREENING. 
(A)  Purpose and intent: Incompatible uses shall be sufficiently buffered and screened to ensure that adverse land use impacts should be mitigated. In the design of a screen or buffer, setbacks shall be taken into account to ensure an appropriate design solution. Where walls are used as screening, they shall be designed to blend with the parcel's architecture. See also Section 7.14, landscaping. 
(1)  Trash dumpsters and donation bins/receptacles: When located adjacent to buildings, but no further away than fifteen (15) feet, trash dumpsters and donation bins/receptacles shall be screened with masonry walls that match the building. When located away from buildings further than fifteen (15) feet, trash dumpsters and donation bins/receptacles shall be screened in accordance with Section 6.07(H), with consideration given for masonry walls or other treatment that compliments the principal structure and with an entrance gate, but also screened with evergreen plant material on any side that faces a public right-of-way or residential use or zoning district. Screening shall exceed the height of the dumpster or donation bin/receptacle by one (1) foot and be no higher than six (6) feet. 

(2)  Loading docks: Loading docks shall be located adjacent to a building and screened with a masonry wing wall that matches the building. 
(3)  Roof-, side- and ground-mounted mechanicals: All outdoor equipment and mechanicals shall be screened from view. Screening of roof-mounted mechanicals shall be architecturally integrated with the adjacent structure in terms of materials, color, shape, and size. Ground-mounted mechanicals shall be screened with evergreen plant material. 
(4)  Residential refuse containers: All solid waste, recycling and yard waste containers shall either be stored inside a garage or accessory structure or be stored outside. Containers stored outside shall be located to the side or rear of the residence and be reasonably screened so as to not be visible from the street. The containers shall be screened by either a natural landscape barrier with a minimum 50 percent opacity or a fence with a minimum height of 42 inches. 
(Ord. No. 16-2017 , § 10, 4-10-2017; Ord. No. 54-2017 , § 23, 12-11-2017) 
§ 7.16 - MIXING USES. 
(A)  Purpose and intent: Uses shall be mixed within developments and/or within individual buildings to provide for a mixed-use environment. Typical uses include retail and personal services, offices, and residences. The goal is to create exciting, active and vital areas of the community where people can live, work, and shop within a quality, walkable environment. 
(1)  Horizontal integration: Uses shall be mixed horizontally through a development. This occurs by providing for buildings that have individual focuses (i.e. retail or housing), but that are adjacent within the same development. 
(2)  Vertical integration: Uses should be mixed vertically in a single building. This can occur by providing for retail uses on the first level, office or residential uses on the second level, and residential uses on third and higher levels. 
§ 7.17 - RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS. 
(A)  Purpose and intent: The purpose of these standards is to encourage residential investment and infill redevelopment to maintain and expand the property values in Upper Arlington, while also protecting the character of the residential neighborhoods by ensuring that new development blends in and is compatible with existing and prominent neighborhood characteristics. These standards are in addition to all other standards and requirements of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(B)  Applicability: The following standards apply to the design of new single-family homes, major additions that exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total existing square footage, second story additions, additions over 1,000 square feet, detached garages over four hundred (400) square feet in area, any proposed modification of a Contributing Structure whereby its historical significance is materially compromised, and newly created or modified parcels. 
(1)  Neighborhood compatibility: The proposed design shall be consistent and compatible with prominent characteristics existing in the neighborhood, with particular consideration and focus on the characteristics existing on the same block (both sides of the street within two intersecting streets) or cul-de-sac as the subject property. Such characteristics include: parcel or homesite width and configuration, architectural style and materials, heights and massing, front yard setbacks, roof pitch and shape, garage location, amount of impervious surface, and other defining features of the neighborhood and with an emphasis on the block. Review for compatibility shall be based on all characteristics. 

(2)  Elevations and floor plans: Houses with identical or similar building elevations and/or floor plans shall not be located on adjacent lots or directly across the street from each other. Hip roof forms, or similar roof forms or designs, and/or varied upper floor setbacks should be used to break-up overall massing, where appropriate. Where existing adjacent homes have lower massing profiles, roof forms and designs with lower profiles should be employed, and should be set back from existing wall planes. The height of new homes and proposed additions should be compatible with the other homes in the neighborhood, with particular consideration and focus on homes on the same block and with the totality of the other applicable design standards required under the Unified Development Ordinance. Number of stories, size of the lot, and proposed distance from neighboring homes may be considered in determining compatibility. 
(3)  Façade articulation: Building façades shall be articulated through the use of color, arrangement, or change in materials to emphasize the façade elements. The planes of the exterior walls may be varied in height, depth or direction. Design elements and detailing shall be continued completely around the structure; blank elevations are prohibited. Such design elements shall include window treatments, trim detailing, and exterior wall materials. 
(4)  Privacy: The location of the house on the lot, windows, orientation, building height, and location of on-site open spaces must be designed in such a manner as to preserve the privacy of existing adjacent homes and development. Second floor balconies proposed adjacent to an existing one-story single-family home shall be set back at least double the minimum side yard setback. 
(5)  Snout houses: The front elevation of new homes shall not be dominated by attached garages. Where possible the garages of new homes shall be side- or rear-loaded. 
(6)  Notification: The property owner shall provide written notice of the pending construction of a new single-family residence to all property owners within 100 feet of the subject property. Such notice shall be hand-delivered or sent by postal mail prior to the submittal of a Building Permit application. Proof of notification shall accompany the Building Permit application. 
(7)  The Director of Community Development (or designee) may request additional information in order to determine compliance with these standards, including but not limited to: Streetscape renderings with adjacent homes, field specific measurements or material samples. 
(8)  Third-party Architectural Review: Upon the submission of a Building Permit application, the Director of Community Development (or designee) may forward a copy of the proposed site plan and elevations to a third-party architectural design firm, to be assigned by the City Manager, for review. The third-party architectural design firm shall review the proposed plans and provide the Director of Community Development a recommendation as to compliance with these standards, which may include recommended changes to the plans so that compliance can be achieved. Such recommendations are not binding, but may be considered by the Director of Community Development in determining compliance with these standards. 
Any individual entitled to notice pursuant to subsection (B)(6), and any individual who submits a Building Permit application, may request that the Director of Community Development refer such proposal to the third-party architectural design firm for review and recommendations as to compliance with these standards. The Director of Community Development shall determine if such third-party architectural review is necessary. 
(9)  Director of Community Development Determination: Upon review of all materials submitted, including any additional information provided pursuant to subsection (B)(7), and including any recommendations (if any) from the third-party architectural design firm, as described in subsection (B)(8), the Director of Community Development shall determine compliance with these standards. 
(10)  Appeal to BZAP: If the Director of Community Development (or designee) determines that these standards are not met by the Building Permit application (or by preliminary review), the applicant may appeal such determination to the Board of Zoning and Planning (BZAP). If an appeal is filed, the applicant shall notify all property owners within 100 feet of the subject property of the time and place of the hearing at least 10 days prior to the hearing. The notice provided under this section is for informational purposes only. Receipt of the required notice under this section does not make the recipient an Aggrieved party and does not confer any right to participate in the appeal to BZAP or to appeal any decision of BZAP on such appeal. Only persons meeting the definition of "Aggrieved" in UDO Section 2.02 shall be considered Aggrieved. 
(11)  Street Trees: For all new homes, street trees shall be installed per Article 6.07, which requires one street tree to be planted (or retained) for each 25 feet of lot frontage. All existing on-site healthy trees shall be preserved to the fullest extent reasonable, unless directed otherwise by the City Forester. 
(Ord. No. 8-2012; Ord. No. 57-2013; Ord. No. 54-2017 , § 24, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 10-2019 , § 2, 4-22-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 54-2017 , § 24, adopted Dec. 11, 2017, amended the title of § 7.17 to read as set out herein. The former § 7-17 title pertained to residential conservation. 
§ 7.18 - HISTORIC BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS. 
(A)  Design requirements: Alterations to contributing structures that require a building permit and new construction that replaces such structures or any other new construction in the Upper Arlington Historic District should be consistent with the design criteria as described below as well as the adopted guidelines approved by the Board and City Council: 
(1)  Maintain distinctive original features and styles: Alterations to Contributing structures that require a building permit and new construction that replaces such structures or any other new construction in the Upper Arlington Historic District should maintain the original features and styles, allowing the distinctive character of the house to serve as an example of or be compatible with early twentieth century revival architecture in the historic district. These features include: details, columns, arched openings, windows, brick designs, porches, roof types, materials and design. These Revival styles include but are not limited to: American Colonial, English Country, English Tudor, Spanish, Italian, and French. 
(2)  Recognize historical architecture: Insensitive alterations and changes to the architecture and to the environment can destroy the special characteristics of the historic district. The window proportions and materials such as siding, doors and shutters help to establish the identity of the revival-style architecture. Replacement of these details with more contemporary features should be avoided. 
(3)  Recognize change: National Register designation does not mean a building or district should be frozen in time, but rather that any change should harmonize with the old and should respect the historic fabric of the district. When attempting to restore a house to a particular style, no attempt should be made to create a building that never existed and the arbitrary removal of later features should be avoided. 
(4)  Materials used: Materials used should be consistent with the historic fabric of the area and compatible with the neighborhood. 
(5)  Compatible contemporary alterations: Alterations should not destroy the architectural or historic fabric of the building and should be compatible with the neighborhood. Landscape materials should reflect the character of the neighborhood and front yard fencing should be avoided to maintain continual visual character along the streetscape. 
(6)  Avoid impairing the underlying structure: Additions should be built so that the original character and feeling of the building would survive if the additions were removed at any time in the future. Freestanding structures should be designed to observe height proportions of the building façade and openings including solid rhythms, spacing rhythms, setbacks and directionality of adjacent buildings, porches, and other projections. Additions should be similar in character to others in the neighborhood. Saving of mature trees is encouraged. 
(B)  These guidelines shall not be required for the following activities in the historic district, but the guidelines under Section 7.17 may still apply: 
(1)  Maintenance and/or repair activities. 
(2)  Alterations to contributing structures that do not require a building permit. 
(3)  Interior work on any building or structure that does not require a building permit. 
(4)  General landscape maintenance and/or planting of new organic material. 
(5)  Work required for temporary stabilization of a building or structure due to damage from natural events or an act of God. 
Part 13 - BUILDING CODE 
CHAPTER 1300. - ADMINISTRATION 

§ 1300.01 - COMPOSITION OF THE CODE. 
The Upper Arlington Building Code, Part 13 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio is composed of: 
(A)  Administrative Regulations As Expressed in Chapter 1300 of Part 13 of the city's Codified Ordinances. These regulations apply to all construction, where not less restrictive than the applicable administrative regulations contained in either the Residential Code of Ohio for One-, Two- and Three-Family Dwellings, current Edition (the Ohio Residential Code or RCO) or the State Commercial Building Code, called the Ohio Building Code (OBC) current Edition. 
(B)  One-, Two- and Three-Family Residential Construction Regulations as expressed in Residential Code of Ohio, current edition. Residential Code of Ohio, as referenced in Part 13 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio, means the Residential Code of Ohio for One, Two and Three Family Dwellings, current Edition including Appendix G, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot tubs. 
All of the requirements of the Residential Code of Ohio for One, Two and Three Family Dwellings, current Edition including Appendix G, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs and interim amendments promulgated by the Residential Code of Ohio, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, amended or replaced by this Code in Chapter 1301, are deemed to be incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, as if rewritten and set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling as pertains to one-, two- and three-family dwellings and accessory buildings. 
(C)  Building Construction Regulations, Except for One-, Two- and Three-Family Residential Construction, As Expressed in the OBC. OBC or Ohio Building Code as referenced in Part 13 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio, means the regulations of the Board of Building Standards of the State of Ohio. 
Buildings defined by use and occupancy classification and types of construction in the OBC Chapters 3 and 6 respectively, of the Ohio Administrative Code, shall conform to the requirements of the Ohio Building Code (OBC) adopted by the State Board of Building Standards pursuant to statutory authority. These buildings shall also conform to the construction requirements expressed in C.O. Chapter 1302 of Part 13 of the city's Codified Ordinances, where the Ohio Building Code is silent. 
The OBC is deemed to be incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, as if rewritten and set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling as pertains to all construction. Detached One-, Two- and Three-family dwellings not constructed of industrialized units and those other buildings noted as exceptions to Section 101.2 of the OBC, are exempted from this provision except where specifically referenced by the OBC. 
§ 1300.02 - DEFINITIONS. 
The following definitions apply to C.O. ch. 1300-Administration. They shall also apply to C.O. chs. 1301 through 1306 where no definition is provided in these chapters: 
    Apartment, efficiency: means a dwelling unit in a multi-family building consisting of not more than one (1) habitable room, together with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities. 
    Apartment hotel: means an apartment house which furnishes services for the use of its tenants which are ordinarily furnished by hotels. 
    Apartment house: means a building containing two (2) or more apartments. 
    Approved plans: means plans approved under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Building department: means the building division of the community development department of this city. 
    Building inspector: means a member or contractual agent of a building department, usually a municipality, who inspects construction to determine compliance with all applicable building codes and the approved plans. 
    C.O: means Codified Ordinance of this city. 
    Conflict with this Code: means legislation, or a rule, or a condition which is at variance with this Code to the extent or in a manner that such legislation, rule or condition permits or constitutes a provision for safety or sanitation which would be or is less safe or sanitary than is required under this Code. 
    Conforming: means complying with the requirements of this Code. 
    Contractor: means any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, association or other organization, or any combination of any thereof, who or which by himself or itself, or by or through others, constructs, alters, repairs, adds to, subtracts from, reconstructs or remodels any building, structure or appurtenance thereto, or who or which undertakes or offers to undertake, or purports to have the capacity to undertake, or submits a bid to do so. The term contractor includes subcontractor and also specialty contractor whose operations as such are the performance of construction work requiring special skill and whose principal contracting business involves the use of specialized building trades or crafts. 
    Contractor, without limiting the inclusion of trades or crafts, includes but is not limited to a general contractor and those engaged in carpentry, electrical, heating and/or air conditioning, dry wall, excavating and/or earth moving, insulating, lathing and/or plastering, brick or stone masonry, painting and/or decorating, plumbing and/or sewer work, sign building and/or erecting, glazing, ornamental iron work and/or awnings, paving, asphalt, concrete and cement work, grading, roofing and/or siding, tile setting, house moving, sheet metal work, welders and structural steel workers. 
    Crawl space: means any space in a building equal to five (5) feet or less in height from the surface below to the bottom of the floor joist or ceiling joist above. 
    Credentials: means the badge of office, certificate, or letter issued by a governmental department to an employee for the identification of said employee in the performance of his duties. 
    Dry well: means an underground, vertical trench or hole filled with rocks and gravel. 
    Existing: means constructed, installed, or situated, or being constructed, installed, or situated prior to the effective date of this Code or parts of this Code. 
    French drain: means an underground, horizontal trench filled with gravel which includes perforated pipes that run horizontally through the aggregate. 
    Garage door: means any door which swings, slides, tilts or folds and is utilized by an automobile for gaining entry into a garage. 
    Garage service door: means an exterior door in a garage less than eight (8) feet in width. 
    General public: as applied to those who enter, use or occupy a building, means persons other than the owner of the building, a tenant in the building, and persons who are employed in the building. 
    Plans: include drawings, specifications and data submitted to the building inspector for approval. 
    Premises: means the lot and the buildings situated therein. 
    Private: as applied to part of a building, means that such part of the building is not normally subject to common uses by those who occupy or enter the building. 
    Public (as applied to an exit way, toilet room, or other part of a building): means that such exit way, toilet room or other part of the building is subject to common use by those who occupy or enter the building, except as required for the separation of the sexes. 
    Rain barrel: means a collection device that stores rainwater collected from rooftop gutters and downspouts. 
    Rain garden: means a small, vegetated depression that is used to capture and infiltrate stormwater runoff. 
    Revised Code: means the Ohio Revised Code. 
    Street: means the area included between the right-of-way lines of a public thoroughfare fifty (50) feet or more in width which provides a public means of access to abutting property, or any such right-of-way more than thirty (30) feet and less than fifty (50) feet in width provided it existed prior to December 18, 1961. 
    Value of work: means the fair market dollar value of the completed construction project for which a permit is secured. This value is to be determined by the applicant and approved by the chief building official. 
    Vegetated swale: means a broad, shallow channel with a dense stand of vegetation covering the side slopes and bottom. Swales can be natural or manmade, and are designed to trap particulate pollutants (suspended solids and trace metals), promote infiltration, and reduce the flow velocity of stormwater runoff. Swales are best suited for residential, industrial, and commercial areas with low flow and smaller populations. 
    Wall, exterior sloping: means a wall that is attached to a building but is not a structural wall and is not finished on both sides, as opposed to a slanting roof. 
(Ord. No. 119-2009; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 1300.03 - COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS. 
The building inspector may request and shall receive so far as may be necessary, in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of the city engineer in fixing grades; of the chief of police in enforcing orders; of the city attorney in prosecuting violations, and of other city officials. 
§ 1300.04 - PERSONAL NON-LIABILITY. 
Any suit brought against any officer or employee of this city because of any act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this Code shall be defended by the city attorney of the city until the final termination of the proceedings therein. The city shall save such officer or employee harmless from personal liability. 
§ 1300.05 - PLANS, WHAT IS REQUIRED. 
(A)  Building plans. Plans are required for any work requiring a permit as defined in Section 105 of the RCO. Two (2) sets of plans shall be submitted with the contents as required in Section 106 of the RCO and consisting of the following: 
(1)  Site plan or development plan drawn to scale, and completely dimensioned, illustrating: 
(a)  North orientation. 
(b)  All property boundaries and dimensions. 
(c)  All existing improvement(s) and locations. Include all building and miscellaneous structure cover, parking cover, swimming pool cover, and miscellaneous impervious cover including but not limited to driveways, tennis courts, walks, terraces, patios, decks, etc. 
(d)  All proposed improvements and locations. Include all building and miscellaneous structure cover, parking cover, swimming pool cover, and miscellaneous impervious cover including but not limited to driveways, tennis courts, walks, terraces, patios, decks, etc. 
(e)  All right-of-way locations. 
(f)  All existing and proposed setback dimensions. 
(g)  All existing easement locations and designated uses. 
(h)  All land and improvements between street curb, or edge of pavement, and property line(s). 
(i)  For building additions whose building footprint exceeds twenty percent (20%) of the existing building footprint, a grading plan with existing and proposed contour intervals for every two (2) feet of vertical grade change when existing land contours are to be altered more than twelve (12) inches at the corners of the new foundation walls. Include all existing and proposed first floor elevations, and existing and proposed spot grades at the corners of all new foundation walls. The controlling subdivision grading plan, if one exists, shall be consulted and referenced on the grading plan. 
(j)  For new home construction, a grading plan shall be submitted. The grading plan shall show existing and proposed contour intervals for every two (2) feet of vertical grade change and surface run-off arrows. Also include all proposed first floor elevations, existing and proposed spot grades at the corners of all foundation walls, driveways and pavement areas. The approved and controlling subdivision master grading plan shall be followed. Deviations from the approved grades shall be limited to no more than eight (8) inches and must be approved by the building inspector prior to implementation of the change. Any further deviations from the master grading plan shall require re-submittal by the engineer of record for the master grading plan for review and approval by the City of Upper Arlington Engineer. Grade changes recommended by the engineer of record must be coordinated with the grades on adjacent lots and properties, respecting existing and proposed building heights. 
(k)  Construction which does not increase the building footprint area or site pavement area, which does not increase the habitable area or height of a non-conforming use or structure, and which does not permanently enclose previously unenclosed building areas, shall be exempt from the provisions of (a) through (g) above. 
(2)  Foundation and footer drawings showing the dimension of walls, footers, columns, piers, chimneys and other pertinent information at a scale of not less than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch equals one (1) foot. 
(3)  Floor plans of all floors showing the use or occupancy, the size and dimensions of all parts of the building together with the size and direction of all structural members, at a scale of not less than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch equals one (1) foot. 
(4)  Elevations of all sections of the building showing heights above and below the finished grade of the lot or parcel of all portions of the building including floor and ceiling levels, roof ridges, chimneys, porches, stoops and other appurtenances at a scale of not less than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch equals one (1) foot. 
(5)  Sections. A section through the building and chimney showing construction details and any other section necessary at a scale of not less than one-half (1/2) inch equals one (1) foot. 
(6)  Tables and diagrams of live loads, trusses, beams and similar items shall, where necessary, be shown. 
(7)  For porches, detached garages, carports or similar small structures, a plot plan, floor plan and front and a side elevation and a section shall be sufficient; plans and elevations need not be drawn to scale, providing dimensions are shown. 
For small additions and alterations, the requirements hereof as to elevations may be reduced to a front and side, and the scale size of all requirements need not be complied with. 
(8)  Where due to the size of the building or parcel of ground, the minimum scale requirements herein provided would make the drawings too large, the scale size may be reduced with the consent of the building inspector. 
(B)  Plumbing plans. 
(1)  Isometric diagrams of all piping and fixtures which comprise the work covered under the permit application. 
(C)  Electrical/Mechanical plans. 
(1)  Plans and diagrams as may be required by the plan reviewer to more fully explain heating, ventilation and air conditioning duct and piping layouts, and lighting and power equipment layouts. 
(D)  Site utilities plans. 
(1)  Plans and details as required to fully describe all utility work which is a part of the permit application. 
(E)  Fire suppression plans. 
(1)  Plans, riser diagrams, hydraulic calculations, and location of water meter, check valve, pressure gauge, inspector's test/drain valve, inspector's test/drain, and relation of test/drain to plumbing return system, as required to fully describe the system and its required components which are a part of the permit application. 
(F)  Additional plans. Additional plans may be required by the plans examiner as required to more fully explain the permit application request. 
TABLE 1300.05 
TYPES OF WORK NOT REQUIRING PERMITS 
Type of Permit When Work Does Not Require A Permit Swimming Pool When there is maintenance work only. Pool alteration and electrical work is specifically excluded and must receive a permit. Sign No permit exceptions. Sewer Tap No permit exceptions. Water Tap (Columbus) No permit exceptions. Fence When there is maintenance work on an existing fence. Driveway* When work is outside of the street right-of-way. Sidewalk* When repairing or replacing existing sidewalk. Fire Suppression No permit exceptions. Antenna Tower/Satellite Dish No permit exceptions. *Homeowner's affidavit may be substituted in-lieu-of licensed contractor.  
§ 1300.06 - NONCONFORMING USE-NOTICE. 
If the building on which the work to be done is a nonconforming use under article 3 § 3.05 of the Unified Development Code of the Upper Arlington Codified Ordinances, then the applicant shall give written notice of the filing of the application to the owners of all property within one hundred (100) feet of any boundary of the subject property, which notice shall indicate the general nature of the work to be done. A written acknowledgment of notice or a consent to the construction signed by any of such owners shall take the place of the prescribed notice to such owners. 
The council may, by the affirmative vote of four (4) members, dispense with the requirements of publication and written notice in cases of minor work, which will have no adverse effect upon neighboring properties. 
A permit may not be issued until fifteen (15) days after proof of notice is filed. 
In the event there are objections to the issuance of the permit, the council shall hold a hearing on the matter. 
§ 1300.07 - PLANS, REQUIRED EVIDENCE OF RESPONSIBILITY. 
Such plans shall bear the identification of the person primarily responsible for their preparation and for the provisions for safety and sanitation shown therein. 
§ 1300.08 - PLANS, FEE FOR INSPECTION. 
The fee for the inspection of plans for which a permit is required under this Code shall be paid in the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02 for each category listed below which applies to the permit requested. 
(A)  New buildings or structures: 
(1)  Basis of computation of area: Areas shall be based on floor surface excluding garage, carport, basement, crawl space and attic, measuring the outside dimensions at each floor level. 
(2)  Only the work shown on the approved plans shall be included in the permit. 
(B)  Detached garages, carports or other accessory buildings. The fee for commercial garages shall be computed in accordance with paragraph (A) hereof. 
(C)  Additions, alterations and repairs to existing buildings. 
(D)  Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is started or proceeded with, prior to obtaining a permit or approval from the building department the fees as calculated for said permit shall be doubled, but payment of such doubled fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of the work or from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
§ 1300.09 - REINSPECTION FEES. 
In the event a reinspection is required, the building inspector shall assess a reinspection fee for each additional inspection trip when: 
(1)  The correction work is not completely corrected; or 
(2)  The address given is inaccurate or inaccessible. 
The reinspection fee required under the conditions itemized above shall be paid in the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02 for each trip required to achieve code compliance. This reinspection fee shall be paid and a receipt posted on the job site before further building inspections are performed. When a contractor and/or owner owes reinspection fees at the time of application for another building permit, this permit shall be withheld until said fees have been paid. 
§ 1300.10 - PLANS, FEE FOR EXAMINATION. 
Plan examination fees for building code review described below shall be assessed according to the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02. The city shall retain thirty-five percent (35%) of the commercial building permit application fee specified in C.O. § 401.02 to supplement the administrative time required for processing. 
Residential work for which a building permit is required by Code. 
Commercial work for which a building permit is required by Code. 
Commercial plans examined by a consultant under contract with the city shall comply with fees as noted in C.O. § 1300.11. 
§ 1300.11 - PLANS, FEE FOR CONTRACT EXAMINATION. 
Any application and plans examined by a plans examiner under contract with the city shall have all costs incurred during the plan review process made part of the overall permit fee. All fees shall be paid in full, prior to the issuance of a permit. Any fees incurred after such permit is issued shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building certificate of occupancy. 
Should any fees remain outstanding and occupancy occurs, the owner or contractor shall be deemed in violation of this Code and subject to the penal provisions thereof. 
§ 1300.12 - PLANS, APPROVAL OF. 
(A)  Upon request of the owner or applicant, the chief building official shall stamp or endorse additional sets of plans, which have been submitted to and approved by him/her. For each additional set of plans so stamped or endorsed, a fee in accordance with the provisions of C.O. § 401.02 shall be paid. 
(B)  All applications and plans shall be dated by the chief building official or his/her designee upon their receipt and shall be taken up in their regular order and no such plans shall be passed out of their order unless they are of a complex character, which require prolonged examination. 
(C)  Exception. If the chief building official finds that the plans are of a complex character which require prolonged examination, he/she may allow work to proceed prior to issuance of the permit for the construction of the foundation for a commercial building or a commercial structure but only to a height to receive the first tier of beams, girders or joists. 
(D)  Validity. The issuance of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed as an approval of any violation of any of the provisions of this Code. The issuance of a permit based upon plans and specifications shall not prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in such plans and specifications or from preventing building operations being carried on there under when in violation of any ordinance of the city. 
§ 1300.13 - EXPIRATION. 
Building permits, if not paid for within sixty (60) days from the time of application, shall be voided and the plans destroyed. 
§ 1300.14 - PLANS, CONFORMITY TO. 
The construction, erection and alteration of a building and any addition thereto, and the equipment and maintenance thereof shall conform to the approved plans, except for minor deviations which do not involve a violation of this Code. 
§ 1300.15 - PERMIT, FORM OF. 
The form of the permit shall be prescribed by the chief building official and shall show the serial number of the permit, the address of the building or equipment under consideration, the name and address of the owner, the name of the person who issued the permit, and such other information as is necessary to facilitate the proper enforcement of this Code. 
§ 1300.16 - PERMIT POSTING. 
The permit shall be placed in a conspicuous location outside of the building and in the front part of the premises on which is, or will be located, the building or equipment to which the approved plans relate. The owner and the contractor shall, so far as possible, preserve and keep said permit posted until the completion of the work to which the approved plans related. Upon application by the owner or contractor, the chief building official or his designee shall issue a duplicate permit at a fee as prescribed in C.O. § 401.02 of the schedule of fees code to replace one that is lost or becomes missing by accident. 
§ 1300.17 - SPECIAL SUPERVISION WHERE REQUIRED. 
Where the work covered by approved plans involves construction or building service equipment which is hazardous or complex, or for other good reason requires special or expert supervision, the architect or professional engineer who signed such plans or affixed his seal thereto, or made the plans or computations for such work, shall supervise the work and be responsible for its conformity with the approved plans as they relate to safety and sanitation. Where said architect or professional engineer is not available, another architect, professional engineer, or other qualified person shall perform the required supervision. 
§ 1300.18 - LOT LINE MARKERS REQUIRED. 
Before any work is started in the construction of a building, all boundary lines shall be clearly marked at their intersections with permanent markers, not less than eighteen (18) inches in length, or with markers which are offset from permanent markers at a distance which is of record with the owner. 
§ 1300.19 - ELECTRICAL PERMITS. 
(A)  When electrical wiring changes are made to existing property requiring a permit and at the same time or in conjunction therewith new devices, such as, but not limited to, light fixtures and convenience outlets are installed in existing boxes, the application for the permit shall list such installations, which shall be included in the calculation of the permit fee and subject to the inspection provisions of this Code. 
§ 1300.20 - PERMIT FEES. 
The fee for an electrical permit for any work described below and for the required inspection shall be paid when the permit is issued. Such fee shall be in the amount specified by C.O. § 401.02. 
(A)  Wiring. Where wires are to be installations of conduit, surface raceway, armored cable, metallic tubing, under-floor raceways, including service race-way and equipment. 
(B)  Alterations. For additional outlets on installations where service equipment is not to be inspected. 
(C)  Fixtures. Pendant cords or Edison screw receptacles will be considered as fixtures and charged for as socket outlets. Approved lighting fixtures shall be considered as one (1) fixture. 
(D)  Footlights, border lights, cove or outline lighting when constructed and installed as fixtures are to be charged for on a socket basis under Item (C). 
When installed in conduit, electric metallic tubing, metal raceway or metallic armored cable, to be charged for under Item (A). 
(E)  Fees for the above shall be based on current consuming outlets. No charge shall be made for junction boxes or switches. 
(F)  Domestic heat regulating equipment, air conditioning venting or air circulation equipment, domestic oil, coal or gas burning equipment, appliances, water heaters, electric heating devices, battery charging outfits, door openers, transformers, etc., the fee shall be the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02. For each furnace using electric service for heating, the fee shall be the amount specified in the appliances provisions of C.O. § 401.02. 
(G)  Electric signs and/or display lighting installations. The permit fee for each such sign or display lighting installation shall be the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02, which shall include inspection of such device and its connections. 
(H)  Sound equipment in theaters and halls. 
(I)  Radio receiving installations, including antenna, ground connections and receptacles. 
(J)  Motors, generators, hot tubs, rectifiers, compressors, heat pumps. Motors of 1/4 horse power or less to be charged as light outlets. 
(K)  If more than one (1) inspection trip is necessary, a charge in the amount specified by C.O. § 401.02 will be made for each additional inspection trip. Reinspection fee to be paid and receipt posted on jobsite before future electrical inspections are performed. 
When a licensee and/or applicant owes reinspection fees at the time of application for another electrical permit, this permit shall be withheld until these fees have been paid. Also, further electrical inspections at an address with reinspection fees outstanding shall be deferred until these fees have been paid. 
(L)  Permanent or temporary service permit fee shall be the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02 for service up to and including 250 AMP. For service in excess of 250 AMP, there shall be an additional charge per ampere assessed in the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02. 
§ 1300.21 - INSPECTION REQUIRED. 
Each permit holder shall cause to be inspected all electrical work done by him or his agent as required by the provisions of this ordinance. 
§ 1300.22 - UNSAFE WIRING. 
The building and/or electrical inspector is hereby empowered to cause to be disconnected, from the source of supply, any electrical wiring which, in his judgment, is unsafe. 
§ 1300.23 - PLUMBING PERMITS (ONE, TWO AND THREE-FAMILY ONLY, SEE OBC CHAPTER 4101:2-29 FOR ALL OTHER USES). 
Permits required: Except as permitted in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, alter or repair any plumbing drain, vent sump, water closet, sink, lavatory or any other plumbing fixture within the city without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector to do such work, or for the owner or person having charge of any property within the city to cause or allow any such work to be done on such premises without a permit having been first obtained therefore. 
Permits may be obtained only by a master plumber or by an occupying owner performing work of plumbing in a single family dwelling building, except that the owner or lessee of any building, may obtain a permit for the removal and replacement of a fixture on the same fixture outlet, but not for the original installation of said fixture. The work of such removal or replacement shall be subject to all technical, inspection and penalty requirements of this Code. 
This section shall not apply or shall any permit be required in case of repairs not affecting sanitation, such as mending leaks in faucets, valves or water supply pipes, mending of broken fixtures, tanks, water heaters, releasing frozen pipes, or rodding and flushing of any house sewer or drain. 
Piping for manufacturing, scientific research and testing, other than soil or liquid piping, and all railroad installations are exempt from the permit and inspection requirements of this Chapter, but shall conform to the applicable section of the OBC. 
§ 1300.24 - FEE FOR PERMITS. 
The fee for plumbing permit and inspection, which shall be paid when the permit is issued, shall be the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02. 
§ 1300.25 - PLUMBING INSPECTIONS. 
Each permit holder shall cause to be inspected all plumbing work done by him or his agent. 
§ 1300.26 - FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS. 
No person shall install or make any substantial alterations or repairs to any fire suppression system in this city without first obtaining from the building inspector a permit to do such work. Application for a permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the building inspector, with such information as he may reasonably require. 
§ 1300.27 - FEE FOR PERMITS. 
The fee for such fire suppression system permits described below, which shall be paid when the permit is issued, shall be the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02. 
(A)  Automatic sprinkler plan review: The fee for sprinklers shall be based on the number of sprinklers, and shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of C.O. § 401.02. 
Standpipes using the same supply as the automatic sprinklers are included in the fee. 
For hydraulically designed systems, the fees are double the above schedule. 
(B)  Carbon dioxide suppression: The fee for carbon dioxide suppression systems shall be based on the number of pounds, and shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of C.O. § 401.02. 
(C)  Halogenated agent suppression: The fee for halogenated agent suppression systems shall be based on the number of pounds, and shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of C.O. § 401.02. 
(D)  Dry chemical suppression: The fee for dry chemical suppression systems shall be based on the number of pounds, and shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of C.O. § 401.02. 
(E)  Foam suppression: The fee for foam suppression systems shall be based on the number of gallons, and shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of C.O. § 401.02. 
(F)  Standpipe only without sprinklers: The fee for a standpipe only, without sprinklers, shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of C.O. § 401.02. 
§ 1300.28 - HVAC PERMIT. 
No person shall install or make any substantial alterations or repairs to any heating, ventilation, air conditioning or refrigeration system in this city without first obtaining from the building inspector a permit to do such work. Application for a permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the building inspector, with such information as he may reasonably require. 
§ 1300.29 - FEE FOR PERMIT. 
The fees for such permits for any work described in sections (A), (B), (C) and (D) below, which shall be paid when the permit is issued, shall be the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02. 
(A)  Heating. 
(1)  Permit fee and minimum permit fee for the installation and the required inspections of new heating systems using any and all heat generating devices and including all appurtenances, e.g., warm air outlets and returns, radiation baseboard convectors, electric grids and panels, etc., shall be the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02. 
(2)  Alterations or additions to existing refrigeration system or combination of systems. 
(3)  Unit heaters and infrared generators. 
(4)  Recessed heaters. 
(5)  Space heaters and floor heaters. 
(6)  Furnace and boiler replacement. 
(7)  Hot water heater replacement. 
(8)  Alterations and additions to any existing heating system or combination of heating system. 
(B)  Air conditioning and ventilation. 
(1)  Exhaust fans vented to outside. 
(2)  Range hoods vented. 
(3)  Mechanical ventilation system. 
(4)  Alterations and additions to any existing air distribution or ventilation system other than component parts of a heating system and combination of same. 
(C)  Refrigeration and heat pumps. Fees for each refrigeration and/or heat pump system (low, medium or high temperature) shall be based on the number of tons, and shall be the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02. 
(D)  Damper devices. 
(1)  Fees for each electrically actuated retrofit damper device for use with gas fired appliances shall be the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02. 
(2)  Water towers. 
Fee included in refrigeration system as above. If installed as a component part of a new system fees shall be paid in the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02. 
§ 1300.30 - HOUSE SEWER PERMIT. 
No person shall connect a house sewer to the sanitary sewer system of this city, without first obtaining a permit therefore from the building department and paying a tapping and inspection fee in the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02. 
In applicable cases where the City of Columbus requires a sanitary sewer capacity permit and fee, which permits and fees are administered by the City of Upper Arlington, the fee paid to the City of Columbus and an additional administrative fee to be paid to the City of Upper Arlington shall be assessed in the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02. 
§ 1300.31 - INFORMATION REQUIRED. 
Such person shall, upon request of the building inspector or any representative of the board of health of the city health district, furnish such information as to the depth, manner of construction, use or intended use of such well and such other information pertinent thereto as may be requested. 
§ 1300.32 - RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER. 
The owner of premises subject to the provisions of this building code shall be responsible for compliance with the standards set forth herein. He shall remain responsible therefore, regardless of the fact certain responsibilities may also be placed on operators or agents and regardless of any agreement between the owner and anyone else as to whom shall assume such responsibilities. The owner shall remain responsible for the elimination of any violation found on his premises, regardless of any agreement between owners and others. 
§ 1300.33 - CONFLICT OF INTEREST. 
No officer or employee of the building division shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or other structure, or in the making of plans or of specifications therefore, unless he is the owner of such building or structure. No such officer or employee shall engage in any work, which is inconsistent with his duties or with interests of the division. 
§ 1300.34 - PERMIT OR APPROVAL REVOCATION. 
The chief building official shall revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this building code in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based, or whenever any permit or approval has been issued in error and conditions are such that a permit or approval should not have been issued. 
§ 1300.35 - PENALTIES. 
Every person, firm, corporation or other entity being the holder of a building permit or who is required to obtain a building permit, every contractor, every owner, every occupant whether legally in possession, and every other person, firm, corporation or other entity having charge, control or supervision of any building or structure, construction, use or operation covered by this building code, part 13 of the Codified Ordinances, shall be responsible for compliance with its provisions. Any such person, firm, corporation, other entity, contractor, owner, occupant and any other person, firm, corporation or other entity who violates or participates in the violation of any of the provisions of the building code, part 13 of the Codified Ordinances, shall be fined not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). The continued violation of any provision hereof shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day said violation shall continue. 
CHAPTER 1301. - ELECTRICAL SERVICE 
The following provisions shall supplement the National Electric Code NFPA 70, as referenced in the Ohio Basic Building Code. 

§ 1301.01 - ELECTRICAL SERVICE EQUIPMENT. 
The minimum size of a permanently installed new electrical installation shall be one hundred fifty (150) amperes. Existing electrical service panels less than one hundred fifty (150) amperes may be replaced to equal the existing service capacity, but shall not be less than one hundred (100) amperes in any case. During electrical service upgrades, the existing service equipment shall be replaced with new, or previously unused, electrical service equipment, shall be replaced at the time the electrical service is upgraded and shall be done prior to energization by the electrical utility. 
Exception No. 1-Due to storm damage or other acts of nature, it shall be permissible to replace only the service mast or service cable riser, which extends upward from the meter base to the point of attachment. 
Exception No. 2-Where the existing service equipment is rated at one hundred fifty (150) amperes or more, it shall be permissible to relocate the overhead service drop conductors underground to create a service lateral. This service lateral may be created without replacement of existing service equipment, so long as the service-entrance conductors are not changed. 
Exception No. 3-Existing listed circuit breakers which were part of the (old) service equipment may be installed in the new service equipment so long as the listed circuit breakers are intended for use in the (new) listed service enclosure. 
The installation of a one hundred (100) ampere electrical service is permitted in any of the three (3) types of apartment units defined under definitions in C.O. § 1300.02. Prior to granting such permission, a load calculation defining the actual calculated load of each individual apartment unit shall be required. This load calculation shall be on file at the community development department prior to the start of any service installation. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 1301.02 - TEMPORARY ELECTRICAL SERVICES. 
The minimum size of a temporary electrical service shall be one hundred (100) amperes. All one hundred twenty five (125) volt, single-phase, fifteen (15) and twenty (20) ampere receptacle outlets served from this service shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection. 
(A)  Individual grounded circuits of ample capacity shall be required to supply the following equipment: washer, dryer, dishwasher, disposal, water heater, air conditioner, food freezer, pump, electric heater (one thousand (1,000) watts or above), gas furnace, boiler, or any appliance having a one quarter (1/4) HP rating or more. 
(B)  All one hundred twenty-five (125) volt, single-phase, fifteen (15) and twenty (20) ampere receptacles installed to serve ranges and counter-top surfaces in a kitchen, bathroom or wet bar area whether commercial or residential shall have ground-fault circuit- interrupter protection for personnel. 
§ 1301.03 - CHANGE, DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE AFTER APPROVAL PROHIBITED. 
Whenever any electrical wiring or other electrical equipment has been inspected and approved, no person shall thereafter change, damage or interfere with the same without authority of the electrical inspector. No person shall thereafter place any sheet metal, pipe, or other metal work within five (5) inches of any electrical conductor, or open wiring, or knob and tube wiring, without having written authorization by the electrical inspector. The electrical inspector will prescribe the protection required for such wiring systems after an on-site inspection. 
CHAPTER 1303. - ANTENNA TOWERS, ANTENNAS AND SATELLITE DISHES 

§ 1303.01 - BUILDING PERMITS. 
No person shall erect or install an antenna tower, antenna or satellite dish which is one (1) meter or more in diameter as defined in C.O. § 6.11 of the Unified Development Code, without first obtaining a building permit therefor. Application for such permit shall be submitted in such form as may be prescribed by the building inspector and shall include, as a minimum, the following documents and information: 
(A)  A location plan in sufficient detail to identify the location of the proposed tower, antennas or satellite dish, to be supported thereby, with reference to the applicant's lot lines, building setback and existing structures. 
(B)  Manufacturer's antenna tower, antenna or satellite dish specifications, if available. If such specifications are not available, the applicant shall furnish such information as may be reasonably required by the building inspector to enable a determination to be made as to the strength, stability and dimensions of such tower, antenna or satellite dish. 
(C)  Details of the proposed antenna tower or satellite dish foundation or support and details of guys or braces, if any, including the number, location and method of attachment of each proposed guy or brace. 
(D)  Method of grounding to afford adequate lightning protection. 
(E)  Sufficient information to establish that the structure will be capable of withstanding a wind load of thirty (30) pounds per square foot or eight-six (86) miles per hour (see E.I.A. Standard RS-222-A). That it will, in all respects, be designed and mounted in accordance with sound engineering practices, and that it will not be in violation of any provision of the Unified Development Code or other law, ordinance or lawful regulation. 
(F)  When the building inspector is satisfied that the proposed antenna, antenna tower, satellite dish and appurtenances conform to the applicable provisions of the Unified Development Code and the requirements of this chapter, he shall, upon payment by the applicant of fees in the amount specified in C.O. § 401.02, issue a building permit in the manner provided in C.O. §§ 1300.11 through 1300.14 of the Upper Arlington Building Code. 
§ 1303.02 - INSPECTIONS. 
Following the issuance of a permit, the building inspector shall cause to be made such inspections and investigations as are necessary to determine whether or not the work done and the installations made are in conformity with the application relating thereto, and with the provisions of this chapter. 
CHAPTER 1304. - DRIVEWAYS AND SIDEWALKS, GRADING AND DRAINING OF LOTS, AND NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS 

§ 1304.01 - ENTRANCE TO CONSTRUCTION SITE. 
Before proceeding with the construction, enlargement, alteration, repair or removal of any building or other structure, in which it is desired or may be necessary to drive across the curb, treelawn or sidewalk, the owner, contractor, or builder, who is undertaking the construction shall, whenever there is a curb and gutter, apply for a permit to cut such curb under C.O. § 901.08. The permit holder shall cut the curb for a sufficient width at the location of the contemplated permanent driveway so as to prevent damage to the remainder of the curb, and if there is no curbing, he shall install in the ditch paralleling the street, tile of sufficient size, but not less than ten (10) inches, to prevent the backing up of water in the ditch and shall cover the tile with crushed stone or gravel to the level of the existing road for a width sufficient to allow trucks carrying building supplies to pass over. Thereafter, no vehicle shall be driven across the curb, treelawn, sidewalk or ditch except by way of said curb cut and proposed driveway. Said person shall take such further action as may be necessary to prevent the formation of ruts, depressions or other obstacles or hazards to pedestrian travel along the treelawn or sidewalk. All of said work shall be done under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector, who shall have the authority to determine the width, depth and manner of cutting the curb or laying tile and the type of protection of the sidewalk and treelawn. 
Not later than two (2) weeks after commencement of construction, alteration or repair of any such building or other structure, the owner shall construct a driveway of gravel or crushed stone extending from the side of the road nearest the site a distance of forty (40) feet. When said structure is completed, said driveway shall be completed in compliance with C.O. § 1304.02 of the Upper Arlington Building Code. 
§ 1304.02 - DRIVEWAYS OVER CITY PROPERTY. 
All driveways shall conform to Plate 1304.06(A) [see end of Chapter] or Plate 1304.06(B) [see end of Chapter] and the following: 
(A)  Location: The driveway shall be so located that all portions thereof shall come within the limits of lot lines extended to the existing curb or pavement, unless the council by special resolution shall authorize a different location which resolution shall specify the location authorized. In case water hydrants, light standards, telephone poles or other existing structures conflict with the location decided upon, the building inspector may require such structure to be removed, provided that removal is practicable. The property owner shall deposit in advance with the owner of said structures a sum sufficient to cover the full cost of removal and relocation. 
(B)  Removal of curb: The minimum length removal of existing curb shall be sixteen (16) feet. In cutting the existing curb, care shall be taken so that the cut shall be vertical and at right angles to the line of curb. Five (5) feet shall be the minimum length of the block or blocks of curb left in place, otherwise a full block of existing curb shall be removed and replaced. Replaced work shall conform in all respects in character and kind to existing work. The minimum width of driveway, from the curb line to the lot line, shall be ten (10) feet. 
In lieu of curb removal, the concrete curb may be cut or sawn. An approved machine, such as manufactured by Kot Kurb of Canada, shall be used for all curb cuts. The sawed curb surface shall be sealed immediately with an approved concrete sealer, applied in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. A diamond wheel grinder shall be used to finish all cut edges. The bottom of the saw cut shall be one (1) inch above the gutter line and all work shall conform to Plate 1304.06(C) [see end of Chapter]. 
(C)  Character of work: All driveways shall be paved with concrete or asphaltic concrete from the back of the curb line, (or, if there be no curb, from the street pavement) to the lot line. Concrete shall comply with the provisions of C.O. § 1304.03(G) and shall have a minimum depth of six (6) inches throughout. Asphaltic concrete shall be of a type and depth as to have sufficient stability to withstand the use to which the driveway may be put. Where concrete sidewalks are in place in front of the property, that portion of the driveway crossing the sidewalk section shall be constructed of concrete. To provide for expansion, a one-half (1/2) inch pre-molded expansion joint extending the full section width of the curb and gutter shall be placed at each side where the driveway joins the existing curb and also in the center of said curb and gutter section. All work shall be done in a first-class, workman-like manner and shall be subject to the approval of the building inspector who may order the removal of any work which does not comply herewith. 
(D)  Existing structures: Existing drain tile shall be left in first-class workable condition and if disturbed shall be properly replaced. If no drain tile exists, a drain tile shall be inserted. Where electric cable exists, a two-inch fiber duct shall be placed around the cable in such a manner as to leave the cable free to be pulled and replaced. If no electric cable exists and if the street is improved with curbs and gutters, a two-inch conduit, capped at each end shall nevertheless be inserted to care for future cables. Valve boxes, land monuments and any existing structures encountered shall be properly protected and cared for. 
(E)  Where the sidewalk is adjacent to the curb, the building inspector may make such adjustments to Plate 1304.06(A) or Plate 1304.06(B) [see end of Chapter] as are necessary to prevent damage to the street, curb or sidewalk and provide for as smooth an entrance as possible. 
Where replacement of driveway apron, sidewalk and/or curb, either separately or combined, would require modification or replacement of work in place which is in good condition, the building inspector may modify the requirements of subsection 1304.06(A) and/or Plate 1304.06(B) [see end of Chapter] to avoid unnecessary repair or replacement. 
(F)  Limitation on width and number: 
(1)  No driveway entering a state highway within this city (whether or not the premises served thereby are within the city limits), shall exceed thirty (30) feet in width, or shall there be more than one (1) driveway entering a state highway for each two hundred (200) feet of frontage of the premises on such highway, or more than one (1) such driveway for any one (1) lot or parcel of land fronting on such highway; provided that the council may waive the limitations of this paragraph, for good cause, in cases in which the public interest will not be prejudiced thereby. 
(2)  Not more than one (1) parallel street may be used as a means of access or construction of driveways in the case of through lots, as defined by Upper Arlington Unified Development Code § 2.02, where the rear of such through lot is contiguous to a thoroughfare or collector street as they are identified in the master plan and as amended from time to time. 
(G)  Location of driveway in relation to an intersection: The proximity of a new residential driveway to a street intersection shall conform to the corner detail shown in Plate 1304.06(D) [see end of Chapter]. The minimum distance from the intersection to the start of the driveway flare shall be thirty-two (32) feet. 
(Ord. No. 34-2011, 7-13-2011) 
§ 1304.03 - SIDEWALKS. 
Sidewalks within the confines of the right-of-way shall be of Portland cement concrete of monolithic construction or of other material approved in writing by the City Manager or his/her designee, and shall have a width of five feet (5) unless a different width shall be provided in the resolution of Council ordering sidewalk construction or unless a different width is appropriate, and shall be constructed as hereinafter set forth. Unless Council has specified the location of sidewalks in its legislation ordering their construction, the city manager may authorize the construction of sidewalks anywhere within the right-of-way (but not nearer the curb or roadway than two (2) feet unless it is his/her determination that such location will not detract from the utility or appearance of such sidewalks, or be objectionable in other respects. 
(A)  Thickness: All concrete walks shall have a minimum thickness of four (4) inches except as excepted in C.O. § 1304.03 (L), or within the limits of driveways, where the minimum thickness shall be six (6) inches. Non-concrete walks shall be built as specified by the city when approval is granted for construction. 
(B)  Grade: Wherever sidewalk meets existing curb, the sidewalk shall be one-half (1/2) inch above the curb. Where walks are parallel with the curb, the near edge of the walk shall be one-half (1/2) inch higher for each foot the sidewalk is distant from the curb, and this grade continued across the entire walk. In other words, the grass plot and sidewalk shall be graded with a rise of one-half (1/2) inch per foot from the curb to property line. The slope may be varied as directed by the city, if necessary, to conform to existing structures or grades. 
(C)  Expansion joints: Expansion joints one-quarter (1/4) inch thick of suitable asphaltic felt or joint material shall be provided in all instances where concrete sidewalk meets curb, or where joining existing walks or concrete structures, and at intervals of approximately sixteen (16) feet across the walk. 
(D)  Preparation of subgrade: The subgrade shall be brought to an even, compact surface, uniformly four (4) inches below the finished surface of the walk, six (6) inches below for driveways. Soft or spongy earth, vegetable or other perishable matter shall be removed and the space filled with gravel or broken stone and thoroughly compacted by ramming. Wherever a fill is necessary to support the sidewalk, material for the fill shall be spread in four-inch layers and each layer thoroughly rolled or rammed. A subgrade layer of four (4) inches of compacted gravel is recommended under all new or replacement concrete sidewalks. 
(E)  Structures encountered: The contractor shall adjust main line or hydrant valve boxes, water or gas service boxes and manholes in the area of the walks to conform to the finished grade. 
(F)  Forms: Forms for concrete sidewalk shall be of wood not less than two (2) inches nominal thickness or of steel of equal rigidity. Flexible strips may be used on curves. The forms shall be set true to line and grade and be securely stacked and held. 
(G)  Material: Portland cement concrete for sidewalks shall be Class C concrete as described under Item 499, Concrete, General in the State of Ohio, Department of Highways, Construction and Material Specifications, except that all coarse aggregate shall be No. 6 and of the quality as specified for super-structure concrete. In general, this shall contain a minimum of six and one-half (6.5) bags of cement for c.y. of concrete and have a maximum net water content of 5.75 gallons per bag of cement. Such adjustments shall be made in the materials, proportions and method of mixing as may be necessary to entrain four percent (4%) to seven percent (7%) air in the concrete. When placed, the slump of the concrete shall not exceed three (3) inches. The city may order two (2) test cylinders, six (6) inches by twelve (12) inches, made from each one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of sidewalk placed. If so ordered, the contractor shall make the test cylinders, cure them and transport them to an approved laboratory for testing. One (1) copy of the report of the cylinder test shall be promptly delivered to the city. The cost of making, curing, transporting and testing the cylinder shall be included in the price bid for the sidewalk. 
(H)  Placing and finishing: The subgrade shall be adequately moistened just before the concrete is placed. The concrete shall be deposited and compacted in a single layer. It shall be struck off with a template and smoothed with a float to produce a sandy texture. The edges shall be rounded to one-quarter (1/4) inch radius. The surface of the sidewalk shall be divided into blocks by the use of a grooving tool. The grooves shall be spaced equally at four-foot intervals to divide the walk into square blocks. Additional grooves shall be placed over roof drains, at changes in walk thickness and at other places directed by the city. A true expansion joint extending through the entire thickness shall be placed at every fourth joint or at intervals of approximately every sixteen (16) feet. 
(I)  Curing and protection: After finishing, the concrete shall be sealed by spraying thereon a membrane curing material in such a manner as to provide a continuous, uniform water-impermeable film without marring the surface of the concrete. A minimum of one (1) gallon of material shall be used per two hundred (200) square feet of surface treated. The curing material shall be of such a nature that it is distinctly visible for at least four (4) hours after application, but shall produce no permanent discoloration of the concrete. 
Sidewalks shall not be laid on frozen ground or at a time when freezing temperatures prevail. The contractor shall be prepared to protect all concrete placed at such times as freezing temperature may be encountered. 
(J)  Clean-up: As the walk is completed and forms removed, the contractor shall immediately backfill the excavation, remove all surplus material and leave the walk and sod strip entirely free from any objects or material that may endanger the public. 
(K)  Roof drain replacement: Existing roof drains passing through the sidewalk area shall be protected when they are at such a grade that the top of the pipe barrel is at least three (3) inches below the top of the sidewalk or finished grade of the sod strip. Drains having less than three-inch cover shall be lowered or replaced for such length as necessary to get cover and to meet the existing pipe grade in the lawn. 
Pipe used for replacement shall be four-inch nominal diameter standard strength vitrified clay pipe; D quality asbestos cement pipe; C quality rigid plastic pipe or standard strength cast iron soil pipe. In all cases the joints between sections shall be sealed by a method appropriate for the pipe being used. Where the replacement pipe is of different type from the existing pipe, the joint between the two shall be made watertight and mechanically secure. 
If the replacement pipe is carried through the curb, the opening shall be cleaned out and mortared up in a neat and workman-like manner after the replacement pipe is installed. 
(L)  Concrete may be reduced to three (3) inches thick over drains, utility lines, tree roots, or other obstacles outside the limits of driveways. No sidewalk shall be constructed of concrete less than three (3) inches thick in any location. 
§ 1304.04 - GRADING AND DRAINING OF LOTS. 
The requirements for the grading and draining of building lots shall be as follows: 
(A)  The foundation walls of every dwelling house, and every other building having a basement under any part thereof, shall be constructed to an elevation at least four (4) inches higher than the top of the abutting street, (measured at the mid-point of the lot frontage), plus a height equal to one-half (1/2) inch for each foot of distance from such building to the abutting street curb. The finished grade of the ground from the front of such building to the street shall slope toward the street at the rate of not less than one-half (1/2) inch to the foot, throughout all portions of said front yard. 
(B)  Where it is not practicable to grade the lot so as to provide natural run-off of surface water from the entire lot to a street, storm sewer or other approved outlet, a drainage line or lines of field tile, vitrified tile or other non-porous pipe of acceptable size shall be installed, with proper inlets to drain any part of the lot which would otherwise collect and impound water. The materials and method of installation of such lines shall be determined by the building inspector. Such drainage lines shall lead into the street, storm sewer or other outlet approved by the Building Inspector. 
(C)  The lot grading and drainage herein required shall not thereafter be changed by any owner, occupant or other person in control of the premises in such a way as to diminish or impede the run-off of water from such lot, away from any building, toward the street, storm sewer or other approved outlet. 
(D)  The building inspector shall have the power to modify the foregoing provisions and to make additional or substituted requirements on hillside lots, corner lots and in other individual cases where, because of unusual topographic or other problems, the above requirements would not produce the results sought, or where other grading or drainage treatment would produce equal or better results. 
(E)  Reserved. 
(F)  Reserved. 
(G)  Where curbs and gutters have not been installed in the abutting street the foundation and lot grades shall be predicated upon the proposed grade of the abutting street as established by the city engineer. 
(H)  All roof water from any building, including detached accessory garages, in this city shall be carried from downspouts to the street gutter, storm ditch or storm sewer through thin walled polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC), corrugated ADS, or approved equivalent having a minimum diameter of four (4) inches, bedded in sand and laid to proper grade. 
(I)  Where the grade at the building is below the grade of street gutter, storm ditch or storm sewer the Building Inspector shall determine the method of drainage, but no such system shall be installed closer to a building than ten (10) feet, or closer to a basement than fifteen (15) feet, or in any side yard. 
(J)  Where roof gutters are not installed, a trench shall be constructed at a point under the drip line of the roof overhang having a minimum width of one (1) foot. The trench shall be graded to the street gutter, storm sewer or storm ditch and shall have three (3) inches of stone at the bottom upon which four-inch field tile shall be laid so as to drain as described above. The remainder of the ditch shall be filled with stone and at the discharge end of said trench the field tile shall be connected to thin walled polyvinyl chloride (PVC), corrugated ADS, or approved equivalent and carried to the final point of discharge as set forth in subsection (H) hereof. 
(K)  Green building standards may also be utilized to mitigate all or a portion of the site grading and drainage requirements as set forth in subsections (A) through (J). A stormwater management plan shall be developed and submitted to the chief building official for review and approval prior to implementation. This stormwater management plan shall be developed to minimize concentrated flows and to simulate flows in natural hydrology by the use of dry wells, french drains, rain barrels, rain gardens, vegetated swales and similar features. Once approved and implemented, the site grading and drainage shall not cause excessive erosion or water damage and shall not create a nuisance on public or private property. Additionally the approved site grading and drainage shall not thereafter be changed by any owner, occupant or other person in control of the premises in such a way as to diminish or impede the run-off. 
(L)  (1)  Stormwater management features shall not be located in the right-of-way unless the owner, occupant or other person in control of the premises fully complies with the requirements of C.O. ch. 933 regarding the use and occupation of rights-of-way. 
(2)  Dry wells, french drains, rain gardens and vegetated swales shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from foundations and fifteen (15) feet from property lines. All roof drain conductors leading to these alternative drainage methods shall be a minimum of four-inch thin walled polyvinyl chloride (PVC) solid pipe and installed underneath the finish grade. 
(3)  Rain barrels shall not be located nearer to any street than the nearest wall of the principal building in question, or nearer to any side or rear property line than three (3) feet and should match the color of the adjacent structure. A complete Rain Barrel system shall consist of at least one (1) fifty to one-hundred-gallon holding tank, a downspout connector/diverter, a sealed lid or mosquito screen, a hose bib and an overflow connected to a storm sewer or an approved location. 
(4)  Rain gardens shall be subject to the review and approval of the chief building official and shall be constructed in accordance with the latest edition of the "Rain Garden Guidelines for Southwest Ohio" published by the Ohio State University Extension, Hamilton County. 
(Ord. No. 119-2009) 
§ 1304.05 - NUMBERING OF DWELLINGS AND BUSINESSES. 
All dwellings and business houses situated within the corporate limits of this City shall be numbered in the manner and according to the system hereinafter prescribed. 
(A)  The initial or starting lines shall be High Street in the City of Columbus, Ohio, for the streets running east and west, and Broad Street in said City for the streets running north and south, and the numbers upon any street not connecting with either of the above initial streets shall be calculated and fixed in the same manner as if such streets did so connect, so that the same number on parallel streets shall be as near as possible the same distance from the initial line. 
(B)  The even numbers shall be upon the east and north sides of streets and avenues and the odd numbers upon the south and west sides of same, allowing fifteen (15) feet, streets and alleys included, for each number. Where entrances are so congested as to require it, half numbers may be used. 
(C)  The building inspector shall issue certified house numbers for each dwelling and business house, upon application therefore by the owner or occupant. It shall be the duty of the owner and occupants of dwellings and business houses to display the correct number on their dwellings or business houses in a conspicuous place in figures not less than three (3) inches in height. The display of other numbers in such a manner as to cause confusion as to the correct street number of the building is hereby prohibited. 
(D)  New homes and new commercial buildings under construction shall have an address sign posted on the site prior to the start of construction. This sign shall include the property address and the building permit number. The property address shall not be less than four (4) inches in height and located above the permit number on the sign. The sign shall be visible from the street at all times until the permanent address is posted per paragraph (C) of this section. 
§ 1304.06 - PLATES. 
Plat 1304.06(A)
Standard Driveway with Three Foot Curb Radius

Plate 1304.06(B)
Standard Driveway with Depressed Curb


Plat 1304.06(C)
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DRAWING for SAWED DRIVEWAY DROPS


Driveway Location and Dimensions
PLAT 1304.06(D)
§ 1304.07 - CONTAINMENT OF CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. 
Construction debris shall be properly contained at all times during construction for new homes, new commercial buildings, remodeling, renovations and/or additions. Open or closed burning of any construction debris is strictly prohibited. 
Trash containment shall be in place at the commencement of construction. This containment shall be of size and design to accommodate ALL construction trash and debris at ALL times. The containment shall be changed or emptied when it becomes full so as to prevent wind blown debris and piles of trash from accumulating around the site. This containment shall be placed on the same property where the construction is taking place and is prohibited in the right of way or sight triangle. 
CHAPTER 1305. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS 

§ 1305.01 - UNSAFE BUILDINGS. 
All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which, in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence, are, for the purpose of this Code, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the procedure of this chapter. 
§ 1305.02 - NOTICE TO OWNER. 
(A)  The building inspector shall examine or cause to be examined every building reported as dangerous or damaged, and if the same is found to be an unsafe building, he shall give written notice to the owner of record and to the person having charge of said building, if known, and to the principal occupant thereof, stating the defects thereof. This notice shall require the building owner or person having charge or control of said building to commence within thirty (30) days and to continue work, either to complete the specified repairs or improvements, or to demolish and remove the building or structure, or portion thereof, leaving the premises in a clean, safe and sanitary condition; except that in cases of emergency, making immediate repairs necessary, the building inspector may order the changes to be made within a shorter period. 
Such notice may also require the building or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith. Should the building be approved for improvements or repairs by the building inspector, such notice may provide that the building or portion thereof not be reoccupied until the specified repairs and improvements are completed and approved by the building inspector. 
(B)  Service of such notice shall be by personal service, residence service, or by registered or certified mail; provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or person having charge of said building, if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to his last known address. If any of such parties cannot be located, or can his address be ascertained, the notice shall be deemed to be properly served, if a copy thereof, is placed in a conspicuous place in or about such building. 
If such notice is served by registered or certified mail, the thirty-day period within which such owner is required to comply with the order of the building inspector shall begin as of the date of posting such notice, provided such notice is not returned undelivered. 
§ 1305.03 - POSTING OF SIGNS. 
The building inspector shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building a notice to read: DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. BUILDING DIVISION, CITY OF UPPER ARLINGTON, OHIO. Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs are made or demolition is completed. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove such notice without permission of the building inspector or for any person to enter the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing same. 
§ 1305.04 - RIGHT TO DEMOLISH. 
In case the owner shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate or demolish and remove such building or structure or portion thereof, such owner shall be subject to the penal provisions of this Code and the building inspector shall proceed with the work specified in such notice or the demolition of such building or portion thereof. 
§ 1305.05 - COST OF DEMOLITION RESPONSIBILITY. 
The owner shall be personally liable for the cost of such work and in the event such cost is not paid by him the amount thereof shall be transmitted to the city council who shall cause the same to be paid. The amount thereof shall be certified to the county auditor and levied as a special assessment on the land on which the building was located and shall be collected in the manner provided for special assessments, or by the taking of a judgment against the owner. 
§ 1305.06 - DEFINITIONS. 
The terms used in this chapter shall have the same definition as ascribed elsewhere in the Upper Arlington Codified Ordinances, or if not defined in the ordinances, shall be ascribed its ordinary and common meaning. 
§ 1305.07 - DEMOLITION APPLICATION AND PERMIT REQUIRED. 
(A)  Demolition permit required. No demolition of work of any building or detached structure shall begin until a registered demolition contract, as defined pursuant to C.O. ch. 745 of the business regulation code, or property owner, has obtained an approved demolition permit from the community development department, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this ordinance as well as section 4.06 of the Unified Development Ordinance. 
(B)  Exceptions: Unless the demolition constitutes a historic demolition, a demolition permit is not required: 
(1)  When a building permit is obtained for new construction that by its nature requires partial demolition of the structure. 
(2)  For the demolition of any accessory structure or detached garage, with a floor area of less than four hundred fifty (450) square feet. 
(C)  Minimum application requirements. The demolition application shall be furnished by the community development department and shall require, at a minimum, the following from the applicant: 
(1)  Name, address, and phone of property owner; 
(2)  Deed or other legal proof of ownership; 
(3)  Street address of proposed demolition; 
(4)  Name, address, and phone of demolition contractor; 
(5)  Description of proposed demolition; 
(6)  Description of method of protecting existing trees and vegetation to be preserved during demolition and restoration; 
(7)  Site restoration plans, if applicable; 
(8)  Grade and storm drainage management plans; 
(9)  Franklin County Board of Health approval to disconnect sanitary sewer, if applicable; 
(10)  EPA "Notification of Demolition and Removal" (commercial only); 
(11)  Statement from applicant that building has been reviewed for hazardous material; 
(12)  Hazardous material report if hazardous material was present and abated; 
(13)  Statement from applicant that all utilities have been properly disconnected; 
(14)  Documentation of zoning and building permit approval for restoration plans; and 
(15)  Any additional information deemed necessary by the community development department and the fire department to complete its review. 
(D)  Demolition by property owner. A demolition permit shall only be issued to a property owner pursuant to a proper application and the following conditions: 
(1)  Demolition is performed by the property owner or with the assistance of non-paid workers; and 
(2)  Demolition is in conformance with the approved demolition permit, C.O. ch. 1305 and all applicable fire, building and zoning regulations and permits. 
(E)  Demolition permit issuance. 
(1)  Unless the demolition is designated a historic demolition as described by UDO section 4.06, the director of community development and/or designee shall act upon the submitted demolition application in the order received and without unnecessary delay, not to exceed thirty (30) days after submittal of said application, and pending the approval of all other reviews required by C.O. ch. 1305. 
(2)  If the demolition constitutes a historic demolition, the director of community development shall not issue a demolition permit or a historic demolition permit until one of the following has occurred: (i) the board has issued a certificate of economic hardship; (ii) the director of community development has made a finding of unusual and compelling circumstances; (iii) the board has determined during its final review that the applicant has complied with the delayed demolition requirements of UDO section 4.06(I)(3); or (iv) city council has overruled a previous denial by the board of one of the preceding approval mechanisms. 
(3)  No demolition permit for a historic demolition shall be issued prior to the time for filing an appeal to the board of zoning and planning or to city council. In addition, a historic demolition permit for a historic demolition pursuant to UDO Section 4.06(I)(3) shall not be issued until at least one hundred eighty (180) days after the applicant initially submitted the demolition application. 
(4)  If a demolition permit is approved for a historic demolition, any new buildings or structures must first complete design review with the Board in accordance with the requirements of UDO Sections 7.17 and 7.18. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 1305.08 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
(A)  Notice: Notice of the demolition of a structure shall be made by the applicant to all adjacent property owners. Failure to provide the required notice shall invalidate any permit and shall constitute a violation. Notice shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Posted notice: Upon the issuance of an approved demolition permit by the community development department, the applicant shall cause notice of the demolition to be given by posting a sign announcing such demolition in a conspicuous place in the front part of the subject property. 
(2)  Duration of posting: Said sign, provided by the community development department, shall be posted conspicuously no less than ten (10) days in advance of such demolition and shall remain posted on the subject property until all work on the subject property has been completed. After posting the sign as required in this section, the applicant shall provide to the community development department a notarized affidavit indicating that the sign has been posted and that it will remain posted throughout the ten-day period required by this section as well as acknowledging that the applicant is responsible for replacing the sign as quickly as possible if it is damaged or stolen. 
(3)  Sign fee: At the time of application, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable sign fee as listed in the C.O. § 401.02 master list of fees. The city shall not be held responsible for lost, stolen, vandalized or damaged signs. 
(B)  Method of demolition. An approved demolition permit is valid for normal demolition means only. Normal demolition means is defined as, but not limited to, common construction machinery, backhoes, cranes, wrecking balls and manual labor. 
Blasting is prohibited. Burning is prohibited unless applicant has obtained an approved burning permit from the Upper Arlington Fire Division. 
(C)  Safety. For the duration of demolition, a forty-two-inch high construction-standard safety fence shall be installed and maintained in good condition around the perimeter of the subject property. The site shall be maintained in a safe and orderly condition at all times. 
The director of community development and/or designee shall have full authority to stop the demolition or removal of any building or structure or part thereof, when the same is being done in a reckless or careless manner, or in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinances of the city. When such work is stopped by order of the director of community development and/or designee, it shall not be resumed without written approval of the director of community development or designee. 
(D)  Expiration of permit. An approved demolition permit shall be valid for a period of six (6) months from the date of issuance. Upon written request to the director of community development and/or designee the permit may be renewed for a maximum of ninety (90) days for good cause shown. 
(E)  Commencement of demolition. Upon commencement of demolition, all demolition work shall be completed within ten (10) calendar days. 
Where unusual or unique circumstances arise, the director of community development and/or designee may grant an extension to the ten-calendar-day requirement at his/her discretion. 
(F)  Hours of work. The standards and special permits as set forth in C.O. § 517.15 regarding hours of work and excessive noise shall be held applicable. 
(G)  Non-transferable and non-assignable. An approved demolition permit is non-transferable and non-assignable without prior written approval of the director of community development and/or designee. 
(H)  Performance. All demolition work shall be performed in a workmanlike manner in accordance with C.O. ch. 1305, the demolition permit and all building, zoning, fire and other applicable codes and ordinances. 
(I)  Protection of adjoining property owners. The director of community development and/or designee may impose such requirements and conditions as he/she deems necessary for the protection of adjoining property owners and the public interest. 
(J)  Commercial demolition. The demolition of all commercial buildings or structures or parts thereof shall comply with the requirements of the Ohio Basic Building Code. 
(K)  Redevelopment of site. No demolition permit shall be issued unless the new construction, replacement or redevelopment of the building or accessory structure has been granted all the necessary approvals, including, but not limited to: permits, variances, rezonings, amendments to a final development Plan, plat amendments, certificates, and reviews, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  When the demolition is determined by the director of community development and/or designee to be required to abate a nuisance or eliminate an unsafe building as defined in C.O. § 1305.01 of the building code; and 
(2)  When the demolition involves a site which is to be redeveloped into multiple lots as the result of a lot split proposal, resubdivision or plat amendment. Redevelopment of the site must commence within thirty (30) days after completion of the demolition. If redevelopment of the site has not commenced within thirty (30) days, then complete site restoration, pursuant to the standards set forth in C.O. § 1305.08(L), shall be required. Site restoration shall be completed within thirty (30) days following the expiration of the thirty-day redevelopment period. 
(L)  Site restoration. No demolition permit shall be issued if any building or structure is to be demolished but not replaced by another structure unless a site restoration plan is submitted and approved by the director of community development and/or designee. 
When demolition is required to abate a nuisance or eliminate an unsafe building as defined in C.O. § 1305.01 of the building code, the registered demolition contractor shall submit a site restoration plan within ten (10) days following the issuance of the demolition permit. 
The site of every approved demolition shall be restored in accordance with any required environmental approval or site restoration plan, or in accordance with minimum standards set forth herein. 
Every restoration shall be performed in a manner which prevents erosion and shall include, at a minimum, prompt removal of debris, backfilling any excavation with granular material, grading in such a manner as to prevent stormwater from accumulating or ponding on the site and to prevent any negative effect on adjacent properties, a six-inch overlay of topsoil and seeding with grass or sod installation. 
Further, the owner of the property shall be required to observe all regulations set forth in U.A.C.O. Chapter 537. 
If the site is not being redeveloped pursuant to C.O. § 1305.07(K), site restoration shall be completed within thirty (30) days from the date of completion of the demolition. 
(Ord. No. 94-2010; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 1305.09 - FEES FOR PERMITS. 
The permit fees for the demolition permit shall be as provided in C.O. § 401.02. 
(Ord. No. 63-2016 , § 7, 11-28-2016) 
§ 1305.10 - REGISTRATION OF DEMOLITION CONTRACTORS. 
Demolition contractors shall be registered pursuant to the C.O. ch. 745 of the business regulation code. 
§ 1305.11 - WAIVER OF LIABILITY; CITY HELD HARMLESS. 
To the fullest extent permitted by law, the property owner and his/her demolition contractor agree to defend, pay on behalf of, indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all claims, demands, suits, or loss, including all costs associated therewith, and for any damages that may be asserted, claimed or recovered against or from the city by reason of personal injury, death and damage to property of third parties, which arise out of or are in any way connected to applicant's permit. A Waiver shall be signed by the property owner and his/her demolition contractor upon issuance of the permit. 
§ 1305.12 - REVOCATION OF PERMIT. 
A demolition permit may be revoked by the director of community development and/or designee at any time upon a violation of the terms of the permit, or upon a violation of any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 1305.13 - APPEALS. 
A person aggrieved by an order issued by the director of community development or designee under this chapter may appeal such order as provided in chapter 1306. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 1305.14 - SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of C.O. ch. 1305 is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision of this ordinance, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
§ 1305.15 - TIME LIMITS. 
For good cause shown, the director of community development and/or designee may extend any time limits imposed by C.O. ch. 1305. 
(Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015) 
§ 1305.99 - PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter or the terms of the demolition permit shall be guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor, subject to a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
In addition, the city may initiate an appropriate action or legal proceeding to restrain, correct or abate a violation in order to obtain compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any improvement on the subject property until the owner thereof has complied with all of the provisions of this article. 
CHAPTER 1306. - BOARD OF BUILDING STANDARDS 

§ 1306.01 - COMPOSITION AND MEMBERSHIP. 
There shall be a board of building standards appointed by the president of city council, subject to the approval of the council, to consist of seven (7) members who shall, collectively, be qualified by profession on all matters pertaining to building, electric, plumbing, heating and ventilation and who shall be residents of this city, and shall not be officers or employees of this city. 
§ 1306.02 - TERM OF OFFICE. 
Members of the board of building standards shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years, four (4) of which shall expire on February 1, 1995 and three (3) of which shall expire February 1, 1997 and every four (4) years thereafter. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term. Each member shall serve until his successor takes office. Members of the board of building standards shall be removed from office after three (3) unexcused absences. 
§ 1306.03 - ORGANIZATION AND APPEALS PROCEDURE. 
(A)  The board shall organize, elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson and adopt rules for its own government. The director of community development, or his designated representative, shall act as secretary. The board shall meet during the first quarter of each odd-numbered year and elect officers and thereafter they shall meet on call by the chairperson or by the city manager pursuant to its rules. 
(B)  In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this section, the day of the act or order from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period as computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. Intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be included in the computation unless otherwise specified. If the final day of the period falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, then the act may be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. 
(C)  The board may postpone or continue any hearing on its own motion or on the motion of a party. The board shall keep a complete and accurate record of all proceedings, which shall be open to public inspection. 
(D)  Testimony at a hearing on an appeal from an order of the building inspector shall be under oath and a stenographic or other record of testimony and other evidence shall be required. 
(E)  For a hearing on an appeal from an order of the building inspector, the board may require the attendance of witnesses, the production of records and papers, and may depose witnesses in accord with ORC § 119.09. 
(F)  If the order appealed from concerns ORC § 3781.111, or rules promulgated under that section, reasonable notice of time, date, place, and subject of the hearing shall be given to any local organization composed of or representing persons with disabilities or, if none exists, then to any statewide organization composed of or representing persons with disabilities. A local organization composed of or representing persons with disabilities or, if none exists, then any statewide organization composed of or representing persons with disabilities, may file an appeal from a decision of the board of building standards as provided by this chapter. 
(G)  The board shall render its decision on any appeal from an order of the building inspector within thirty (30) days of the final hearing on the appeal; the board's decision shall be entered on the board's record. A certified copy of the decision shall be served upon the parties and upon the parties' attorneys, if applicable, by certified mail, return receipt requested, with notice that such order may be appealed, within fifteen (15) days after the mailing of the board's decision, to the state board of building appeals, or to the Franklin County Court of Common Pleas. 
(Ord. No. 82-2013; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 1306.04 - QUORUM. 
Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. The concurring vote of four (4) members shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building Inspector or any administration official. 
§ 1306.05 - DUTIES. 
(A)  The board shall recommend to the city council any changes that it may deem necessary in this Code. 
(B)  It shall serve as interpreter of this Code. 
(C)  It shall hear all appeals from the refusal or revocation of a residential one-, two- and three-family dwelling unit building permit, and shall also hear all appeals from the refusal or revocation of a license, the issuance of which is within the jurisdiction of the Building Inspector, or any other order made by the building inspector. 
(D)  It shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to it by the Council of the City of Upper Arlington. 
§ 1306.06 - APPLICATION AND FILING FEE FOR BOARD OF BUILDING STANDARDS APPEAL. 
Any person aggrieved by an order of the building inspector, or any person seeking a variance from the requirements of the Upper Arlington Building Code, may appeal such order or request such variance using a form prepared by the department of community development. This application form shall contain a notice that the decision of the board is subject to appeal to state board of building appeals, or to Franklin County Court of Common Pleas within fifteen (15) days after final decision of the board, and that it is the responsibility of a successful applicant or appellant, before taking action thereunder, to let the appeal period for that decision expire before taking action under the board's decision. 
For appeals of an order of the building inspector, applications for appeal before the board shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the mailing date or actual receipt of the order being appealed, whichever is earlier. Such appeals shall be filed with the director of community development, or the director's designated representative, who shall transmit the same to the board. 
A decision to file a code enforcement citation in the Upper Arlington Mayor's Court or other court of competent jurisdiction, or to pursue other remedies provided in C.O. § 1305.99, may not be appealed to the board of building standards. 
Any application submitted to the board of building standards shall be accompanied by a filing fee as specified in C.O. ch. 400, Table 401.02. 
(Ord. No. 82-2013; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 1306.07 - APPEAL FROM DECISION OF THE BOARD OF BUILDING STANDARDS. 
The director of community development or designee, a party, or an organization composed of or representing persons with disabilities as provided in C.O. § 1306.03(F), aggrieved by a decision of the Upper Arlington Board of Building Standards on a variance application or appeal of an order of the building inspector may appeal that decision to the state board of building appeals or to the Franklin County Court of Common Pleas. Such appeal shall be taken within fifteen (15) days after the final action of the board of building standards. No decision of the board of building standards shall become final until the expiration of fifteen (15) days from the date such decision is made, or, if an appeal is filed, until final action thereon by the state board of building appeals or Franklin County Court of Common Pleas. 
(Ord. No. 82-2013; Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015) 
Part 14 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
CHAPTER 1401. - AMENDMENTS, DELETIONS AND MODIFICATIONS TO THE ICC INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE, 2003 EDITION 

§ 1401.01 - ADOPTION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE. 
A certain document being marked and designated as the "International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition," as published by the International Code Council (ICC), be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio; for the control of buildings and structures and property as therein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said ICC International Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in C.O. § 1401.02. 
§ 1401.02 - AMENDMENTS, DELETIONS AND MODIFICATIONS TO THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE, 2003 EDITION. 
The ICC International Property Maintenance Code is amended and revised as follows. All section numbers correspond to the International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition. 
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION 
SECTION 101 
GENERAL 
101.1 Title 
These regulations shall be known as the City of Upper Arlington, Ohio, Property Maintenance Code, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." 
SECTION 102
APPLICABILITY 
102.3 Application of Other Codes 
Repairs, additions, maintenance or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of this Code and the Upper Arlington Codified Ordinances; Ohio Residential Code For One, Two and Three Family Dwellings, 1999 Edition; Ohio Building Code, 2002 Edition; Ohio Plumbing Code, 2002 Edition; Ohio Mechanical Code, 2002 Edition; International Fuel Gas Code, 2002 Edition; Ohio Fire Code, 2002 Edition and the National Electric Code, 2002 Edition. 
Nothing in this Code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the Upper Arlington Unified Development Ordinance. 
SECTION 103 
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
103.1 General 
The Upper Arlington Department of Community Development shall have jurisdiction over this Code and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Director of Community Development or designee hereinafter referred to as the Code official. 
103.5 Fees 
The fees for activities and services performed by the Community Development Department in carrying out its responsibilities under this Code shall be as indicated in C.O. § 401.02. 
SECTION 106
VIOLATIONS 
106.3 Prosecution of Violation 
Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. Violations shall be classified as minor misdemeanors. Whoever violates any provision of this Code shall be fined as prescribed in C.O. § 501.09(D) and C.O. § 501.10(A)(5). 
106.4 Violation Penalties 
Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. A violation shall be classified as a minor misdemeanor for a person's first offense and shall be classified as a fourth degree misdemeanor for every subsequent offense. Whoever violates any provision of this Code shall be fined as prescribed in C.O. § 501.09. 
SECTION 111 
MEANS OF APPEAL 
111.1 Procedure 
The Upper Arlington Board of Building Standards shall serve as the Upper Arlington Property Maintenance Appeals Board. The Property Maintenance Appeals Board shall hear appeal and variance requests from the Upper Arlington Property Maintenance Code. Procedures and duties of the Property Maintenance Appeals Board shall be consistent with Chapter 1306 of the Upper Arlington Codified Ordinances. Appeal and variance requests shall be consistent with Sections 111.2-111.4 of this Code. 
In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this section, the day of the act or order from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period as computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. Intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be included in the computation unless otherwise specified. If the final day of the period falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, then the act may be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. (Per Ordinance No. 82-2013) 
111.2 Appeal of Administrative Order 
Any person aggrieved by any order made by the Director of Community Development, or designated representative, in the administration or enforcement of this Code may appeal to the Property Maintenance Appeals Board by filing a written notice of appeal with the Director of Community Development within thirty (30) days of issue of the order. A decision to file a code enforcement citation in the Upper Arlington Mayor's Court or other court of competent jurisdiction may not be appealed to the Property Maintenance Appeals Board. Any appeal application submitted to the Property Maintenance Appeals Board shall be accompanied by a filing fee as specified in C.O. § 401.02. (Per Ordinance No. 82-2013) 
111.3 Variance 
A person may seek a variance from the requirements of the Upper Arlington Property Maintenance Code. Applications shall be filed with the Director of Community Development, or designated representative, who shall transmit the same to the Property Maintenance Appeals Board. Any application submitted to the Property Maintenance Appeals Board shall be accompanied by a filing fee as specified in the Master List of Fees. The Property Maintenance Appeals Board may authorize, in specific cases, such variance where practical difficulties unique to the property in question would create an undue hardship, prevent full compliance with this Code and not be contrary to the public interest. 
111.3.1 Submittal Requirements 
An application for a variance shall be filed on a form provided by the Director of Community Development. Such application form shall contain a notice that the action of the Board is subject to appeal to the City Council within fifteen (15) days after final action of the Board, and that it is the responsibility of a successful applicant, before taking action thereunder, to obtain a certificate from the City Clerk that no appeal has been filed within said appeal period. Such form shall contain the following: 
1.  Name, address and phone number of the applicant(s) and property owner(s); 
2.  Proof of ownership, legal interest or written authority; 
3.  Legal description of property or portion thereof; 
4.  Description or nature of the variance requested; 
5.  Narrative statements establishing and substantiating the justification for the variance; 
6.  Site plans, floor plans, elevations and other drawings at a reasonable scale to convey the need for the variance; 
7.  Payment of the application fee as established by City Council; 
8.  Any other documents deemed necessary by the Director of Community Development. 
111.3.2 Notification 
Written notice of the public hearing shall be provided to all owners within 100 feet of the subject site. The applicant shall provide a list of the owners within 100 feet of the property for which the variance is requested to the Director of Community Development. Such notice shall be sent, by the applicant certified mail, at least 10 days before the date of the hearing addressed to the owners appearing on the Franklin County Auditor's current tax list and to such other list or lists as verified by staff. 
111.3.3 Hearing and Recommendation 
The Property Maintenance Appeals Board shall review the application and recommend that the variance be granted as requested; be granted as modified by the Board, or be denied. The Property Maintenance Appeals Board shall indicate the specific reason(s) for its recommendation. 
111.3.4 Additional Conditions and Safeguards 
The Property Maintenance Appeals Board may further prescribe any conditions and safeguards that it deems necessary to ensure that the objectives of the regulations or provisions to which the variance applies will be met. 
111.3.5 Expiration 
Variances shall expire one year from the date of enactment, unless prior thereto the applicant executes the terms of the variance. There shall be no modification of the variance except by further consideration of the Property Maintenance Appeals Board. Extension of variance without modification may be applied for prior to the date of expiration, if the variance does not carry a prohibition against such extension. Extensions may be granted by the Property Maintenance Appeals Board if it finds that the requested extension is consistent with the purpose, policies and the intent of the Master Plan and the specifications of this Code. Requests for renewal of expired variances shall be considered to be the same as an application for variance and shall meet all requirements for application and review. 
111.3.6 Standards for Approval 
The following factors shall be considered and weighed by the Property Maintenance Appeals Board in determining the practical difficulty or hardship: 
1.  Whether special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land or structure involved and which are not applicable generally to other lands or structures; 
2.  Whether the property in question will yield a reasonable return or whether there can be any beneficial use of the property without the variance; 
3.  Whether the variance is substantial and is the minimum necessary to make possible the reasonable use of the land or structures; 
4.  Whether the essential character of the neighborhood would be substantially altered or whether adjoining properties would suffer substantial detriment as a result of the variance; 
5.  Whether the variance would adversely affect the delivery of governmental services such as water, sewer, and trash pickup; 
6.  Whether special conditions or circumstances exist as a result of actions of the current or a previous owner; 
7.  Whether the property owner's predicament feasibly can be resolved through some method other than a variance; 
8.  Whether the spirit and intent behind the property maintenance requirement would be observed and substantial justice done by granting a variance; and/or 
9.  Whether the granting of the variance requested will confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this regulation to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
111.4 Appeal from Decision of the Property Maintenance Appeals Board 
The Director of Community Development or designee, or a person aggrieved by any decision of the Upper Arlington Property Maintenance Appeals Board on an order or variance application may appeal to City Council. Such appeal shall be taken within fifteen (15) days after the final action of the Property Maintenance Appeals Board by filing a written notice of such appeal with the City Clerk. No decision of the Property Maintenance Appeals Board shall become final until the expiration of fifteen (15) days from the date such decision is made, or, if an appeal is filed, until final action thereon by the Council. (Per Ordinance No. 82-2013) 
111.5 Court Review 
Any person aggrieved by the final decision of the City Council shall have the right to appeal the final decision pursuant to Ohio Revised Code § 2506.01. The appellant must follow the procedures for filing a timely appeal in accordance with Ohio Revised Code §§ 2505.04, 2505.05 and 2505.07. 
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS 
SECTION 201 
GENERAL 
201.03 Terms Defined in Other Codes 
Where terms are not defined in this Code and are defined in the International Building Code, International Fire Code, International Zoning Code, International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code, Upper Arlington Codified Ordinance, Unified Development Ordinance, Ohio Residential Code For One, Two and Three Family Dwellings, Ohio Building Code, Ohio Mechanical Code, National Electric Code or the ICC Electrical Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those Codes. 
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
SECTION 302
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS 
302.2 Grading and Drainage 
All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of standing and/or stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. 
Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs. Standing water for a period of three or less days. 
302.4 Plant Maintenance and Management for Exterior Private Property Areas 
All premises and exterior property areas shall be maintained free from weeds, grass or other herbaceous plant growth in excess of 10 inches in height, except for cultivated landscapes or gardens, or managed forests. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. As used in this section, managed forests, weeds and noxious weeds have the same meaning as those terms are defined in C.O. 907.01. 
Upon failure of the owner, occupant or agent having charge of a property to remove all noxious weeds or to cut, remove, or otherwise destroy weeds, grass or other plant growth exceeding 10 inches in height within five days after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 of this Code and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the City or contractor hired by the City shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and to cut, remove, spray, or otherwise destroy the noxious weeds or high grass and weeds growing thereon, and the costs shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property. Unpaid costs shall be collected pursuant to C.O. Chapter 227. 
Only one notice of violation per calendar year is required to be served by the Code Compliance Officers or designee for a lot or parcel. If, after one notice of violation has been served, the Code Compliance Officers or designee determine that one or more subsequent violations has occurred on that lot or parcel during that calendar year, the City may proceed to immediately abate such violations as set forth in this ordinance. 
302.5 Rodent Harborage 
All structures shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Accumulations of rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, car bodies or any other materials that may provide rodent harborage shall be prohibited. No owner or occupant of a premises shall accumulate any materials that may serve as food for rodents in a site accessible to rodents. All waste material that may serve as food for rodents shall be stored in rodent proof containers. Feed for birds shall be placed on raised platforms or where it is not accessible to rodents. When rodents are found in or under a structure, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes, which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation. Within 10 days after extermination, the owner of the premises shall cause all of the rodent holes or burrows to be filled with earth or other suitable material. This ordinance shall not apply to domesticated rodents such as hamsters, gerbils, guinea pigs and animals of a similar nature provided such animals are kept in accordance with Upper Arlington Codified Ordinance Chapter 519. 
SECTION 303
SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS 
303.2 Enclosures 
Outdoor swimming pools, containing water more than 18 inches in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 45 inches in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less than 54 inches above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least 3 inches below the top of the gate. The gate and barrier shall have no opening greater than 0.5 inch within 18 inches of the release mechanism. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of 6 inches from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier. 
SECTION 304
EXTERIOR STRUCTURE 
304.3 Premises Identification 
Buildings shall have approved address numbers properly maintained and placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals. Street names are optional and shall be alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 3 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch. 
304.7 Roofs and Drainage 
The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water and sump water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a nuisance. 
304.7.1 Nuisance 
In the event roof water or sump water from any building, including a detached accessory structure, creates a nuisance; such water shall be carried from downspouts to the street gutter, storm ditch or storm sewer through subsurface thin walled polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC), corrugated ADS or approved equivalent having a minimum diameter of four inches, bedded in sand and laid to proper grade. Where the grade at the building is below the grade of the street gutter, storm ditch or storm sewer the Code official shall determine the method of drainage, but no such system shall be installed closer to a building than 10 feet, or closer to a basement than 15 feet or in any side yard. Where roof gutters are not installed, a trench shall be constructed and maintained at a point under the drip line of the roof overhang having a minimum width of 1 foot. The trench shall be graded to the street gutter, storm sewer or storm ditch and shall have 3 inches of stone at the bottom upon which four (4) inch field tile shall be laid so as to drain as described above. The remainder of the ditch shall be filled with stone and at the discharge end of said trench the field tile shall be connected to thin walled polyvinyl chloride (PVC), corrugated ADS, or approved equivalent and carried to the final point of discharge as set forth herein. 
304.14 Insect Screens 
During the period from May 15 to October 15, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh) and every swinging door shall have a self closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screen doors shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellant fans, are employed. 
SECTION 307 
RUBBISH, GARBAGE AND OUTSIDE STORAGE 
307.4 Outside Storage 
No person being the owner or occupant of any premises shall maintain or permit to be maintained on the exterior property area of such premises the storage or accumulation of materials including but not limited to out of use or non-usable appliances, auto parts, tires, rugs, rags, broken, dilapidated or unusable furniture, other household furniture or goods, plastic materials, paints or combustible materials, disabled or inoperative machinery or equipment, lumber, building materials, decaying matter of any kind, wood or paper boxes, wearing apparel, grass clippings, trimmings from trees or shrubs, leaves, bagged mulch, wood, ashes, tin cans, aluminum cans, empty containers, glass and metal including all forms of scrap. 
Exceptions: 
1.  To building materials accumulated in the construction, remodeling or repairing of buildings on the premises, provided there is a valid building permit for such construction, remodeling or repairing project and provided that such materials may only be stored or accumulated for a reasonable length of time during such construction, if the same does not constitute a health, sanitary or safety hazard. 
2.  To trash and waste which is properly placed in appropriate covered containers as prescribed by C.O. Chapter 935 and located within the buildable area or at the curb for regularly scheduled trash collection. 
3.  To wood intended and prepared for the personal use of household residents in a fireplace or wood stove, provided that such wood is cut to fireplace lengths/diameters and stacked and provided that such wood is utilized during winter months. 
4.  To compost materials provided that such materials are contained in a compost bin or enclosure, properly turned, properly maintained and provided that such materials do not create a nuisance or otherwise violate City ordinance. Such compost materials shall not be located between a principal building and a street. 
5.  To leaves raked into the adjacent street in piles during the fall season in accordance with the City's leaf pick-up program. 
307.5 Abatement 
Upon finding that rubbish, garbage and/or improperly stored items are accumulating on exterior property areas or have been placed or disposed of on public or private property, and constitutes a detriment to public health, safety or welfare, the Director of Community Development or designee shall order removal of such material by a notice of violation sent in accordance with Section 107 of this Code. A period of not more than 7 days from the date of the letter shall be permitted to effect such removal. 
Upon failure of the owner, occupant or agent having charge of a property to remove rubbish, garbage and/or improperly stored items within 7 days after service of the notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106 of this Code. Any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and remove rubbish, garbage and/or improperly stored items, and the costs shall be paid by the property owner or agent having responsibility for the property. Unpaid costs shall be collected pursuant to C.O. Chapter 227. (Ordinance No. 8-2008 02/25/08) 
SECTION 308
EXTERMINATION 
308.1 Infestation 
All structures shall be kept free from insect, rodent and nuisance animal infestation including but not limited to bats, squirrels, rabbits, chipmunks, woodchucks (ground hogs), skunks, possums and raccoons. All structures in which insects, rodents or nuisance animals are found in or under shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-infestation. This ordinance shall not apply to domesticated animals provided such animals are kept in accordance with Upper Arlington Codified Ordinance Chapter 519. 
CHAPTER 5
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS 
SECTION 507 
STORM DRAINAGE 
507.1 General 
Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a nuisance. 
Exception: Yard drainage that results in standing water for a period of three or less days. 
CHAPTER 6 
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS 
SECTION 602
HEATING FACILITIES 
602.3 Heat Supply 
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 15 to May 15 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
Exception: When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. 
602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces 
Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from October 15 to May 15 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
2.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
CHAPTER 8
REFERENCED STANDARDS 
City City of Upper Arlington 
3600 Tremont Road 
Upper Arlington, Ohio 43221 Standard 
Referenced 
Number Title Referenced in Code Section Number UACO Upper Arlington Codified Ordinance 102.3, 106.4, 201.3, 111.1, 111.2, 307.4 UDO Upper Arlington Unified Development Ordinance 102.3, 201.3 OBBS Ohio Board of Building Standards 
6606 Tussing Road 
Reynoldsburg, Ohio 43068 Standard 
Referenced 
Number Title Referenced in Code Section Number OBC-2002 Ohio Building Code 102.3, 201.3 OFC-2002 Ohio Fire Code 102.3, 201.3 OMC-2002 Ohio Mechanical Code 102.3, 201.3 OPC-2002 Ohio Plumbing Code 102.3, 201.3 ORC-1999 Ohio Residential Code for One, Two & Three Family Dwellings 102.3, 201.3 NFPA National Fire Protection Association 
One Batterymarch Park 
Quincy, Massachusetts 02269 Standard 
Referenced 
Number Title Referenced in Code Section Number NEC-2002 National Electric Code 102.3, 201.3  
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ; Ord. No. 89-2015, § 6, 2-22-2016 ) 
Part 15 - HEALTH CODE 
CHAPTER 1521. - HOUSING 

§ 1521.01 - GENERAL DEFINITIONS. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement any and all provisions of Part 15 - Health Code, unless a different definition is specifically designated in another section of Part 15 - Health Code. 
    Basement: shall mean a portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Bed and breakfast: shall mean a transient lodging establishment generally in a single-family dwelling providing overnight or otherwise temporary lodging for the general public and may provide meals for compensation. 
    Cellar: shall mean a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Dwelling: shall mean any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and/or eating by human occupants; provided, that, temporary housing as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
    Dwelling unit: shall mean any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities, which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Extermination: shall mean the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the health commissioner. 
    Garbage: shall mean all putrescible wastes except sewage and body waste, including the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, vegetable and animal offal and carcasses of small animals but excluding recognizable industrial by-products. 
    Habitable room: shall mean a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or connecting corridors, closets and storage spaces. 
    Health commissioner: shall mean the legally designated health authority of the Upper Arlington City Health District or his/her authorized representative. 
    Infestation: shall mean the presence within or around a dwelling or accessory structure of any insects, rats, rodents or other pests. 
    Multiple Dwelling: shall mean any dwelling containing more than two (2) dwelling units. 
    Occupant: shall mean any person, over one (1) year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    Operator: shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let or offered for occupancy. 
    Ordinary minimum winter conditions: shall mean the temperature 15 degrees Fahrenheit above the lowest recorded temperature for the previous ten (10) year period. 
    Owner: shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(a)  Shall have legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(b)  Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with any and all provisions of Part 15 - Health Code, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he/she were the owner. 
    Person: shall mean and include the state, any political subdivision, any individual, firm, public or private corporation, association, partnership, or other entity. 
    Plumbing: shall mean and include all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipe, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage-disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines. 
    Plumbing includes the practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: drainage systems, the vent systems, and the water-supply systems, within or adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance; also the practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of the stormwater, liquid waste or drainage and water-supply systems of any premises (Franklin County Board of Health 710). 
    Premises: shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land including any structure thereon. 
    Rooming house: shall mean any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one (1) or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three (3) or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator. 
    Rooming unit: shall mean any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Rubbish: shall mean nonputrescible, nonliquid, combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery and dust. 
    Supplied: shall mean paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator. 
    Temporary housing: shall mean any tent, trailer or other structure used for human shelter, which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
§ 1521.02 - MEANING OF CERTAIN WORDS. 
Whenever the words dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit or premises are used in Part 15 - Health Code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words or any part thereof. 
CHAPTER 1527. - ROOMING HOUSES/HOTELS/BED AND BREAKFASTS 

§ 1527.01 - GENERAL PROVISION, COMPLIANCE. 
No person shall operate a rooming house, or shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except in compliance with any and all provisions of Part 15 - Health Code and any and all provisions of the Unified Development Code. 
§ 1527.02 - CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMIT REGULATIONS. 
No person shall operate a rooming house unless he/she holds a valid certificate of zoning compliance permit issued by the city's community development department in the name of the operator and for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. A certificate of zoning compliance permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the rooming house at all times. 
Every person holding such a certificate of zoning compliance permit shall give notice in writing to the city's community development department within seventy-two (72) hours after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in, or control of any rooming house. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such rooming house. 
( Ord. No. 87-2015, § 5, 12-14-2015 ) 
§ 1527.03 - PERMIT DENIAL, HEARING. 
Any person whose application for a certificate of zoning compliance permit to operate a rooming house has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Upper Arlington Board of Zoning and Planning. 
§ 1527.04 - VIOLATIONS, NOTICE, SUSPENSION. 
Whenever upon inspection of any rooming house the health commissioner finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provisions of Part 15 - Health Code or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the health commissioner shall give notice in writing to the operator of such rooming house that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period, to be determined by the health commissioner, the operator's certificate of zoning compliance permit will be suspended or revoked. At the end of such period the health commissioner shall reinspect such rooming house, and if he/she finds that such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he/she shall give notice of a hearing in writing to the operator that the certificate of zoning compliance permit may be suspended and/or revoked at the next hearing of the board of health. 
§ 1527.05 - LAVATORY AND BATH REQUIREMENTS. 
At least one (1) flush water closet, lavatory basin and bath tub or shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the health commissioner and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each eight (8) persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of the facilities; provided that, in a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half (1/2) the required number of water closets. All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a basement except by written approval of the health commissioner. 
§ 1527.06 - BED LINENS AND TOWELS. 
The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen and towels therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner. 
§ 1527.07 - FLOOR AREA. 
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) person shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) person shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof. 
§ 1527.08 - MEANS OF EGRESS. 
Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of this state and this city. 
§ 1527.09 - SANITATION. 
The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and for maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house. The operator shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator. 
§ 1527.10 - APPLICATION TO HOTELS AND BED AND BREAKFASTS. 
Every provision of Part 15 - Health Code, which applies to rooming houses shall also apply to hotels and bed and breakfasts, except to the extent that any such provisions may be found in conflict with the laws of this state or with the lawful regulations of any state board or agency. 
CHAPTER 1571. - ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS 

§ 1571.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of any and all provisions of chapter 1571: 
    Board of health: means the Board of Health of the Upper Arlington City Health District. District board of health and board of health shall have the same meaning. In the event the city contracts with another city or general health district for public health services, the Upper Arlington Board of Health shall act in an advisory capacity to the contracted entity. 
    Contact: means any susceptible animal that directly or indirectly has come in contact with a rabid or suspected rabid animal. 
    Dangerous animal: means any animal, not including dangerous or vicious dogs as defined in C.O. § 519.01, which in the opinion of the health commissioner represents a danger to the health, welfare and safety of the public and presents a risk of serious physical harm to persons or property as measured by infectious disease status, viciousness, or poisonous status, or presents a risk of serious physical harm to persons, animals, or to property. 
    Domestic animal: means animals that through long association with humans have been bred to a degree resulting in genetic changes affecting the temperament, color, conformation, or other attributes of the species to an extent that makes them different from nondomestic animals of their kind. 
    Endemic: means the constant presence of a disease or infectious agent within a given geographic area. 
    Epidemic or outbreak: means the occurrence of cases of disease in numbers greater than expected in a particular population or for a particular period of time. 
    Exotic animal : means other wild animal not indigenous to Ohio, capable of transmitting rabies. 
    Feral animal: means any susceptible domestic animal living in the wild state, including but not limited to, any dog or cat without a rabies tag or other acceptable identification as approved by the board of health. 
    Health commissioner: means the Health Commissioner of the City of Upper Arlington, or their authorized representative or designee. In the event the City of Upper Arlington contracts with a board of health for health services pursuant to ORC ch. 3709, the health commissioner of the contracted board of health shall serve as the health commissioner. 
    Human exposure: means all incidents involving persons having contact with a susceptible animal, including bites. 
    Immunization: means the administration of a biological product recommended in the U.S. Public Health Service Center for Disease Control Animal Rabies Vaccine Compendium and licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and deemed adequate to provide protection to the animal so vaccinated against rabies. 
    Incidence: means the number of new cases of a disease occurring during a specified interval of time in a defined population. 
    Infected individual: means a person whose body harbors a specific microorganism capable of producing disease, whether or not the person is experiencing signs or symptoms of the disease. 
    Isolation: means the separation of an infected individual from others during the period of disease communicability in such a way that prevents, as far as possible, the direct or indirect conveyance of an infectious agent to those who are susceptible to infection or who may spread the agent to others. 
    Owner: means any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring, maintaining or having the care, custody or control of an animal. 
    Period of communicability: means the interval during which an infected individual or animal is shedding the specific microorganism of a communicable disease in such a manner that those who are susceptible could acquire the infection. 
    Person: means individual, company, partnership, firm, municipal corporation, corporation or association, or any combination of individuals, or any employee, agent, or officer thereof. 
    Pocket pets: means small pets kept in cages such as, but not limited to, hamsters, gerbils, guinea pigs, chinchillas, domestic rabbits, white rats and white mice. 
    Prohibited animals: means any poisonous and/or venomous insects, amphibians, or reptiles, including those whose fangs or poison sacs have been removed or neutralized; constrictor reptiles; and any wild animal as defined in ORC § 1531.01. 
    Quarantine: means the restriction of the movements or activities of a well individual or animal who has been exposed to a communicable disease during the period of communicability of that disease and in such a manner that transmission of the disease may have occurred. The duration of the quarantine ordered shall be equivalent to the usual incubation period of the disease to which the susceptible person or animal was exposed. 
    Rabid animal: means any animal showing observable clinical signs of rabies or which has been confirmed as having rabies by a laboratory acceptable to the health commissioner. 
    Stray: means any susceptible animal whose owner cannot be determined or one that cannot be apprehended and isolated for observation. 
    Susceptible animal: means any animal to which rabies can be transmitted. 
    Susceptible person: means a person that, when exposed to an infectious microorganism, may not possess sufficient resistance to prevent contracting the infection or disease. 
    Suspected rabid animal: means a susceptible animal showing, to a limited degree, observable clinical signs of rabies or a susceptible animal that has bitten a person or has come in contact with a person in such manner that rabies could be transmitted to that person. 
    Veterinarian: means a veterinarian duly licensed under the laws of the State of Ohio. 
    Wild animal: means hares or rabbits, gray squirrels, black squirrels, fox squirrels, red squirrels, groundhogs or woodchucks, deer, wild boar, bears, minks, weasels, raccoons, skunks, opossums, muskrats, fox, beavers, badgers, otters, coyotes, bobcats or any other warm blooded non-domestic animal which is indigenous to the State of Ohio and capable of transmitting rabies; an offspring born to wild animals bred with a domestic animal, or offspring born to domestic animals bred with wild animals; and any animal for which there has been no rabies vaccine in which the efficacy has been demonstrated, or which the quarantine period has not been scientifically researched and defined. 
(A)  Mustela Putorius Furo (Domestic Ferret) shall be considered wild unless all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Shall be under the regular care of a licensed veterinarian but not necessarily in the veterinarian's possession; 
(2)  Shall be currently immunized for rabies by a licensed veterinarian; and 
(3)  The ferret must be a product of three (3) generations of breeding, in captivity; to live a life intimately associated with man in a tame or tamable condition. 
§ 1571.02 - QUARANTINE. 
(A)  Any law enforcement officer, animal control officer or other person authorized by the health commissioner, the city manager or their designee may order quarantined any animal pursuant to this section, whenever it is reported that a dog, cat, ferret or any susceptible animal has bitten a person. The dog, cat or susceptible animal shall be quarantined under order issued by the health commissioner by its owner or by a harborer in cases approved by the health commissioner. 
(B)  Home quarantine by the owner is acceptable provided that the following criterion is met: 
(1)  The owner assumes all risk related to the animal during home quarantine. 
(2)  Animals confined indoors must be confined to a house, building or other enclosure in such a way that prevents human contact, other than contacts with the owner(s). 
(3)  Animals confined outdoors must be on a leash, not to exceed a six-foot length, and under direct supervision of an adult capable of controlling and handling the animal or confined in a kennel with a six-foot high fence with an enclosed top and a secured bottom, or other enclosure suitable to the board of health. 
(C)  Confinement may be obtained at the Franklin County Animal Shelter for a ten-day period, at a daily charge to the owner. 
(D)  If any law enforcement officer, animal control officer or other person designated by the Upper Arlington City Manager captures, confines or impounds any animal running-at-large or not under owner control, the animal, may be quarantined by the health commissioner or any other person authorized to issue quarantine pursuant to paragraph (A). If quarantined during impoundment, the animal will not be released until the quarantine period is over and the daily confinement cost is paid by the owner. 
(E)  If the animal does not have a current rabies vaccination, the owner must take the animal to a veterinarian within twenty-four (24) hours after the tenth (10th) day of the bite for examination and rabies vaccination, before the animal is released from quarantine. 
(F)  No person shall remove an animal that has bitten a person within the jurisdiction of the board of health from this jurisdiction until a quarantine period, as determined by the health commissioner, has been completed. 
(G)  No person shall kill an animal that has bitten any person until a quarantine period, as specified in C.O. § 1571.02, has been completed unless the owner of the animal elects to sacrifice the animal for immediate laboratory analysis. 
(H)  No animal shall be immunized against rabies, as specified in C.O. § 1571.04, during the period of quarantine as specified by the health commissioner and/or their authorized representative. 
(I)  No animal shall be released from quarantine until the quarantine period has expired and the animal has been immunized, by a licensed veterinarian, against rabies. 
(J)  Whoever fails to obey any order of the health commissioner issued in the enforcement of this section shall be in violation of this section. 
(K)  Strict liability is intended to be imposed for a violation of this section. 
(L)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and is subject to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and/or a jail term of not more than thirty (30) days. 
(2)  Each day the violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense for which the offender is strictly liable. 
§ 1571.03 - CONTROL REPORTS, OBSERVATIONS, EXAMINATIONS AND DISPOSITION. 
(A)  Veterinarians, owners or persons caring for an animal shall report to the health commissioner all cases of rabid or suspected rabid animals. If no veterinarian is in attendance of a rabid or suspected animal, the owner or person caring for the animal shall immediately make the report to the health commissioner. 
(B)  If there is any doubt as to the diagnosis, the attending veterinarian, owner or person caring for the animal, shall, after the death of the animal, deliver to the laboratory of the Ohio Department of Health or other recognized laboratory, the head of the suspected rabid animal for examination and laboratory diagnosis. 
(C)  The veterinarian, owner or person caring for the rabid or suspected rabid animal or contact shall give the health commissioner all data pertaining to the animal. This data shall include the name and addresses of all persons having been bitten or having contact with the animals; names and addresses of the owners or persons caring for animals bitten by or having contact with the rabid or suspected rabid animal; any information regarding the possibility of infection; and any other pertinent information. 
(D)  All rabid animals shall be destroyed by an acceptable humane method. 
(E)  All suspected rabid animals, with the exception of stray, wild, exotic and feral animals, shall be held in isolation under observation in a place suitable to the health commissioner for a period of not less than ten (10) days or more than one hundred eighty (180) days, in order to determine the development of observable clinical signs of rabies. Whenever the health commissioner requires a veterinarian to observe or examine a suspected rabid animal for symptoms of rabies, the veterinarian shall report the result(s) of the observation, and conclusions reached, to the health commissioner within twenty-four (24) hours. The examination by a veterinarian shall be at the expense of the owner. 
(F)  If any animal dies before the quarantine period expires, the veterinarian, owner, or person caring for the animal shall make arrangements with the health commissioner to remove the head by an approved agency or individual and to submit the head of the suspected rabid animal, for examination and laboratory diagnosis, to the Ohio Department of Health Laboratory or other recognized laboratory. 
(G)  All animal contacts shall be destroyed by some suitable and acceptable humane method or shall be held in quarantine for at least one hundred eighty (180) days, under observation, until observable clinical signs of rabies develop. This quarantine shall be held in some place authorized by the health commissioner, where no persons or susceptible animals can come in contact with the possible rabid animal. 
(H)  Any stray, wild, exotic, or feral animal, involved in an animal bite, must be sacrificed immediately and the head submitted to the Ohio Department of Health Laboratory for analysis, except for the following: 
(1)  For Mustela Putorius Furo (domestic ferret), shall be ten (10) days from the bite. 
(a)  The animal shall meet all conditions, as specified in C.O. § 1571.01, of this regulation. 
(I)  All suspected rabid animals may be sacrificed if showing, to a limited degree, observable clinical signs of rabies. The health commissioner shall determine if the suspected rabid animal or animal contact should be destroyed and may require all such animals to be examined by a licensed veterinarian at the expense of the owner. The veterinarian shall report to the health commissioner the results of the examination and conclusions reached within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(J)  The place of keeping and the premises where a rabid animal has been quartered shall be cleaned and disinfected to the satisfaction of the health commissioner. 
(K)  Whenever a person is bitten by a susceptible animal, prompt report of such bite shall be made to the health commissioner. The report herein required shall be made by the physician attending the person bitten, or, if such person is received at a hospital or other health care facility for treatment, the report herein required shall be made by the person in charge of the hospital or health care facility. This report shall include name, age and address of the person bitten, the part of the body where the bite was inflicted, and if known, the name and address of the owner or person caring for the animal inflicting the bite. When a physician was not consulted or the person bitten was not taken to a hospital or other health care facility, the report shall be made by the person bitten or any other person who has knowledge of the facts. 
(L)  Whenever a veterinarian is called upon to observe a susceptible animal that has bitten a person, they shall promptly report the result of their observation to the health commissioner. Any susceptible animal inflicting a bite on a person shall be placed in isolation on the owner's premises or in a place deemed suitable by the health commissioner until it is determined to the satisfaction of the health commissioner that the animal is not affected with rabies. The isolation period shall not be less than ten (10) days from the day the person was bitten, and there shall be at least two (2) observations made by a veterinarian or health department representative. A veterinarian or health department representative shall make the final observation on the tenth (10th) day of the isolation period whenever possible, except where the animal does not have a current rabies vaccination. If the animal does not have a current rabies vaccination, a licensed veterinarian must examine and vaccinate the animal as specified in C.O. § 1571.02(E). 
(M)  When a report is made to the health commissioner of a person bitten by a susceptible animal, the health commissioner shall notify the owner or a person caring for the animal inflicting the bite that this animal shall be held in quarantine for at least ten (10) days from the date of the bite and that at least two (2) observations shall be made by a veterinarian or a health department representative. The quarantine shall remain in effect until final observation is made by a veterinarian or health department representative. The place of quarantine may be, if suitable, the premises of the owner or the person caring for the animal, a veterinary hospital, or an animal shelter approved by the health commissioner. All susceptible animals held under such quarantine shall be boarded and cared for at the expense of the owner or person caring for the animal. 
(N)  Any anti-rabies treatment given in Upper Arlington must be administered in accordance with the recommendations of the U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare Center for Disease Control. 
(O)  Whoever fails to obey any order of the health commissioner issued in the enforcement of this section shall be in violation of this section. 
(P)  Strict liability is intended to be imposed for a violation of this section. 
(Q)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and is subject to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and/or a jail term of not more than thirty (30) days. 
(2)  Each day the violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense for which the offender is strictly liable. 
§ 1571.04 - IMMUNIZATION. 
(A)  Any person who keeps or harbors dogs, ferrets or cats, within the jurisdiction of the board of health, shall have such dogs, ferrets or cats immunized or re-immunized, by a licensed veterinarian, against rabies by a method listed in the U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare Center for Disease Control Animal Rabies Vaccine Compendium or any other method approved by the Health Commissioner, provided that dogs, ferrets or cats need not be immunized before reaching the age of three (3) months. Dogs, ferrets or cats entering this jurisdiction temporarily for shows, exhibitions and/or breeding purposes shall not be allowed out of the owner's, keeper's or handler's control unless properly immunized. All dogs, ferrets or cats entering this jurisdiction for field trials, or any other purpose, shall be properly immunized. Immunized dogs, ferrets and cats shall be accompanied by an immunization certificate or certified acknowledgement by a veterinarian that the dog or cat has been properly immunized. 
(B)  All veterinarians immunizing or re-immunizing dogs or cats against rabies shall keep a record of such immunization or re-immunization and shall, without delay, give to the owner or keeper of the dog or cat immunized or re-immunized a certificate of immunization which shall include a number identifying the individual record, a complete description of the dog or cat, place where the dog or cat is kept or harbored, name of owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog or cat and his/her address, date and type of immunization or re-immunization and such other pertinent information as is needed, including the name and address of the veterinarian. The veterinarian shall also, without delay, forward the information required on the certificate described in this section to the Health Commissioner or any agency authorized by the health commissioner. 
(C)  The certificate described in C.O. § 1571.04(B) shall be made on forms provided and approved by the health commissioner or an agency authorized by the board of health. 
(D)  Nothing in this regulation shall be interpreted to mean that dogs, ferrets or cats immunized or re-immunized shall be allowed to run at-large in violation of any law, ordinance, regulation or rabies quarantine. 
(E)  All veterinarians who immunize or re-immunize a dog, ferret or cat against rabies shall provide a rabies tag approved by the health commissioner which shall have thereon permanently affixed the year of immunization or re-immunization and the number indicating the record prescribed in C.O. § 1571.04(B). Such rabies tag shall be securely fastened to the collar and/or harness worn by the dog or cat. Ferrets, however, are not required to wear or display a rabies tag. Animals that do not wear collars or harnesses shall have a microchip implant or other approved method of permanent identification and the identification number included on the rabies vaccination certificate. 
(F)  The rabies tags, described in paragraph (E), shall be provided to the veterinarians by the health commissioner, the veterinarians shall purchase such tags at a cost determined by the board of health. A veterinarian may choose to charge and/or pass through such costs to the person requesting the vaccination. Any tags purchased by a veterinarian and not distributed by said veterinarian may be returned to the health commissioner and such fee shall be reimbursed to the veterinarian. 
(G)  The owner of a Mustela Putorius Furo (domesticated ferret) shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies by a method and vaccine approved by the United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Center for Disease Control and maintain a certificate of immunization signed by a licensed veterinarian. This certificate shall be made on forms provided and approved by the health commissioner or an agency authorized by the board of health. All licensed veterinarians immunizing or re-immunizing Mustela Putorius Furo against rabies shall keep a record of such immunization and shall, without delay, give the owner of the Mustela Putorius Furo immunized a certificate of immunization which shall include the rabies tag number, a statement certifying that the domestic ferret meets the requirement of the definition for wild animal as contained in C.O. § 1571.01, and any other pertinent information deemed necessary by the health commissioner. The veterinarian shall, also without delay, forward the information required on the certificate described in this section to the health commissioner or any agency authorized by the health commissioner. 
(H)  Whoever fails to obey any order of the health commissioner issued in the enforcement of this section shall be in violation of this section. 
(I)  Strict liability is intended to be imposed for a violation of this section. 
(J)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and is subject to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and/or a jail term of not more than thirty (30) days. 
(2)  Each day the violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense for which the offender is strictly liable. 
§ 1571.05 - WILD, EXOTIC, PROHIBITED, DANGEROUS AND FERAL ANIMALS. 
(A)  No person, regardless of intent, shall: 
(1)  Harbor, feed or sell wild, exotic, prohibited, dangerous or feral animals within the jurisdiction of the board of health; 
(2)  Import into the jurisdiction of the board of health any such wild, exotic, prohibited, dangerous or feral animals; 
(3)  Perform surgery or other techniques on a wild, exotic, prohibited, dangerous or feral animal for the purpose of domesticating it, such as but not limited to, neutering, spaying, removing scent glands, or venom sacs. Mustela Putorius Furo may be neutered, spayed or descented if all conditions are met as specified in C.O. § 1571.01; and 
(4)  Immunize wild animals against rabies. 
(B)  This section does not apply to the following exemptions and special provisions: 
(1)  The term wild and exotic animal does not include pocket pets. 
(2)  Wild and exotic animals held for exhibit or use by person, research institutions, or governmental agencies having legal authority to possess wild animals, publicly supported zoos, circuses or extensions thereof. 
(C)  Disposition of animals: In the event of a human exposure with any wild, exotic, prohibited, dangerous or feral animal, the animal shall be impounded for sacrifice as soon as possible, to permit laboratory examination for rabies. 
(D)  Whoever fails to obey any order of the health commissioner issued in the enforcement of this section shall be in violation of this section. 
(E)  Strict liability is intended to be imposed for a violation of this section. 
(F)  (1)  Whoever violates this section is guilty a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and is subject to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and/or a jail term of not more than thirty (30) days. 
(2)  Each day the violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense for which the offender is strictly liable. 
§ 1571.06 - UNCONSTITUTIONALITY CLAUSE. 
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of said Chapter shall not be affected thereby. 
CHAPTER 1580. - SMOKING PROHIBITIONS 

§ 1580.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
(A)  Area immediately adjacent: means the area that is a distance of less than ten (10) feet from the ingress and egress of any enclosed area and is owned, leased, managed, or otherwise controlled by the proprietor of the enclosed area. 
(B)  Ashtray: means any receptable that is used for disposing of smoking materials including but not limited to ash and filters. 
(C)  Business: means a sole proprietorship, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or any limited liability form of any of the foregoing, or any other entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations or other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, financial, counseling or other professional or consumer services are provided. 
(D)  Club: means a corporation or association of individuals organized in good faith for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political, patriotic, or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor, or occupant of a permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for the purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and includes the place so operated 
(E)  Department: means the Ohio department of health or its authorized designee, unless otherwise specified 
(F)  Directly or indirectly under the control: means the ability to exercise authority over an area based upon property rights set forth under a real estate lease, title, or deed. 
(G)  Director: means the director of the Ohio department of health or the director's authorized representative. 
(H)  Employee: means a person who is employed by an employer, or who contracts with an employer or who contracts with a third person to perform services for an employer, or who otherwise performs services for an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, or any person who volunteers his or her services to such employer for no monetary compensation. 
(I)  Employer: means the state or any individual person, business, partnership, association, political subdivision, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or other public or private entity, including a non-profit entity that employs or contracts for or accepts the provision of services from one (1) or more employees. 
(J)  Enclosed area: means an area with a roof or other overhead covering of any kind and walls or other side coverings of any kind, regardless of the presence of openings for ingress and egress, on all sides or on all sides but one. 
(K)  Enter: as used in this chapter means any physical movement of tobacco smoke into any area in which smoking is prohibited under C.O. ch. 1580 through entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or other means. 
(L)  Entrance: means a doorway through which pedestrians, including the public or employees, enter a public place or place of employment. Entrance does not mean doorways through which vehicles pass or through which the loading or unloading of materials including but not limited to cargo or goods takes place. 
(M)  Hotel or motel: for the purposes of the exemption in 1580.03(B) shall have the same meaning as set forth in § 2.02 of the Unified Development Code. 
(N)  Migrate or migration: means the transit or movement of tobacco smoke from one place to another, regardless of cause, including but not limited to, movement of tobacco smoke induced or caused by changes in air flow. 
(O)  Outdoor patio: means an outdoor area, open to the air at all times, that is either: 
(1)  Enclosed by a roof or other overhead covering and not more than two (2) walls or other side coverings; or 
(2)  Has no roof or other overhead covering at all regardless of the number of walls or other side coverings. 
(P)  Place of Employment: means: 
(1)  An enclosed area under the direct or indirect control of a public or private employer that the employer's employees use for work or any other purpose, including but not limited to, private offices, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, sales, production and storage areas, classrooms, employee cafeterias, employee gymnasiums, auditoriums, libraries, file rooms, mailrooms, employee medical facilities, rooms or areas containing photocopying or other office equipment used in common by employees, elevators, stairways, hallways, factories, warehouses, garages, laboratories, taxies, limousines, and company-owned vehicles used for a business purpose. 
(2)  An enclosed area as described herein is a "Place of Employment" without regard to time of day or actual presence of employees. 
(3)  "Place of Employment" only includes private residences, whether single or multifamily, if used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility, or if a person uses a private residence in any way otherwise qualifying that person as an employer with respect to the use of the private residence; provided, however, that private residences are exempt from this chapter to the extent that the person providing the services is providing housecleaning, home maintenance or personal care services in the private residence. 
(Q)  Private residence: means, except as otherwise provided by C.O. § 1580.03(A), a dwelling or area of a dwelling where there is a reasonable expectation of privacy and used as an individual's residence, including employer-provided housing. 
(R)  Private club: means a club as that term is defined in ORC § 4301.01(B)(13) and that is organized as not for profit. 
(S)  Proprietor: means the employer owner, manager, operator, liquor permit holder, or other person in charge or control of a public place or place of employment. 
(T)  Public place: means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted and that is not a private residence and includes service lines. "Public place" includes "public park or playground" as defined by C.O. § 507.07, regardless of whether the area is enclosed or unenclosed. A private residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
(U)  Retail tobacco store: means a retail establishment that derives more than eighty percent (80%) of its gross revenue from the sale of cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is incidental. "Retail tobacco store" does not include a tobacco department or section of a larger commercial establishment such as a department store, discount store, or bar or of any establishment with a liquor permit or any restaurant. 
(V)  Service line: means an indoor line in which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
(W)  Smoking: means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant, or other lighted smoking device for burning tobacco or any other plant in any manner or in any form. "Smoking" includes the inhaling or exhaling of any electronic cigarette or cigar, vaporizer, or other burning substance, vapor, or aerosol. "Smoking" also includes the inhaling, exhaling, using of, or otherwise engaging with, an electronic cigarette or cigar, vaporizer, or other burning substance, vapor, or aerosol in a manner that releases vapors, aerosols, or particles containing tobacco or nicotine in any amount into the surrounding air or area. "Smoking" does not include the burning of incense in a religious ceremony. 
(X)  Smoking materials or devices: means any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant or other material or device designed for burning tobacco or any plant for the purpose of inhaling smoke. "Smoking materials or devices" includes any electronic cigarette or cigar, e-cigarette, vaporizer, or any product or device that produces, creates, or facilitates the release of, a vapor or aerosol that delivers nicotine, tobacco, nicotine particles, or any other plant matter, to the person inhaling or otherwise using the device. Smoking materials or devices does not mean devices designed and primarily used for the burning of any plant for cooking, heating, or illumination purposes and specifically excludes wood-fired ovens, smokers, grills, fireplaces, wood-burning stoves and candles. 
(Y)  Vehicle: means an enclosed motor vehicle registered by the Ohio bureau of motor vehicles when it is occupied by one (1) or more non-smoking persons at the same time and while used for business purposes; a motor vehicle registered by the Ohio bureau of motor vehicles that is part of a motor pool and shared by non-smoking employees; a motor vehicle registered by the Ohio bureau of motor vehicles that is used for public mass transit; or tourist or scenic railcars operated exclusively in Ohio 
(Z)  Work area: means any room, desk, station or other area normally occupied by an employee while carrying out his or her primary work functions. 
(Ord. No. 27-2019 , § 4, 4-22-2019) 
§ 1580.02 - PROHIBITIONS. 
(A)  No proprietor of a public place, business, or place of employment shall permit smoking in said public place, the enclosed area of said business or said place of employment within the City of Upper Arlington, or in the areas directly or indirectly under the control of the proprietor immediately adjacent to locations of ingress or egress to the public place or place of employment, except as provided in section 1580.03 of this chapter. 
(B)  All enclosed areas, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the City of Upper Arlington, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(C)  In addition to the requirements of paragraph (a) of this rule, a proprietor of a public place or place of employment shall take reasonable steps including, but not limited to, requesting individuals to cease smoking, to ensure that tobacco smoke, in an area directly or indirectly under the control of the proprietor, does not enter any area in which smoking is prohibited under this chapter through entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or other means. 
(D)  A proprietor shall not be deemed in violation of this chapter if any smoke inadvertently enters the public place or place of employment, including entry through entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or other means, from an area otherwise exempted by this chapter as a private residence. 
(E)  A proprietor shall post signs pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. 
(F)  A proprietor shall identify himself or herself upon the request of the department of health. 
(G)  No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an individual for exercising any right, including reporting a violation, or performing any obligation under this chapter. 
(H)  No person shall refuse to immediately discontinue smoking in a public place, place of employment, or the areas directly or indirectly under the control of the proprietor or in an establishment, facility or outdoor area declared nonsmoking under of this chapter when requested to do so by the proprietor or any employee of an employer of the public place, place of employment or establishment, facility or outdoor area. 
(I)  Lack of intent to violate a provision of this chapter shall not be a defense to a violation. 
§ 1580.03 - AREAS WHERE SMOKING IS NOT REGULATED BY THIS CHAPTER. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the prohibitions in C.O. § 1580.02: 
(A)  Private residences, except during the hours of operation as a child care or adult care facility or health care facility for compensation, during the hours of operation as a business by a person other than a person residing in the private residence, or during the hours of operation as a business, when employees of the business, who are not residents of the private residence or are not related to the owner, are present. 
A private residence in which an individual is employed only on an intermittent basis is not subject to this chapter. This includes, but is not limited to, situations where individuals perform services for the owner of the residence or individuals residing in the residence such as those services performed by plumbers, electricians, remodelers, and housekeepers. 
A private residence or portion of a private residence that is licensed or certified by the state or federal government to provide overnight accommodations and supervision or personal care services to unrelated individuals is not subject to this chapter. Notwithstanding this paragraph, smoking may be prohibited by other applicable laws or rules. 
(B)  Rooms for sleeping in hotels, motels or other lodging facilities that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than twenty percent (20%) of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. 
(C)  The enclosed areas of family-owned and operated businesses in which all employees are related to the owner, and offices of self-employed persons in which all employees are related to the self-employed person, but only if the enclosed areas these businesses and offices occupy are not open to the public, are not in the same building with other enclosed areas subject to this regulation, and smoke from these businesses and offices does not migrate or enter enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this chapter. 
A family-owned place of employment, in which contractors or third parties not under the direction and control of the family-owned place of employment are intermittently present, is not subject to this chapter. 
(D)  An institution, residence or facility that provides for a period of more than twenty-four (24) hours, whether for profit or not, accommodations to three (3) or more unrelated individuals who are dependent upon the services of others, including any nursing home, as defined in ORC § 3721.10(A), residential care facility, the Ohio veteran's home, any facility or part of a facility that is defined as a skilled nursing facility as defined in ORC § 5111.20, and a country home or district home operated pursuant to ORC ch. 5155, but only to the extent necessary to comply with ORC § 3721.13(A)(18) and rules promulgated according to that section. 
(1)  If an indoor smoking area is provided by the herein referenced facilities, the designated indoor smoking area shall be separately enclosed and separately ventilated so that tobacco smoke does not enter, through entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or other means, any areas where smoking is otherwise prohibited under this chapter. Only residents of the facility may utilize the designated indoor smoking area for smoking. The herein referenced facilities may designate specific times when the indoor smoking area may be used for such purpose. No employee of said facilities shall be required to accompany a resident into a designated indoor smoking area or perform services in such area when used for smoking, unless they have volunteered to do so. 
(2)  If portions of an institution, residence, or facility are private residences, such as apartments, those private residential portions are governed by rules in this chapter applicable to private residences, unless otherwise prohibited by applicable laws or rules. 
(3)  Outdoor smoking by residents of institutions, residences or facilities specified in paragraph (d) of this rule is permitted to the extent necessary to comply with ORC § 3721.13(A)(18). 
(E)  (1)  Retail tobacco stores as defined in section 1580.01(U) of this chapter in operation prior to July 6, 2004, provided that each retail tobacco store claiming the exemption meets the following: 
(a)  The retail tobacco store shall annually file with the department of health, postmarked by January 31 of each year, an affidavit stating the percentage of its gross income during the prior calendar year that was derived from the sale of cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or other smoking devices for smoking tobacco and related smoking accessories; 
(b)  The affidavit shall be in the form approved by the director and attached as appendix A to this rule; 
(c)  Upon request of the department of health, the retail tobacco store shall provide additional information to assist the department in the determination of whether the exemption is properly applicable to a retail tobacco store; and 
(2)  Any retail tobacco store that begins operation after December 7, 2006 or any existing retail tobacco store that relocates to another location after July 6, 2004 may only qualify for this exemption if it meets the requirements set forth in paragraph (E)(1) of this section and: 
(a)  Is located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the retail tobacco store; and 
(b)  Smoke from the business does not enter or migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Within sixty (60) days after receiving an affidavit and, if requested, any additional information, the department of health shall provide each retail tobacco store that meets the requirements of this rule with written documentation that the retail tobacco store is exempt from the regulations of this chapter. 
(F)  Outdoor patios as defined in section 1580.01(O) of this chapter, except for the area of any outdoor patio that is within ten (10) feet of a window, door, or other opening of an enclosed area that is open when employees are present. Outdoor patios may be located immediately adjacent to locations of ingress or egress to the public place or place of employment, but shall be physically separated from any enclosed area. If windows or doors form any part of the partition between an enclosed area and the outdoor patio, the openings shall be closed to prevent the migration of smoke into the enclosed area. If windows or doors do not prevent the migration of smoke into the enclosed area, the outdoor patio shall be considered an extension of the enclosed area and subject to the prohibitions of this chapter. 
(1)  When smoking is permitted, the outdoor patio shall be open to the air. "Open to the air" shall mean the patio has thorough, unobstructed circulation of outside air to all parts of the outdoor patio. 
(2)  Any outdoor patio that has a structure capable of being enclosed, regardless of the materials or removable nature of the walls or side coverings, shall be regarded as an enclosed area when the walls or coverings are in place. An outdoor patio shall be presumed to be open to the air when not more than fifty percent (50%) of the combined surface area of an outdoor patio's sides is covered by walls or side coverings. 
(3)  For purposes of this paragraph (F), a "roof or other overhead covering" shall include any structure or arrangement above the outdoor patio, including substantial coverage by umbrellas or awnings, that may impede the flow of air into the patio, regardless of the type or nature of roof or other overhead covering. For the purposes of this rule, roof or other overhead covering does not include materials provided by a proprietor to ensure security in a confined residential setting when the outdoor patio is otherwise open to the air. 
(G)  Private clubs as defined in section 1580.01(R) of this chapter provided that all of the following apply: 
(1)  Only members of the club are present in the club's building; 
(2)  That the private club is the holder of a valid D-4 liquor permit pursuant to ORC § 4303.17 if alcoholic beverages are to be served; 
(3)  The club has no employees. For purposes of this exemption, the term employees does not include members of the private club who provide services to the private club; 
(4)  The club is organized as a not for profit entity; 
(5)  No persons under the age of 18 are present in the club's building; 
(6)  The club is located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the club; and 
(7)  Smoke from the club does not enter or migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this chapter. 
§ 1580.04 - CONSTRUCTION; OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS. 
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws, and shall be liberally construed so as to further its purposes. 
§ 1580.05 - DECLARATION OF ESTABLISHMENT AS NONSMOKING. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the owner, manager, operator, liquor permit holder, or other person in charge or control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area which does not otherwise qualify as a public place or place of employment may declare such establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of section 1580.06 is posted. 
§ 1580.06 - POSTING OF SIGNS; PROHIBITION OF ASHTRAYS; RESPONSIBILITIES OF PROPRIETORS. 
In addition to the prohibitions contained in Section 1580.02 of this Chapter, the proprietor of a public place, business or place of employment shall comply with the following requirements: 
(A)  No Smoking signs or the international No Smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this chapter. The sign shall be of sufficient size to be clearly legible to one of normal vision throughout the areas it is intended to mark. All signs required by this chapter shall contain the telephone number 1-866-559-OHIO (6446) for reporting violations and may also contain a designee's telephone number for reporting violations. 
(B)  Every public place, business and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this chapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign, at a height and location easily seen by a person entering the public place, business, or place of employment, clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(C)  Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, signs shall be posted at all pedestrian points of transition from areas where smoking is not regulated by this Chapter to all areas that are regulated. Nothing in this rule shall prohibit public places and places of employment from posting signs in addition to those required to comply with this chapter. 
(D)  Signs posted in vehicles shall be firmly affixed to the vehicle dashboard, or firmly affixed to each passenger door window, or firmly affixed to other areas visible to all passengers. 
(E)  All ashtrays and other receptacles used for disposing of smoking materials shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter unless such ashtrays or receptacles are of historic or architectural value and were affixed to real property prior to July 6, 2004, or are for ornamental purposes only and are displayed in such manner so as to preclude their use as receptacles for the disposal of smoking materials. This rule shall not apply to ashtrays and other receptacles within vehicles if they are not used for the disposal of smoking materials. 
(1)  A proprietor may provide ashtrays and other receptacles used for disposing of smoking materials in areas where smoking is not prohibited under this chapter. 
(2)  A proprietor may provide ashtrays and other receptacles used for disposing of smoking materials solely for the purpose of disposing smoking materials prior to entering a place of employment or public place. 
(3)  A proprietor may store ashtrays and other receptacles used for disposing of smoking materials in a location within an area where smoking is prohibited if the location has no public access, the location is used primarily for storage purposes, and the ashtrays or other receptacles are used solely in accordance with this chapter. 
(F)  The owner, manager, operator or other person in charge or control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area which does not otherwise qualify as a public place or place of employment regulated by this chapter, may voluntarily declare such establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place by conspicuously posting "No Smoking" signs that conform with the requirements of this chapter. 
(G)  This section shall not be construed to permit smoking in any area in which smoking is prohibited pursuant to section 1580.02. 
§ 1580.07 - ENFORCEMENT. 
This chapter shall be enforced by the Upper Arlington Board of Health and its designee(s). The health commissioner and his or her designee(s), and the city manager and his or her designee(s), shall have concurrent jurisdiction to enforce all provisions of this chapter. 
§ 1580.08 - SEVERABILITY. 
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. 
§ 1580.09 - SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PROHIBITED AREAS. 
(A)  No person shall smoke in a public place, the enclosed area of a business, or a place of employment, within the City of Upper Arlington, except as provided in section 1580.03 of this chapter. 
(B)  No person shall smoke in any establishment, facility, or outdoor area that has been declared a nonsmoking area by the owner, manager, operator, liquor permit holder, or other person in charge or control of the establishment, facility, or outdoor area. 
(C)  No person shall smoke in the areas immediately adjacent to public place, the enclosed area of a business, or a place of employment within the City of Upper Arlington, except as provided in section 1580.03 of this chapter. 
(D)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the proprietor of the public place, business, or place of employment failed to comply with the requirements of section 1580.06(A) or (B). 
(E)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of smoking in a prohibited place, a minor misdemeanor, punishable by a maximum fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
§ 1580.99 - PENALTIES. 
(A)  Upon the receipt of a first report that a proprietor of a public place, business or place of employment has violated any provision of this chapter, the Upper Arlington Board of Health shall issue a warning letter to that proprietor. A copy of such letter shall be forwarded to the city manager. The proprietor shall have available upon request the warning letter issued by the Upper Arlington Board of Health. Thereafter, the penalties contained in division (B) of this section shall apply. 
(B)  Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of the offense of permitting smoking in public places or places of employment. Such offense is a minor misdemeanor, punishable by a maximum fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(C)  Strict liability is intended for a violation of this chapter. 

CHAPTER 1581 - WATER SUPPLIES 

§ 1581.01 - CONNECTION TO PUBLIC WATER MAINS, RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF WELL WATER. 
Every dwelling house, business building and other establishment supplying water for drinking purposes to residents, customers, invitees, licensees, tenants or lessees, construction of which was commenced after October 1, 1963, and which at the time of construction was reasonably accessible to a public water main, shall be connected with such public water main and shall obtain its water supply therefrom. Every such building or structure except private residences occupied by the owners, supplying water for drinking purposes to customers, invitees or licensees, tenants, or lessees, which is or becomes reasonably accessible to a public water main shall be connected with such public water main and shall obtain its water supply therefrom, regardless of the date such building was erected or such establishment was put in operation. Provided that water from private wells may be used for laundry and air conditioning purposes, and for watering lawns and other uses outside the residence or other building not involving its use for human consumption. 
§ 1581.02 - TREATMENT OF WATER. 
Every occupied dwelling house which is supplied with water by a private well or any source other than the public water supply system of this city shall be provided with a suitable water treatment system so designed, maintained and operated as to continuously supply water free from coliform organisms. If the dwelling unit is occupied by other than the owner, failure of the owner or his/her representative to maintain and operate such water treatment system so as to provide coliform free water at all times shall be a violation of this C.O. ch. 1581, punishable as hereinafter provided. 
Each water supply system serving any business building or other establishment, except the private dwelling houses covered above, which is not reasonably accessible to a public water main and which supplies water for drinking purposes to customers, invitees or licensees from any source other than the public water supply system of this city, shall be equipped with a suitable water treatment system so designed, maintained and operated as to continuously supply water, free from coliform organisms. Failure of the owner or the owner's representative to maintain and operate such water treatment system so as to provide coliform free water at all times shall be a violation of C.O. ch. 1581 punishable as hereinafter provided. Water treatment shall not be required for water used only for laundry or air conditioning purposes or for watering lawns or other uses outside the residence or other buildings not involving human consumption provided that no cross connections shall be permitted between pipe-supplying water for the purposes enumerated above and those supplying water for uses for which treatment is required. 
§ 1581.03 - CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED. 
No cross-connections shall be permitted between the piping system for the water supplied from public mains and that supplied by private wells. 
§ 1581.04 - RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE, EXISTING DWELLINGS, ETC. 
It shall be the responsibility and duty of the owner of every building or establishment above referred to, and of every person in charge of the rental or management thereof, to comply with the provisions of C.O. ch. 1581, and failure of any such person to comply therewith shall constitute a violation of this section. Provided that, as to dwelling houses and business buildings presently occupied and other establishments now in operation, compliance with the provisions of C.O. ch. 1581 may be effected before December 1, 1963, and no violation shall be deemed to exist as to such buildings or establishments until on or after such date. 
CHAPTER 1582. - POLLUTION OF WATER RESOURCES 

§ 1582.01 - POLLUTION OF WATER RESOURCES. 
(A)  No person being the owner, tenant or prime occupant of any structure serviced by a household sewage disposal system shall allow such system to pollute with coliform organisms any well, stream, watercourse or watershed. 
(B)  The board of health, upon consideration of local conditions, shall prescribe rules and regulations designed to prevent the pollution of water resources. Such rules shall provide for, but without limitation to, the following: 
(1)  The inspection of household sewage disposal systems to include standards therefore, which standards shall be state-of-the-art standards of general acceptance within the industry and other public jurisdictions. 
(2)  The certification of individual sewage disposal systems. 
(3)  The inspection of individual water supply systems. 
(4)  The treatment of individual water supply systems. 
(5)  The keeping of records of all individual water supply systems and individual sewage disposal systems within the city. 
CHAPTER 1583. - ENFORCEMENT, PENALTY 

§ 1583.01 - AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF HEALTH. 
The health commissioner, or his/her authorized deputies or agents, shall be authorized to enforce this chapter and any health regulations adopted by city council. Any reference to this chapter shall incorporate any health regulation adopted by city council. The board of health has primary authority to enforce the provisions of ORC §§ 3707.04 to 3707.32 regarding quarantine and isolation. In accordance with ORC § 3707.34, the health commissioner shall act on behalf of the board of health in administering the provisions of ORC §§ 3707.04 to 3707.32 regarding quarantine and isolation when circumstances have rendered a meeting of the board of health to be impractical or impossible or delaying the action until a meeting of the board of health would compromise the public health. This policy shall be adopted by the board of health pursuant to ORC § 3707.34. 
§ 1583.02 - ENFORCEMENT. 
Part 15 - Health Code shall be enforced by the health commissioner, his or her deputies or representatives, the city manager and police division of the city. No person shall violate any provisions of Part 15 - Health Code or refuse to obey any lawful order of the health commissioner, his or her deputies or representatives, or the city manager. 
The city attorney shall be responsible for the prosecution of all misdemeanor offenses or civil actions arising under this Part 15 - Health Code. 
§ 1583.03 - RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGULATIONS. 
Part 15 - Health Code shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other ordinances or regulations that prescribe standards other than are provided in this part. This part establishes minimum standards relative to health, sanitation and safety for all premises and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established by regulations that may be additional or more stringent. This Code shall not be construed or interpreted to impair or limit in any way the authority of the health commissioner or the commissioner's authorized representative(s) to cause the removal or abatement of public nuisances or hazards that may threaten the health, safety or welfare of any person. 
§ 1583.04 - INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY. 
(A)  Inspection, right of entry, evidence. 
(1)  The health commissioner or his/her authorized deputies or agents in enforcing the provisions of Part 15 are hereby authorized and directed to make inspections pursuant to any procedures of inspection by the board of health; or in response to a complaint that an alleged violation of the provision of this part or of applicable rules or orders pursuant thereto may exist; or when the health commissioner has valid reason to believe a violation of this part or any rules and orders pursuant thereto has been or is being committed. 
(2)  Upon presentation of proper credentials, the health commissioner or his/her authorized deputies or agents is authorized, where permission is granted, to enter any dwelling, dwelling unit, multiple dwelling, business building or premises in the City of Upper Arlington at reasonable times to perform any duty imposed on him/her by this part. If any owner or person having charge of a building or premises subject to the provisions of this part fails or refuses to permit free access and entry to the dwelling, dwelling unit, multiple dwelling, business building or premises under his or her control or any part thereof, the health commissioner may apply to a judge of a court record, pursuant to ORC § 2933.21(F) for a warrant of search to conduct an inspection. A warrant of search to conduct an inspection shall not be issued except upon probable cause as provided in ORC § 2933.22. 
(3)  Every occupant of a premises or structure shall give the owner or operator thereof, or keeper, agent or employee, access to any part of such structure or its premises at all reasonable times for the purposes of making such inspection, maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to comply with the requirements of this part. 
(4)  The health commissioner or his/her authorized deputies or agents may obtain samples of evidence during inspections. 
§ 1583.05 - NOTICE OF VIOLATION. 
(A)  Issuance of notice of violation. Whenever the health commissioner or his/her authorized deputies or agents determines, or has reasonable grounds to believe, that there exists a condition that violates any provisions or requirements set forth in the Ohio Statutes, the Ohio Administrative Code, or Part 15 - Health Code, the health commissioner or his/her authorized deputies or agents may issue a notice setting forth the alleged violations and advising the owner or person having charge that such violations must be corrected. 
(B)  Content of notice of violation. 
(1)  All notices of violation, except emergency orders, shall be in writing and shall be served on the person from whom action, forbearance or compliance is required. 
(2)  All notices of violation shall identify the sections of Part 15 - Health Code and/or any health regulation adopted by city council to which the order applies. 
(3)  All notices of violation shall provide a description of the dwelling, dwelling unit, multiple dwelling, business building or premises where the violations are alleged to exist or to have been committed; and/or a description of the public nuisance and the premises where the said public nuisance is alleged to exist. 
(4)  All notices of violation shall specify a reasonable time for compliance with the order. 
(5)  All notices of violation shall advise the owner or person having charge of the right to appeal to the board of health. 
(6)  All notices of violation shall advise the owner or person having charge that if the order is not complied with by the specified date of compliance, the board of health may initiate a civil and/or criminal complaint against the owner or person having charge; and/or the board of health may, by city personnel or private contractor, cause the violations to be corrected with the cost of such correction to be charged as a lien upon the real estate. 
(C)  Service of notice of violation. A notice of violation shall be served upon the owner or any person from whom action, forbearance or compliance is required. Such notice shall be served by any one (1) of the following methods: 
(1)  Personal service; or 
(2)  Certified mail; or 
(3)  Residence service; or 
(4)  Publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county; or 
(5)  Regular mail service to an address that is reasonably believed to be: 
(a)  A place of residence of the owner; or 
(b)  A location at which the owner regularly receives mail; or 
(6)  Posting the notice of violation on the property, except that if a structure or premise is vacant, then the notice shall be posted on the structure or premise and one (1) of the above methods of service shall also be used. 
(D)  When the notice of violation has been properly serviced, the order shall be effective as to anyone having any interest in the premises whether recorded or not at the time the order was issued, and shall be effective against any subsequent owner of the premises as long as the violation exists and there remains a city record of the order in a public file maintained by the board of health. 
(E)  Written or oral acknowledgment by the owner of receipt of a notice of violation shall be evidence that the owner received the notice of violation. An appeal of the notice of violation by the owner shall constitute evidence of written acknowledgment by the owner of service of notice of violation. 
§ 1583.06 - EMERGENCIES. 
(A)  Whenever the health commissioner finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the health and safety of any person, he or she may issue an oral or written order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action as he or she deems necessary be taken to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Code, such order shall be effective immediately and complied with immediately. 
(B)  If necessary to protect the health and safety of any person where an emergency exists in an occupied building, the health commissioner shall order that the premises be vacated forthwith and further that it shall not be reoccupied until the conditions causing the emergency to exist have been abated and approved by the health commissioner. 
(C)  In cases where it reasonably appears that there is imminent danger to the health and safety of any person unless the emergency condition is immediately corrected and if after reasonable attempts to notify the owner it appears that the owner will not or cannot immediately correct the condition, the board of health may cause the immediate abatement, including building demolition, of such emergency condition. The board of health shall further cause the cost of such abatement to be charged against the land on which the building exists as a municipal lien or to be recovered in a civil suit against the owner. 
(D)  The owner or person having charge shall be granted a hearing before the board of health on the matter. 
§ 1583.07 - APPEALS OF NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS. 
Appeals of any notice of violation for an alleged violation of Part 15 - Health Code issued by the health commissioner and/or his/her authorized deputies or agents shall be made in writing within fifteen (15) days of the date of service of the notice of violation. Any person affected by a notice of violation may request and shall be granted a hearing before the board of health on all matters set forth in such notice of violation. 
§ 1583.08 - PROHIBITION AGAINST FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE OF VIOLATION. 
(A)  No owner or person having charge or authority over a violation of Part 15 - Health Code shall fail to comply with any notice of violation of the board of health, health commissioner and/or his/her authorized deputies or agents for a violation, obstruct or interfere with the execution of such order, or omit to obey such notice of violation. 
(B)  No person shall fail to comply within the time specified in a notice of violation after receiving notification of being in violation of Part 15 - Health Code. 
§ 1583.09 - PROCEDURE UPON FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE OF VIOLATION. 
Whenever, upon inspection the health commissioner and/or his/her authorized deputies or agents determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there is a violation of Part 15 - Health Code resulting in the existence of an actual or potential public nuisance, or whenever there exist conditions that adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of any person, or when notices issued pursuant to this part do not alleviate such a public nuisance or condition, the board of health may: 
(A)  Cause solid waste to be removed from any premises and may employ the necessary labor to perform the task; 
(B)  Cause weeds, noxious weeds or rank growth to be cut or destroyed and removed from any premises and may employ the necessary labor to perform the task; 
(C)  Cause the correction or abatement of any condition, which violates any section of Part 15 - Health Code in, regards to the sanitary maintenance of premises, the sanitary maintenance of animals, the control and abatement of rodents, insects, vermin or other pests, and the control and abatement of public nuisances and may employ the necessary labor to perform the task; 
(D)  Upon performance of the labor mentioned in divisions (A), (B) and (C) with respect to abatement of the above-mentioned public nuisances, the board of health shall with respect to each parcel of land report to city council a statement of the charge for the services, the amount paid for performing the labor, and the fees of the officers who made the service of the notice and return; 
(E)  Upon receipt of the statement and approval thereof by council, the city clerk shall make a return in writing to the auditor of the applicable county of such statement, which shall be entered upon the tax duplicate of the county, all in accordance with ORC §§ 731.51-731.54. 
(F)  Cause to be filed a civil complaint for injunctive relief seeking abatement of the public nuisance in a court of jurisdiction. The procedures to be followed will be pursuant to the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure; or 
(G)  Cause to be filed a criminal complaint in a court of jurisdiction. 
§ 1583.99 - PENALTY. 
(A)  Unless otherwise provided for in a chapter, whoever violates any provision of Part 15 - Health Code is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and is subject to a fine of not more than two-hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days or both. An organization convicted of a violation of Part 15 - Health Code, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, shall be fined not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(B)  Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(C)  Unless otherwise provided for in a chapter, strict liability is intended to be imposed for violation(s) of Part 15 - Health Code. 
Part 17 - FIRE CODE 
CHAPTER 1701. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

§ 1701.01 - ENFORCEMENT OF OHIO FIRE CODE. 
(A)  As used in the Codified Ordinances of the City of Upper Arlington, "Ohio Fire Code" shall refer to the state fire code (OAC Chapter 1301:7-7) adopted by the state fire marshal pursuant to ORC § 3737.82, including any subsequent amendments. 
(B)  The Upper Arlington Division of Fire shall be primarily responsible for the enforcement of the Ohio Fire Code. Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the provisions of the Ohio Fire Code shall be controlling within the limits of the city. The fire division may proceed under the enforcement and penalty provisions of the Ohio Fire Code or section C.O. § 1701.99 or both. 
§ 1701.02 - PERMITS. 
(A)  The Upper Arlington Division of Fire shall establish a permit program pursuant to Section 105.1.1 of the Ohio Fire Code and may issue permits for the activities set forth in Appendix A of Rule 1 of the Ohio Fire Code. The fees for each permit shall be the amount specified in C.O. Ch. 401; provided, however, that the fee shall be doubled if work, activities, or conditions for which a permit is required under the Ohio Fire Code or this section is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining the required permit. Payment of a doubled fee shall not: 
(1)  Relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of the Ohio Fire Code or C.O. § 1701.02 in the execution of the work; or 
(2)  Limit the imposition of any penalties provided for violations of the Ohio Fire Code or C.O. § 1701.99. 
(B)  For temporary membrane structures, tents, and canopies operational and construction permits, if the temporary membrane structure, tent, or canopy is to be erected by a person engaged in the business of renting or constructing temporary membrane structures, tents, or canopies, then such person shall be the party responsible for securing the permit. This requirement shall apply regardless of whether such person has registered to engage in such business pursuant to C.O. § 730.01. 
(Ord. No. 63-2016 , § 8, 11-28-2016) 
§ 1701.99 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly violate any provision of the Ohio Fire Code or any order made pursuant to it. 
(B)  No person shall knowingly build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved pursuant to the Ohio Fire Code. 
(C)  No person shall knowingly fail to comply with the terms and conditions of any permit issued pursuant to the Ohio Fire Code or C.O. § 1701.02. 
(D)  Whoever violates this section shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty days (180), or both. 
(E)  The imposition of a criminal penalty for any violation shall not: 
(1)  Excuse the violation or permit it to continue; 
(2)  Prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions; or 
(3)  Preclude the imposition of any civil penalties pursuant to the Ohio Fire Code or ORC ch. 3737. 
(F)  Each day that the prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
CHAPTER 1702. - OPEN BURNING, RECREATIONAL FIRES, AND PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACES 

§ 1702.01 - DEFINITIONS. 
(A)  Open burning: The burning of materials whereby products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber. Open burning does not include road flares, smudgepots and similar devices associated with safety or occupational uses typically considered open flames, recreational fires or use of outdoor fireplaces or portable outdoor fireplaces. For the purpose of this definition, a chamber shall be regarded as enclosed when, during the time combustion occurs, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or chimneys necessary to provide combustion air and permit the escape of exhaust gas are open. 
(B)  Outdoor fireplace: A stationary, outdoor, solid-fuel-burning fireplace or fire ring that may be constructed of or, if the outdoor fireplace or fire ring is recessed or sunken, lined or bordered with noncombustible material such as steel, concrete, stone, brick, or clay. An outdoor fireplace may be open in design, or may be equipped with a small hearth opening and a short chimney operating in the top. Examples include outdoor fireplaces, fire rings, fire pits, stationary fire tables, and other elements designed and manufactured or constructed for use as a stationary outdoor fireplace or fire ring. 
(C)  Portable outdoor fireplace: A portable, outdoor, solid-fuel-burning fireplace that may be constructed of noncombustible material such as steel, concrete, or clay. A portable outdoor fireplace may be open in design, or may be equipped with a small hearth opening and a short chimney operating in the top. Examples of a portable outdoor fireplace include chimineas, portable outdoor fire pits, and other products manufactured for use as a portable outdoor fireplace. 
(D)  Recreational fire: An outdoor fire burning materials other than rubbish where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, portable outdoor fireplace, barbecue grill or barbecue pit and has a total fuel area of three (3) feet (914 mm) or less in diameter and two (2) feet (610 mm) or less in height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes. 
(E)  Seasoned firewood: Firewood that has been split and stored to dry for at least six (6) months. 
§ 1702.02 - PERMIT REQUIRED. 
No person shall commence open burning of a fire with a fuel area exceeding three (3) feet in diameter and two (2) feet in height without first securing an open burning permit from the fire division. Outdoor fireplaces and portable outdoor fireplaces used at one- and two-family dwellings are excepted from this permit requirement; exception from this requirement shall not except outdoor fireplaces from permit, inspection, or other applicable requirements in the Unified Development Ordinance, Building Code, Property Maintenance Code, or other applicable law. 
§ 1702.03 - SEASONED FIREWOOD. 
Only clean, seasoned firewood, natural gas or equivalent, or any clean-burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood may be burned in any recreational fire, outdoor fireplace, or portable outdoor fireplace. 
§ 1702.04 - ATTENTION AND EXTINGUISHMENT. 
(A)  All open burning, recreational fires, outdoor fireplaces, and portable outdoor fireplaces are to be constantly attended by a responsible party. 
(B)  All open burning, recreational fires, outdoor fireplaces, and portable outdoor fireplaces shall be conducted only with an adequate means of extinguishment readily available. 
§ 1702.05 - DISTANCE FROM STRUCTURES AND COMBUSTIBLES. 
(A)  Open burning shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within fifty (50) feet of any structure. 
(B)  Recreational fires shall not be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any structure or combustible material. 
(C)  Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be used in accordance with manufacturer instructions and shall not be operated within fifteen (15) feet of a structure or combustible material. Portable outdoor fireplaces used at one- and two-family dwellings are excepted from this setback requirement. 
(D)  In all cases, provisions shall be made prior to ignition to eliminate conditions that would allow fire to spread to any structure or combustible material. 
§ 1702.06 - EXTINGUISHMENT AUTHORITY. 
The fire division is authorized to order the extinguishment of any recreational fire, outdoor fireplace, portable outdoor fireplace, or open burning that is determined by the fire chief, or the fire chief's designee, to be hazardous to public safety. 
§ 1702.99 - PENALTY. 
(A)  No person shall fail to secure a permit in violation of section 1702.02 of this chapter. 
(B)  No person shall create or maintain conditions violating sections 1702.03, 1702.04, or 1702.05 of this chapter. 
(C)  No person shall fail to comply with any extinguishment order issued pursuant to section 1702.06 of this chapter. 
(D)  (1)  Whoever violates division (A), (B), or (C) of this section shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(2)  The penalties provided for misdemeanors in C.O. § 501.09 shall apply to the offenses created in this section. 
(E)  The imposition of a criminal penalty for any violation shall not: 
(1)  excuse the violation or permit it to continue; 
(2)  prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions; or 
(3)  preclude the imposition of any civil penalties pursuant to the Ohio Fire Code or ORC ch. 3737. 
(F)  Each day that the prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 24-2014) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance Number Date Section Section this Code 16-79       Rpld 539.01 48-2002  5-23-2002       Rpld 537.06 4-2008  1-28-2008 139.01 6-2008  2-25-2008 311.06(3), (4) 311.06(9) 311.08(5) 311.08(12) 311.11(37) 8-2008  2-25-2008 227.05 937.21 939.07 1401.02 11-2008 12- 6-2008 155.14(A)(3) 40-2008 353.01(H) 353.07(B) 60-2008 507.01 507.18(F) 507.19(D) 88-2008 11-10-2008 353.01(J) 353.01(K)(1)(b)(i), (ii) 353.01(K)(1)(b)(v) 353.01(K)(1)(c)(iv) 353.01(K)(1)(c)(vi) 353.01(K)(5)(b) 353.01(S) 355.19 40-2009 227.02(E) 227.03(B) 59-2009 311.11(9) 311.11(27) 92-2009 301.01-301.05 351.41(A), (B) 351.4(D)(1) 359.03 359.26(C)-(L) 371.01 371.02 371.03(A)-(C) 371,03(K) 371,03(M) 371.04 371.05(A) 371.06(A) 371.07(C) 371.10(A), (B) 371.11(E)-(G) 371.12 371.14(C)-(E) 371.15(D) 371.18 93-2009 503.01(C) 505.19(A) 106-2009 Pt. 11, § 2.02 Pt. 11, § 4.01(B) Pt. 11, § 4.04(D) Pt. 11, § 4.06(C)(3) Pt. 11, § 4.06(C)(5) Pt. 11, § 5.02(A)(2) Pt. 11, § 5.04(A)(1) Pt. 11, § 6.02(B)(16) Pt. 11, § 6.03(G)(10) Pt. 11, § 6.06(D)(6) Pt. 11, § 6.08 Pt. 11, § 6.09(B) Pt. 11, § 6.09(C)(1)d. Pt. 11, § 6.09(C)(3)c. Pt. 11, § 6.09(D)(1)a. Pt. 11, § 6.09(D)(13)i. Pt. 11, § 6.11(B)(1) 111-2009 131.01 131.11 131.13-131.15 112-2009 138.01 138.06(E) 138.07(D), (E) 138.08(C)(3) 138.09(A) 138.09(E) 138.10(C) 138.11(B) 138.21 138.21 113-2009 139.02 139.06 114-2009 156.03 201.01 201.03(A) 201.05 201.07(C) 201.08 201.11(B) 201.12 201.13 201.18(D) 201.20 201.22 201.25 201.27 115-2009 311.02 335.03(B), (C) 116-2009 1401.02 117-2009 143.01 143.02(D) 143.03-143.08 143.09(A) 143.09(D) 143.09(F) 143.10-143.38 118-2009 155.01(N) 155.01(Q)-(U) 155.11 155.16 155.18(B)(6)(b)i., ii 155.18(B)(6)(d)i. 119-2009 1300.02 17-2010 773.01, 773.02 773.99 32-2010 543.01 543.02 48-2010 383.02 383.03 383.07 383.10-383.12 49-2010 551.01 551.03 551.05 551.06 551.14 551.15 61-2010 517.20 70-2010 173.01 173.04 173.05 71-2010 315.02(B) 315.02(E)(2), (3) 315.03 383.01 74-2010 Pt. 11, § 6.03(G)(1) 75-2010 173.08 94-2010 1305.08(A)(3) 95-2010 12-13-2010 937.18(E) 96-2010 3-16-2011 Pt. 11, § 3.05 Pt. 11, § 4.06(E)(17) Pt. 11, § 5.01 Pt. 11, § 5.05(B)(5) Pt. 11, § 6.03(G)(11) 114-2010  3-16-2011 907.03-907.05 907.08 115-2010  3-16-2010 131.02-131.04 133.01 137.02(A)       Rpld 139.04 139.05 141.02       Rpld 141.03 143.27 145.02 145.03 155.18(A)(2) 155.18(C)(2) 158.02(E) 171.01 173.01 4-2011  1-24-2011 155.14(A)(1) 5-2011 155.05(J)(2) 10-2011 503.09 12-2011 353.01(K)(1)(a)(iii) 353.01(K)(1)(b)(iii) 353.01(K)(1)(c)(iii) 21-2011  5- 9-2011 311.11(26) 25-2011  5- 9-2011 131.05 543.02(A)(6)(a) 549.11(B) 28-2011  6- 6-2011       Rpld311.07 34-2011  7-13-2011 901.08 35-2011 202.02(E)(2) 49-2011 137.14 55-2011 138.01 138.23 58-2011 Pt. 11, § 2.02 70-2011 353.01(K)(6) 353.01(L)(1)(b) 353.01(L)(4) 355.01(B), (C) 355.05(C), (D) 355.05(G) 355.12(D) 355.13(B), (C) 355.15(B), (C) 71-2011 505.05(B) 505.06(C) 505.08(A), (D) 505.09(B)(3), (4) 505.09(D) 505.11(C) 505.19(B) 505.20 509.05(B) 515.08(A)(9) 515.08(E) 523.01, 523.02 523.03(C)       Rpld 523.04 523.08 523.12(A)-(C) 523.14(A)(2) 523.14(B) 523.17 82-2011 111.03(A) 5-2012 939.01(C) 939.02(C) 939.03 939.04 6-2012  2-13-2012 137.01(B) 137.02 138.09(B) 138.09(F) 138.10(B) 155.01(A) 155.01(K) 155.02(A)(1) 155.02(B) 155.02(G)(2) 155.02(1) 155.05(K) 155.06(G) 155.06(1)-(L) 155.14(A)(2) 155.18(F)(1) 155.18(G)(2) 157.02(B) 157.3       Added Ch. 175       Rpld Ch. 161 Pt. 11, § 2.02 Pt. 11, § 3.03(D) 8-2012 Pt. 11, § 2.02 Pt. 11, § 4.06(G) Pt. 11, § 4.06(J) Pt. 11, § 4.07(F) Pt. 11, § 6.09(D)(1)d. Pt. 11, § 6.09(D)(1)f.,g. Pt. 11, § 7.17(A)(1) 10-2012 357.01(A)(9) 357.1(A)(11)(c) 357.02(B) 371.18 11-2012 901.05(D) 33-2012 301.01 353.05(B)(9) 44-2012 155.14(A)(2) 49-2012 519.01-519.03 519.11 519.14(C) 54-2012  9-24-2012 131.05 59-2012 301.01 301.02 301.05 351.41(E) 353.13 353.14 71-2012 505.02(C)(2), (3) 505.03(C), (D) 505.04(D)(3) 505.05(C) 505.06(D) 505.18(B)-(D) 79-2012 155.05(C) 155.13(E), (F) 7-2013 155.01(O), (P) 155.08(C) 155.18(A)(2) 155.18(B)(3)(b) 155.18(B)(5) 155.18(B)(6)(b)i. 155.18(B)(11) 8-2013 149.01 149.08(E) 9-2013 131.14 131.14(C) 23-2013 401.06 32-2013 171.08 40-2013  6-10-2013 131.05 543.02(A)(6)(a) 41-2013  6-10-2013 1       Added 131.16 45-2013 138.05(F) 138.06(B)(4), (5) 138.06(B)(11) 138.06(C) 138.07(A) 138.07(E) 138.09(B) 138.09(D)-(F) 138.10(B), (C) 46-2013 505.11(D) 47-2013 359.59(K)(1) 49-2013 131.01 131.10(B) 50-2013 223.03(A)       Added 223.03(E)       Added 223.05(E) 54-2013 155.02(G)(2) 57-2013 Pt. 11, § 4.06(C)(8) Pt. 11, § 4.06(E)(16) Pt. 11, § 4.06(F)(1) Pt. 11, § 7.17(A)(1) 63-2013 315.02(F)(1) 64-2013 511.08(H) 66-2013 202.02(A) 68-2013 549.07(F) 202.02(E)(2) 77-2013 519.15(G) 80-2013 Table 401.02 82-2013 1306.03(B)- (G) 1306.06, 1306.07 1401.02 83-2013 223.07 1-2014 511,07(A)(13) 531.08, 531.09 8-2014 313.01 (A)(11), (12) 11-2014 155.14(A)(2) 23-2014 151.02 24-2014 1702.99(F) 28-2014 202.01 36-2014 Pt. 11, § 2.02 Pt. 11, § 4.06(J) Pt. 11, § 5.03(A)(4) Pt. 11, § 5.03(A)(6) 44-2014 355.20 48-2014 8-18-2014 138.08(c)(1), (2) 60-2014 11-24-2014 1 931.17 2 931.99 62-2014 11-24-2014 1 149.05 63-2014 11-25-2014 1 311.04 65-2014 12- 8-2014 2 Pt. 11, § 6.03(G)(3) 3 Pt. 11, § 6.03(H) 71-2014 12- 8-2014 1 155.13 73-2014 12- 8-2014 1 201.02 2 201.04 3 201.11 4 201.26 8-2015  3- 9-2015 1 507.14 9-2015  4-27-2015 2 Pt. 11, § 6.07 19-2015  4-13-2015 1       Added 355.25 30-2015  5-27-2015 1 401.06 35-2015  6- 8-2015 1       Added 547.03 2 531.08 3 531.09 39-2015  6-22-2015 1 Ch. 141(tit.) 141.01 2 145.02 42-2015  6-22-2015 1 301.04 2 355.01 3 355.04 4 355.16 5 355.18 44-2015  7-13-2015 1 137.14 48-2015  7-13-2015 1 901.05 50-2015  7-13-2015 1 138.04 2 138.06 3 138.09 4 138.10 62-2015 11-23-2015 1 Pt. 11, § 2.04 2 Pt. 11, § 2.05 3 Pt. 11, § 4.05(D) 4 Pt. 11, § 506, Table 5-A 5       Rpld Pt. 11, § 6.10(C)(6) 75-2015 11-23-2015 1 145.02 2 903.02 3 903.05 4 903.06 5 903.07 6 903.08 7 903.09 8 931.02 9 931.03 10 931.10 11 931.11 12 931.14 13 931.16 14 931.17 15 935.05 76-2015 11-23-2015 1 Ch. 201(tit.) 2       Added 201.90, 201.91 3       Added 203.01-203.26, 203.99 4       Rnbd 202.99       as 205.99 5       Rnbd 202.01-202.90       as 205.01-205.90 6       Rpld 156.01-156.03       Added 156.01 77-2015 11- 9-2015 1       Added 225.10 87-2015 12-14-2015 1 175.01-175.03 2 143.06 3 Pt. 11, § 2.01 4 Pt. 11, § 3.03 5 157.03 401.02 Ch. 401, Exh. A 717.02 717.03 723.01 723.02 729.01 741.02 745.01 745.02 747.02 747.03(A) 747.06 783.02(A) 785.01 937.08 937.23 Pt. 11, § 1.10 Pt. 11, §§ 2.02-2.04 Pt. 11, §§ 2.06-2.08 Pt. 11, § 3.02(B)(4) Pt. 11, § 3.02(E), (F) Pt. 11, § 3.04 Pt. 11, § 3.05(D) Pt. 11, § 3.06 Pt. 11, § 4.01 Pt. 11, §§ 4.04-4.10 Pt. 11, § 5.06 Pt. 11, §§ 6.01-6.04 Pt. 11, § 6.05(D)(1)(c) Pt. 11, § 6.05(A)(2) Pt. 11, § 6.06 Pt. 11, §§ 6.09-6.11 1300.02 1301.01 1305.07, 1305.08 1305.12, 1305.13 1305.15 1306.03 1306.06, 1306.07 1401.02 1527.02 88-2015  1-25-2016 1 549.04 89-2015  2-22-2016 1 907.01 2 907.02 3 907.04 4 907.05 5 907.08 6 1401.02 7 Ch. 907(tit.) 8-2016  2-22-2016 1 301.01 2 305.01-305.03       Added 305.04, 305.05 3       Rpld 311.01-311.13       Added 311.01 4 335.01 5 335.03 6 351.10 7 371.07 8 371.08 9 371.17 12-2016  3-14-2016 1 154.01, 154.02 13-2016  3-14-2016 1 152.01-152.07 14-2016  3-14-2016 1 151.01-151.04 15-2016  3-14-2016 1 157.01-157.04 20-2016  4-11-2016 1 138.16 21-2016  5- 9-2016 2 Pt. 11, § 2.02 3 Pt. 11, § 2.05 4 Pt. 11, § 2.06 5 Pt. 11, § 2.07 6 Pt. 11, § 5.02 7, 8 Pt. 11, § 5.06 9 Pt. 11, § 6.09(C) 10 Pt. 11, § 6.09(D)(2) 11 Pt. 11, § 6.09(D)(11) 12 Pt. 11, § 6.09(D)(17) 34-2016  6- 6-2016 1 131-14 38-2016  7-11-2016 1 221.06 2 221.09 44-2016 10-24-2016 2 Pt. 11, § 4.06(C)(7) 3 Pt. 11, § 6.01(B)(6) 4 Pt. 11, § 6.03 5 Pt. 11, § 6.08 58-2016 11- 7-2016 1       Added 175.04 2       Added 711.02 3 717.03 4       Added 717.04 5 723.01 6       Added 723.03 7 729.02 8       Added 729.04 9 735.01 10       Added 735.06 11       Added 741.03 12 745.02 13 745.03 14 747.03(A)(3) 62-2016 11-28-2016 1 138.09 63-2016 11-28-2016 1 401.01 2 401.02 3       Added 401.03 4       Rpld 401.04, 401.05 5 Table 401.02 6 730.01 7 1305.09 8 1701.02 64-2016 11-28-2016 1 401.06 2 901.01 3 901.08 4 933.01 5 933.02 6 933.05 7 933.15 8 933.16 9 933.17 72-2016 12-12-2016 1-3       Added 931.18-931.20 8-2017  1-23-2017 1 155.14(A)(2) 5-2017  2-13-2017 1 131.01 2 137.01, 137.02 3 138.09, 138.10 4 155.06 155.18 5 223.03(E) 6-2017  2-13-2017 1-3 519.01-519.03 14-2017  2-27-2017 1 171.08 2 353.01 3       Added 355.26 16-2017  4-10-2017 2 Pt. 11, § 2.03 3 Pt. 11, § 3.05 4 Pt. 11, § 4.09(C) 5 Pt. 11, § 6.01(D) 6, 7 Pt. 11, § 6.03 8 Pt. 11, § 6.09(D)(1) 9 Pt. 11, § 7.06(B)(4) 10 Pt. 11, § 7.15(A)(1) 36-2017  5-22-2017 1       Added 315.10 42-2017  6-26-2017 1 Pt. 11, § 2.03 2 Pt. 11, § 2.04 3 Pt. 11, § 2.08 4 Pt. 11, § 6.06 44-2017  7- 5-2017 1 Pt. 11, § 2.02 2 Pt. 11, § 2.03 3 Pt. 11, § 2.08 4 Pt. 11, § 6.11 64-2017 11-27-2017 1 931.17 69-2017 11-27-2017 1-11 935.01-935.11 12 935.13 13 935.14 53-2017 12-11-2017 1, 2 Pt. 11, § 2.02 3 Pt. 11, § 2.05 4 Pt. 11, § 2.07 5 Pt. 11, § 6.06 54-2017 12-11-2017 2, 3 Pt. 11, § 2.02 4-7 Pt. 11, § 2.05 8, 9 Pt. 11, § 2.06 10, 11 Pt. 11, § 2.07 12, 13 Pt. 11, § 4.10 14, 15 Pt. 11, § 5.06 16-18 Pt. 11, § 6.03 19 Pt. 11, 6.07(D) 20-22 Pt. 11, § 6.09 23 Pt. 11, § 7.15(A) 24 Pt. 11, § 7.17 16-2018  2-27-2018 2-7 203.02(C) 8 203.04 9 203.05 10 203.07 11 203.18(C)(2) 17-2018  2-20-2018 1(Exh. A)       Added 203.80-203.82, 203.84-203.95 25-2018  4- 9-2018 1, 2 767.01 27-2018  4- 9-2018 1       Added 537.06 2 537.12 32-2018  4-23-2018 2 Pt. 11, § 2.02 3 Pt. 11, § 2.05 4 Pt. 11, § 2.06 5-7 Pt. 11, § 3.02 8 Pt. 11, § 4.10(A) 9, 10 Pt. 11, § 6.09 35-2018  5-29-2018 2 Pt. 11, § 2.07 3 Pt. 11, § 6.01(D) 4 Pt. 11, § 6.09(D)(1) 36-2018  5-14-2018 2 203.03(F)(4)(a) 3, 4 203.05 38-2018  4-23-2018 2 Pt. 11, § 5.02(B) 3 Pt. 11, § 5.06(Table 5-A) 4 Pt. 11, § 6.10(C) 41-2018  5-29-2018 2 155.18(E) 3       Added 155.19 47-2018  6-25-2018 2-5 Pt. 11, § 2.02 6-10 Pt. 11, § 2.03 11 Pt. 11, § 2.05 12 Pt. 11, § 2.06 13-15 Pt. 11, § 2.07 16-20 Pt. 11, § 2.08 21-24 Pt. 11, § 6.11 48-2018  6-25-2018 2, 3 933.01 4-6 933.02 7-11 933.03 12 933.04(B) 13 933.05 14 933.06(E) 15 933.08 16       Rpld 933.13 17-21 933.15 22-27 933.16 28 933.18(B) 29 933.20(B)(2) 30 933.23(F) 31       Added 933.24 32 401.06 49-2018  6-25-2018 2 223.05 3 551.01 4 551.03 5 551.04 6 551.06 7 551.07 50-2018  7- 9-2018 2 Pt. 11, § 2.07 3 Pt. 11, § 5.06 66-2018  9-24-2018 2 Pt. 11, § 3.05 72-2018 10- 8-2018 2 301.02 3 301.03 4 301.05 5 383.02(C) 6 383.14 7       Added 383.16 74-2018 10-22-2018 1 171.08(C) 75-2018 10-22-2018 1 221.06 87-2018 12-10-2018 5 137.06(A) 6 137.07(A) 5-2019  2-11-2019 1 171.02 2 171.03 3 171.07 10-2019  4-22-2019 2 Pt. 11, § 7.17 22-2019  4- 8-2019 3 Pt. 11, § 5.02(B) Pt. 11, § 5.06 Pt. 11, § 6.10(c) 27-2019  4-22-2019 2 543.01 3 543.02(A) 4 1580.01  
