
West Carrollton, OH Code of Ordinances


TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS









Chapter










Chap. 10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
























CHAPTER 10
GENERAL PROVISIONS









Section










10.01   Short titles





10.02   Definitions





10.03   Rules of construction





10.04   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal





10.05   Construction of section references





10.06   Conflicting provisions





10.07   Severability





10.08   Fee when check not honored by bank





10.09   Emergency powers of Mayor





10.99   General penalty




 



10.01  SHORT TITLES.




   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the
Municipality as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated
into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections shall be known and
designated as the Codified Ordinances of West Carrollton, Ohio, 1977, for
which designation “codified ordinances” or “code” may be
substituted.  Code, title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute
any part of the law as contained in the Codified Ordinances. 
(R.C. § 1.01)










   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
such components of the Codified Ordinances unless otherwise specified.  Any
component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the
“traffic code”.  Sections may be referred to and cited by the
designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§ 10.01”. 
('70 Code, § 101.01)









10.02  DEFINITIONS.




   For purposes of this code the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.





   (A)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense
requires it. 
(R.C. § 1.02 (F))










   (B)   ANOTHER.  When used to designate the owner of property which
is the subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also
every other owner of property. 
(R.C. § 1.02 (B))










   (C)   COUNCIL.  The legislative authority of the municipality.










   (D)   COUNTY.  Montgomery County, Ohio.










   (E)   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR.  Includes all persons, whether acting
by themselves or as a servant, agent, or employee.










   (F)   LAND or REAL ESTATE.  Includes rights and easements of
incorporeal nature. 
(R.C. § 701.01 (F))










   (G)   MUNICIPALITY or CITY.  The City of West Carrollton, Ohio.










   (H)   OATH.  Includes affirmation and SWEAR includes affirm.
(R.C. § 1.59)










   (I)   OWNER.  When applied to property, includes any part owner,
joint owner, or tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.










   (J)   PERSON.  Includes an individual, corporation, business trust,
estate, trust, partnership, and association. 
(R.C. § 1.59 (C))










   (K)   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes all property except real.










   (L)   PREMISES.  As applied to property, includes land and
buildings.










   (M)    PROPERTY.  Includes real, personal, mixed estates and
interests. 
(R.C. § 701.01 (E))










   (N)   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Includes boards of education; the
municipal, county, state, or federal government, its officers or an agency
thereof; or any duly authorized public official.










   (O)   PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery,
school yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other
place for the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.










   (P)   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.










   (Q)   REGISTERED MAIL.  Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL
includes registered mail.
(R.C. § 1.02 (G))










   (R)   SIDEWALK.  That portion of the street between the curb line
and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.










   (S)   STATE.  The State of Ohio.










   (T)   STREET.  Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads,
highways, viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the
municipality.










   (U)   TENANT or OCCUPANT, as applied to premises, includes any
person holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or
any part of such premises, alone or with others.










   (V)   WHOEVER.  Includes all persons, natural and artificial;
partners; principals, agents, and employees; and all officials, public or
private. 
(R.C. § 1.02 (A))










   (W)   WRITTEN or IN WRITING.  Includes any representation of words,
letters, symbols, or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating
to signatures. 
(R.C. § 1.59 (J))  ('70 Code, § 101.02)









10.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.









   (A)  Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed
according to the rules of grammar and common usage.  Words and phrases that
have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative
definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(R.C. § 1.42)










   (B)   As used in the code, unless the context otherwise required:





      (1)   Tense.  Words in the present tense include the future.





      (2)   Gender.  Words of one gender include the other genders.





      (3)   Plural.  The singular includes the plural and the
plural includes the singular.










   (C)   Calendar:  computation of time.





      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be
done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day;
except that when the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the
act may be done on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.





      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is
to be performed, is closed to the public for the entire day which constitutes
the last day for doing such act or before its usual closing time on such day,
then such act may be performed on the next succeeding day which is not a
Sunday or a legal holiday.
(R.C. § 1.14)





      (3)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from
and after a day named, no part of that day shall be included.
(R.C. § 1.15)





      (4)   In all cases where the law shall require any act to be
done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable
time or notice shall mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.










   (D)   Authority.  When the law requires an act to be done which may
by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement
shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.










   (E)   Joint authority.  All words purporting to give joint
authority to 3 or more municipal officers or other persons shall be construed
as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons,
unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the
authority or inconsistent with state statute or Charter provisions.










   (F)   Exceptions.  The rules of construction shall not apply to any
law which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction, or
when the subject matter or context of such law may be repugnant thereto.





('70 Code, § 101.03)









10.04  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.




   (A)   The repeal of a repealing statute does not revive the statute
originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein. 
(R.C. § 1.57)










   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of a statute does not,
except as provided in division (C) of this section:





      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the statute or any prior
action taken thereunder;





      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege,
obligation, or liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred
thereunder;





      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal;





      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in
respect of any such privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment; and the investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted,
continued, or enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed,
as if the statute had not been repealed or amended.










   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is
reduced by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according
to the statute as amended. 
(R.C. § 1.58)  ('70 Code, § 101.04)









10.05  CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.




   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, such reference shall be
construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections
included in such reference.










   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.
(R.C. § 1.23) ('70 Code, § 101.05)









10.06  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.




   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the
Codified Ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail.  If the conflicting
provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as
to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the
subject matter taken as a whole. 
('70 Code, § 101.06)









10.07  SEVERABILITY.




   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable. 
(R.C. § 1.50)  ('70 Code, § 101.07)









10.08  FEE WHEN CHECK NOT HONORED BY BANK.




   The city shall assess a handling charge as set forth in Section37.01 of
Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
West Carrollton to any person, corporation, association, or other entity for
any check submitted to the city which is not honored by the bank for any
reason and the account for which such check was submitted for payment will
revert to the same status as though no payment was received. 





(Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09)









10.09  EMERGENCY POWERS OF MAYOR.




   (A)   The Mayor may, in times of public emergency or when existing
circumstances or the state of facts present imminent and substantial danger
of bodily harm to large numbers of people and/or widespread destruction of
property, such as, but not limited to, natural disorders caused by an act of
God, explosions, fires, tumult, diffusing explosive vapors, diffusing
dangerous chemicals or liquids, civil emergency, power failures or aircraft
accidents, proclaim in writing a state of emergency.  Coincident with the
proclamation, the Mayor shall issue notice of a special meeting of Council to
be held within 12 hours of the time of the proclamation.










   (B)   As a part of such proclamation or by subsequent written order
after such proclamation is issued, the Mayor may, in his/her discretion as
he/she deems necessary to the public safety:





      (1)   Delineate the boundaries of any area threatened by an
emergency condition and restrict or prohibit persons from entering such area
except when carrying on necessary and legitimate pursuits, and control and
regulate movement within and from such area;





      (2)   Establish a curfew within such area under regulations
set by the Mayor or Council and prohibit persons from being out of doors
during such curfew; and





      (3)   Prohibit the sale, offering for sale, dispensing, and
regulate or control the transportation of firearms and other deadly weapons,
ammunition, dynamite and other dangerous explosives, incendiary devices and
any necessary ingredient thereof.










   (C)   When the danger has passed, the Mayor or Council shall
forthwith make a proclamation that the emergency has ended and any
proclamation, order or regulation issued pursuant to this section shall then
become void.










   (D)   The powers conferred by this section are in addition to any
other power which may be conferred by law and nothing in this section shall
be construed to modify or limit such authority, powers, duties and
responsibilities of any officer or public official as may be provided by
law.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit suspension of the
privilege to a writ of habeas corpus.










   (E)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of, or knowingly fails
to perform any duty required by a proclamation, order or regulation issued
and in effect pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.





(Ord. 2788, passed 2-26-91)









10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.




   Whenever, in the codified ordinances or in any ordinance of the
municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or
an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or
the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific
penalty is otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be
punished by a fine, which fine shall be set forth in Section 37.02 of Chapter
37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West
Carrollton.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed in each day during
or on which a continuing violation occurs.  (Ord. 3436,  passed 12-22-09)





























TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION









Chapter










Chap. 30.   ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY










Chap. 31.   LEGISLATIVE










Chap. 32.   CITY MANAGER; PURCHASING; INVESTMENTS










Chap. 33.   DEPARTMENTS; BOARDS; AND COMMISSIONS










Chap. 34.   EMPLOYMENT POLICIES










Chap. 35.    PUBLIC RECORDS POLICY










Chap. 36.   COUNCIL RULES AND PROCEDURES










Chap. 37.   GENERAL FEE SCHEDULE










Chap. 38.   GENERAL FEE SCHEDULE










Chap. 39.    IDENTITY THEFT POLICY





























CHAPTER 30
ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY









Section










30.01   Conformity with Charter





30.02   Applicability of prior ordinances





30.03   Departmental organization





30.04   Officers





30.05   Department heads





30.06   Acting department heads





30.07   Assistants to department heads




 



30.01  CONFORMITY WITH CHARTER.




   This title shall implement the city Charter, and the provisions hereof
shall be so construed.  Should any provision of this title be found to be in
conflict with the Charter, the Charter provisions shall control.  Any
conflict of any provision of this title shall render only the conflicting
provision hereof invalid, and all other provisions not in conflict with the
Charter shall remain in force and effect.  Should any provision of this
title be susceptible to 2 interpretations, one of which is in conflict with
the Charter and the other of which is in conformity with the Charter, the
provision shall be given that interpretation conforming to the Charter. 
('70 Code, § 105.01; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









30.02  APPLICABILITY OF PRIOR ORDINANCES.




   Existing ordinances of the city in conflict with the Charter and with
this title are hereby repealed.  To the extent that if this title does not
make provision for any matter required by the Charter to be provided by
ordinance, the provisions of existing ordinances on the matters shall remain
in effect and be deemed to be a part of this title.
('70 Code, § 105.02; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









30.03  DEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION.




   The administrative service of the city shall be divided into the
following departments with the following heads thereof:









 




Departments

 

Department Head

 

Responsible to




Department of Finance

 

Finance Director

 

City Manager




Department of Law

 

Law Director

 

Council




Department of Safety

 

Safety Director

 

City Manager




Department of Service

 

Service Director

 

City Manager




Department of Personnel

 

Personnel Director

 

City Manager




Department of Parks and Recreation

 

Parks and Recreation    Director

 

City Manager




Department of Planning and Community Development

 

Planning and Community Development Director

 

City Manager











('70 Code, § 105.03; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









30.04  OFFICERS.




   Each officer shall perform all duties required of his office by the
Charter, by law and by this title and other ordinances of the city, and he
shall perform the other duties not in conflict therewith as may be assigned
by the City Manager. 
('70 Code, § 105.04; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









30.05  DEPARTMENT HEADS.




   The heads of departments, with the exception of the Law Director, shall:










   (A)   Be immediately responsible to the City Manager for the
effective administration of their departments and all activities assigned
thereto.










   (B)   Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular
field and shall inaugurate, with the approval of the City Manager, any new
practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public.










   (C)   Be responsible for the performance of their departments and
the duties assigned to it by the Charter, by law, by this title, and by the
City Manager.










   (D)   Submit reports of the activities of their departments when
requested by the City Manager.










   (E)   Establish and maintain a system of records and reports in
sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of
departmental activities and to form a basis for the reports required by the
City Manager.










   (F)   Be responsible for the proper custody and maintenance of all
city property and equipment used in their departments. 
(amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









30.06  ACTING DEPARTMENT HEADS.




   Whenever for any reason a department head, except the Law Director, is
unable to perform his duties, the City Manager may name a substitute or
assume the duties himself, until the disability is removed or the position
becomes vacant.  With the approval of Council, the City Manager may serve as
the head of 1 or more departments, except that he may not serve as Director
of Finance, or he may appoint one person as the head of 2 or more departments.





('70 Code, § 105.06; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









30.07  ASSISTANTS TO DEPARTMENT HEADS.




   Whenever for any reason the City Manager deems it necessary to provide
either temporary or permanent assistants for any department head, except the
Law Director, the City Manager shall authorize the employment of the same
within existing or amended appropriations.
('70 Code, § 105.07; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)
























CHAPTER 31
LEGISLATIVE









Section










Council










31.01   Clerk of Council





31.02   Annual independent audit




 



Ordinances and Resolutions



 




31.05   Posting places designated (Repealed)





31.06   Posting by Council Clerk; certification





31.07   Application of legislation to city property outside the corporate
limits




 



 



COUNCIL



 



31.01  CLERK OF COUNCIL.




   The Clerk of Council shall perform any duties as are required of him by
the city Charter and Council.
('70 Code, § 121.01; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









31.02  ANNUAL INDEPENDENT AUDIT.




   The Council shall annually provide for an independent audit as provided
for in § 4.13 of the city Charter.  The audit shall be to:










   (A)   Verify receipts from various departments and all other sources
with fund ledger sheets and bank statement.










   (B)   Verify fund balances with bank statement.










   (C)   Verify total appropriation expenditures with fund expenditures.










   (D)   Perform such other audit duties as Council may direct.
('70 Code, § 121.02; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)










ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS









31.05  POSTING PLACES DESIGNATED.




   (EDITOR’S NOTE: Former Section 31.05 was repealed by Ordinance 3194,
passed December 11, 2001.)









31.06  POSTING BY COUNCIL CLERK;  CERTIFICATION.




   All matters posted shall be for the period required by law, and shall
be done by the Council Clerk, who shall make the proper certificate of
posting upon the completion thereof. 
('70 Code, § 123.02)









31.07  APPLICATION OF LEGISLATION TO CITY PROPERTY OUTSIDE THE CORPORATE
LIMITS.




   Pursuant to R.C. § 715.50, it is hereby ordained by Council that all
real and personal property owned by the city located without the municipal
corporation limits is hereby subject to the provisions of all city police and
sanitary regulations and ordinances. Any person, firm or corporation coming
in or upon any municipally owned property lying outside the corporate limits
of the city, shall be subject to the penalties and provisions as provided in
the regulations and ordinances. 
('70 Code, § 123.03)
























CHAPTER 32
CITY MANAGER; PURCHASING; INVESTMENTS









Section










City Manager










32.01   Check vouchers





32.02   Bond





32.03   Authority to prescribe rules and regulations





32.04   Transfer of personnel





32.05   Transfer of work among departments





32.06   Assistant to the City Manager





32.07   Authority to sell real estate owned by city




 



Purchasing



 




32.10   Purchasing agent





32.11   Formal bidding





32.12   Opening and tabulation of bids; award of contracts





32.125   Joint purchases





32.13   Purchase orders





32.14   Inspection





32.15   Purchase of surplus commodities




 



Investment and Deposit Policy



 




32.25   Purpose





32.26   Adoption of policy





32.27   Objectives and guidelines





32.28   Fund depositories





32.29   Authorized financial institutions and dealers





32.30   Authorized and suitable investments





32.31   Collateralization of competitively bid interest bearing time
certificates of deposit, repurchase agreements and now accounts





32.32   Safekeeping and custody





32.33   Diversification





32.34   Maximum maturities





32.35   Competitive bidding





32.36   Liability





32.37   Ethics and conflict of interest





32.38   Reporting





32.39   Pooling of funds




 




CITY MANAGER




 



32.01  CHECK VOUCHERS.




   All check vouchers shall be approved and signed by the City Manager or
Acting City Manager.
('70 Code, § 131.01; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









32.02  BOND.




   The City Manager shall furnish bond, as required by the Charter, in the
amount of $25,000, the premium for which shall be paid by the city.  The
bond shall be for the protection of the city and the public against loss due
to acts of omissions of the City Manager. 
('70 Code, § 131.02; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









32.03  AUTHORITY TO PRESCRIBE RULES AND REGULATIONS.




   The City Manager may prescribe the general rules and regulations as he
may deem necessary or expedient for the general conduct of the administrative
departments, other than the department of law.  The head of each department
shall in like manner prescribe the rules and regulations as he may deem
necessary and expedient for the proper conduct of his department, not
inconsistent with rules and regulations prescribed by the City Manager.
('70 Code, § 131.03; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









32.04  TRANSFER OF PERSONNEL.




   The City Manager may temporarily transfer employees from one department
to another department in order to expedite the work of a department to meet
increased duties of a seasonal  or emergency nature which may occur within a
department. 
('70 Code, § 131.04; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









32.05  TRANSFER OF WORK AMONG DEPARTMENTS.




   The City Manager may direct any department to perform work for any
other department to meet increased duties of a seasonal or emergency nature. 
('70 Code, § 131.05; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









32.06  ASSISTANT TO THE CITY MANAGER.




   The City Manager may, whenever he deems it necessary or expedient, and
upon approval of the position by Council, employ, within existing or amended
appropriations, an assistant, who shall assist the City Manager in the
performance of his duties in the manner and to the extent as the City Manager
may direct. 
('70 Code, § 131.06; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









32.07  AUTHORITY TO SELL REAL ESTATE OWNED BY CITY.




   (A)   Whenever City Council determines that it would be in the best
interest of the city to sell certain real estate owned by the city, it may
authorize the City Manager to sell such real estate without advertising for
bids for such sale.










   (B)   The sale of such real estate shall be for a price, and upon
such terms and conditions, as Council may approve by ordinance.





(Ord. 2700, passed 2-14-89)










PURCHASING









32.10  PURCHASING AGENT.




   (A)   The City Manager or other appointed officer shall act as
purchasing agent for the city, making all purchases required by the various
departments and selling unused, worn out, surplus or obsolete equipment and
materials.










   (B)   Whenever the head of a department deems it necessary or
desirable that supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services be
purchased or secured, the department head shall inquire of potential
suppliers as to the cost of the purchases and solicit informal competitive
bids to supply the items or services required, and then shall prepare and
submit to the purchasing agent a purchase order therefor, specifying the
nature of the purchase desired, the cost or estimated cost, the quantity
required and such other information as the purchasing agent may request. 
Upon receipt of any purchase order for the purchase of supplies, materials or
services and the probable cost thereof exceeds the statutory limitation, the
purchase shall be made by formal bidding as hereinafter provided.  However,
if the cost for the supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services to
be purchased exceeds the statutory limitation, the City Manager may request
City Council's authorization to make such purchase without formal bidding. 
The authorization for such a purchase may be given by the City Council after
they have reviewed the procedure used in obtaining the informal bids, the
number of bids received, the amount of such bids and any other information
requested by City Council.  City Council shall then determine whether it
would be in the best interest of the citizens of the city to purchase such
supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services without formal
bidding, and if so, the City Council may authorize the City Manager to
purchase such supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services from
the lowest and best informal bidder.  If Council fails to authorize the
purchase by informal bidding, the purchase of such equipment shall be made by
use of the formal bidding procedure as hereinafter provided.  The City
Manager may authorize the department heads to make purchases for $500 or
less, without review by the purchasing agent, however, all purchases in
excess of $500 must be submitted to the purchasing agent as noted above in
this section.  Emergency purchases may be made as specified by charter.





('70 Code, § 133.01; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81; amend. Ord. 2573,
passed 1-13-87; amend. Ord. 2847, passed 1-28-92)









32.11  FORMAL BIDDING.




   Whenever formal bidding is employed, the purchasing agent shall prepare
or cause to be prepared specifications for the articles or services required
and shall advertise the requirements of the city for the same for two
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, inviting
suppliers to tender bids in writing for the furnishing of the requirements,
the bids to be publicly opened not less than two full weeks following the
date of first advertisement, at a time and place specified in the published
notice. If the contemplated purchase shall not have been included in the
annual appropriation ordinance, a supplementary appropriation shall be
required. 
('70 Code, § 133.02; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81; amend. Ord. 2573,
passed 1-13-87)









32.12  OPENING AND TABULATION OF BIDS; AWARD OF CONTRACTS.




   Where formal bidding is employed, the bids shall be opened and
tabulated publicly by the City Manager or his representative and by the
Director of Finance or his representative, at the time and place specified in
the advertisement for bids.  The investigation of the responsibility of the
bidders shall be made as the City Manager may deem necessary, and the City
Manager shall then award the contract to the lowest and best responsible
bidder, unless he determines that the interest of the city would be better
served by rejecting all bids and ordering a new advertisement, in which case
he may so order.  Before the contract is signed, it shall be submitted to
the Finance Director for encumbrance and certification and approved as to
form by the Law Director.  Council shall be informed of all bidding action
and awarding of contracts. 
('70 Code, § 133.03; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









32.125 JOINT PURCHASES.




   Notwithstanding the provisions contained in §§ 32.10, , and 32.12 of
this chapter, the City Manager is hereby authorized, whenever formal bidding
is necessary, to advertise for bids either separately or in conjunction with
other political subdivisions, or both, in order to obtain the lowest and best
bid for the city. 
(Ord. 2429, passed 3-27-84)









32.13  PURCHASE ORDERS.




   Whenever informal bidding is followed pursuant to this chapter, the
purchasing agent shall forward a purchase order prepared by the department
head, addressed to the successful bidder, directing him to supply the goods
or services required in accordance with the terms agreed upon.
('70 Code, § 133.04; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









32.14  INSPECTION.




   The purchasing agent and/or department head shall inspect or supervise
the inspection of all deliveries of supplies, materials, equipment or
contractual services, to determine their conformance with the specifications
set forth in or referred to in the order or contract. 
('70 Code, § 133.05; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









32.15  PURCHASE OF SURPLUS COMMODITIES.




   The purchasing agent may purchase any personal property from the
federal government whenever the property is offered, if he finds that the
purchase can be made at prices less than would be obtained by taking bids as
provided by law for purchases from private individuals. It shall not be
necessary for him to advertise for bids, but he may make the purchase upon
the formalities and terms as are required by the federal government,
irrespective of the amount of money involved.
('70 Code, § 133.06; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)










INVESTMENT AND DEPOSIT POLICY









32.25  PURPOSE.




   Effective cash management is recognized as essential to good fiscal
management.  This is particularly true as mounting costs and expanding
programs have placed ever increasing pressures on local governmental
revenues.  Investment returns on funds not immediately required can help to
reduce this pressure.  Effective cash management of these funds requires an
investment and deposit policy be well founded and uncompromisingly applied.





(Ord. 2973, passed 4-11-95)









32.26  POLICY; ADOPTION OF POLICY.




   (A)   It is the policy of the city to invest public funds in a
manner which will provide the highest investment return with the maximum
security while meeting the daily cash flow demands of the city and conforming
to all applicable local, state and federal statutes governing the investment
of public funds.










   (B)   The city's investment and deposit policy, as set forth in this
subchapter, shall be adopted by ordinance of City Council. The policy shall
be reviewed on an annual basis by the Finance Director and with Council at
least every five years.  Any modifications made thereto must be approved by
the City Council. 
(Ord. 2973, passed 4-11-95)









32.27  OBJECTIVES AND GUIDELINES.




   (A)   The following investment objectives will be applied in the
management of city funds.





      (1)   The primary objective of the city's investment
activities is the preservation of capital and the protection of investment
principal.





      (2)   In investing public funds, the city will strive to
maximize the return on the portfolio but will avoid assuming unreasonable
investment risks as are defined within R.C. § 135.14 and further by this
city's investment and deposit policy.





      (3)   The city's investment portfolio will remain sufficiently
liquid to enable the city to meet operating requirements which might be
reasonable anticipated.





      (4)   The city will diversify its investments to avoid
incurring unreasonable and avoidable risks regarding specific security types
or individual financial institutions.





      (5)   Investments shall be made with the exercise of that
degree of judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which
persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management
of their own affairs, not for speculation but for investment, considering the
probable safety of their capital as well as the probable income to be derived.





      (6)   Banks vary in the services they provide, their service
fees, interest rates on interim investments and the minimum compensating
balances required for demand-deposit accounts.  The city's objective is to
obtain good banking services while minimizing the cost of banking services to
the city.










   (B)   To insure that the city will continue to receive the best
service and rates available and that other financial institutions will have
an equal opportunity to competitively bid in future years, the city will seek
competitive proposals for depositories of active funds at least every five
years.





(Ord. 2973, passed 4-11-95)









32.28  FUND DEPOSITORIES.




   (A)   The Finance Director shall, with the approval of the City
Manager, contract with one or more institutions having made application for
such funds as depositories of the city's active funds.  In making such
designation consideration shall be given to the following:





      (1)   The convenience of location of the depositories offices.





      (2)   Interest rates to be paid on active deposits.





      (3)   Service charges to be made for processing transactions.





      (4)   Compliance with other conditions required by the city of
their depositories.










   (B)   The Finance Director may with the approval of the City Manager
contract with one or more institutions for investment counsel.  The city
will not relinquish control over assets.  The institution shall be chosen
based on rate of return on investment, fees charged for investment counsel,
and compliance with R.C. Chapter 135 and this investment policy.





(Ord. 2973, passed 4-11-95)









32.29  AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND DEALERS.




   The Finance Director will maintain a list of financial institutions and
security broker/dealers who maintain an office in the State of Ohio and are
authorized to provide investment services to the city.  These may include
"primary" dealers or regional dealers that qualify under Securities &
Exchange Commission Rule 15C3-1 (uniform net capital rule).  The Director of
Finance:










   (A)   May make additions to the authorized list when the investment
and deposit policy requirements are met.










   (B)   Shall make deletions from the list:





      (1)   If and as directed by ordinance of City Council,





      (2)   Upon failure of the financial institution to meet the
foregoing investment and deposit policy requirements, or





      (3)   Upon request of the financial institution or dealer.










   (C)   May make deletions from the list based on the following
criteria or circumstances:





      (1)   Perceived financial difficulties of the financial
institution or dealer;





      (2)   Consistent lack of competitiveness by the financial
institution or dealer;





      (3)   Lack of experience or familiarity of the account
representative in providing service to large institutional accounts; or





      (4)   When deemed in the best interest of the city.





         (Ord. 2973, passed 4-11-95)









32.30  AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS.




   The Finance Director may invest on behalf of and in the name of the
city in the following instruments at a price not exceeding their fair market
value:










   (A)   United States Government Securities.  Direct obligations of
the Department of the Treasury of the United States of America (bills, notes,
and bonds);










   (B)   United States Government Agency Securities and
Instrumentalities of Government Sponsored Corporations.





      (1)   Bonds, notes, debentures or any other obligations or
securities issued by any federal government agency or instrumentality, the
principal and interest of which are unconditionally guaranteed by the United
States; and,





      (2)   Bonds, notes, debentures, or any other obligations or
securities issued by any federal government agency or instrumentality;










   (C)   Competitively Bid Interest Bearing Certificates of Deposit. 
Competitively bid interest bearing certificates of deposits in banks and
savings and loan associations organized under the laws of Ohio, and national
banks organized under the laws of the United States, doing business and
situated in Ohio, provided that any such deposits are secured by collateral
as prescribed herein;










   (D)   Repurchase Agreements and Reverse Repurchase Agreements. 
Repurchase agreements of a bank or savings and loan association organized
under the laws of the United States or State of Ohio and reverse repurchase
agreements for negotiable direct obligations of the United States or federal
agencies.  Provided, however, if any repurchase agreement obligations do not
have the full faith and credit backing of the United States, any such
investments shall be secured by collateral as provided in § 32.31 of this
subchapter.  A master repurchase agreement must be signed with the financial
institution or dealer;











   (E)   Bankers Acceptance.  Bankers acceptances which are eligible
for purchase by the federal reserve system and which are issued by
institutions which are ranked nationally as being in the top 50 in asset and
deposit size within their industry;










   (F)   State Treasury Asset Reserve of Ohio.  The State Treasury
Asset Reserve of Ohio ("Star Ohio") is a statewide investment pool managed by
the Treasurer of the State of Ohio similar in concept to a money market fund
but available exclusively to political subdivisions of Ohio.  State law sets
the guidelines that determine the program's investment practices;










   (G)   Money Market Funds.  Money market funds whose portfolios
consist of those instruments listed in divisions (A) and (B) of this section.










   (H)   Now Accounts.  Now accounts, super now accounts or any other
similar account authorized by the Federal Reserve's Depository Institutions'
Deregulation Committee; and










   (I)   Ohio Government Securities.  Bonds, notes and other
obligations issued by the State of Ohio or any political subdivision therein.





(Ord. 2973, passed 4-11-95)









32.31  COLLATERALIZATION OF COMPETITIVELY BID INTEREST BEARING TIME
CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT, REPURCHASE AGREEMENTS AND NOW ACCOUNTS.




   (A)   All deposits of city funds in competitively bid interest
bearing time certificates of deposits, Now accounts and active funds of the
city, and repurchase agreements without the full faith and credit backing of
the United States shall be secured by pledged collateral in an amount equal
to at least 100% of the deposit less an amount insured by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation or by any other agency or instrumentality of the
federal government.  All securities shall be pledged at market value and all
collateral must maintain a market value equal to at least 100% of the deposit
less an amount insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or by any
other agency or instrumentality of the federal government.





      (1)   The following securities shall be eligible to be pledged
as collateral for purposes of this section:





         (a)   Bonds, notes or other obligations of the United
States; or bonds, notes or other obligations guaranteed as to principal and
interest by the United States or those for which the full faith and credit of
the United States is pledged for the payment of principal and interest
thereon, by language appearing in the instrument specifically providing such
guarantee or pledge and not merely by interpretation or otherwise;





         (b)   Bonds, notes, debentures or other obligations or
securities issued by a federal government agency; bonds, notes or other
obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States or
those for which the faith of the United States is pledged for the payment of
principal and interest thereon, by interpretation or otherwise and not by
language appearing in the instrument specifically providing such guarantee or
pledge;





         (c)   Bonds and other obligations of Ohio;





         (d)   Bonds and other obligations of any county,
township, school district, municipal corporation, or other legally
constituted taxing subdivision of Ohio, which is not at the time of such
deposit, in default in the payment of principal or interest on any of its
bonds or other obligations for which the full faith and credit of the issuing
subdivision is pledged;





         (e)   Bonds of other states of the United States which
have not, during ten years immediately proceeding the time of such deposits,
defaulted in payments of either interest or principal on any of their bonds.





      (2)   Any and all securities pledged as collateral by any
institution where city investments have been made shall be delivered to the
Finance Director as security for the repayment of public monies or to an
independent third party financial institution or federal reserve bank or
branch approved by the Finance Director serving as trustee (the trustee). 
Fees and expenses of the trustee shall be paid by the depository.  When
securities are held in trust by a third party, a safekeeping receipt (form of
which must be approved by the city) naming the City of West Carrollton as
holder, must be prepared and issued by the depository and presented to the
city.





      (3)   If the depository fails to pay over any part of a
deposit due the city, the Finance Director shall have the option to sell, in
a manner determined by the Finance Director, any of the bonds or other
securities deposited with the Finance Director pursuant to the provisions of
this policy.  If the bonds or other securities are on deposit with a
trustee, the Finance Director may request the trustee to deliver to the
Finance Director any of the bonds or other securities on deposit with the
trustee; and the Finance Director shall have the option to sell such bonds or
other securities in a manner determined by the Finance Director.  When a
sale of bonds or other securities has been made and upon payment to the
Finance Director of the purchase money, the Finance Director shall transfer
such bonds or securities whereupon the absolute ownership of such bonds or
securities shall pass to the purchaser(s), and any surplus remaining after
deducting the amount due the city and expenses of the sale shall be paid to
the depository.










   (B)   (1)   When the depository has deposited eligible securities
as described in this policy with a trustee for safekeeping, the depository
may at any time substitute or exchange eligible securities having a current
market value equal to or greater than the current market value of the
securities then on deposit and for which they are to be substituted or
exchanged only:





         (a)   If the Finance Director with the approval of the
City Manager has authorized the depository to make such substitution or
exchange on a continuing basis during a specified period without prior
approval of each substitution or exchange.  Such authorization may be
effected by the Finance Director sending to the trustee a written notice
stating that substitution may be effected on a continuing basis during a
specified period which shall not extend beyond the end of the period of
designation during which the notice is given.  The trustee may rely upon
such notice, and upon the period of authorization stated therein;





         (b)   If no continuing authorization for substitution or
exchange has been given by the Finance Director, but the depository notifies
the Finance Director, the City Manager, and the trustee of an intended
substitution or exchange, and the Finance Director, the City Manager, or
his/her designee fails to object to the trustee within ten business days
after the date appearing on the notice of proposed substitution.  The notice
to the Finance Director, the City Manager, and to the trustee shall be given
in writing and delivered personally or by certified or registered mail with a
return receipt requested.  The trustee may assume in such case that the
notice has been delivered;





         (c)   If the Finance Director with the approval of the
City Manager gives written authorization for a substitution or exchange of
specific securities.





      (2)   The depository shall notify the Finance Director of any
substitution or exchange of securities authorized by this policy.  Upon
request from the Finance Director, the depository and/or the trustee shall
furnish a detailed statement of securities pledged against the deposits of
the city.  The detailed statement will provide the value and the then
current market value.










   (C)   (1)   With the approval of the Finance Director and the
City Manager, a depository may provide collateral for deposits of city funds
in competitively bid interest bearing time certificates of deposit and for
savings accounts or Now accounts and for active funds of the city through a
single pool of securities pledged toward all deposits of public funds held by
the depository and not otherwise secured pursuant to law.





      (2)   The "pooled collateral" option is subject to the
following conditions:





         (a)   Securities committed to the pool must have a
market value at least equal to 110% of all public monies on deposit with the
depository excluding the amount covered by federal deposit insurance.





         (b)   The securities eligible for deposit in the pool
shall be those described in division (A) of this section.  In addition to
those described in division (A) of this section, obligations of any county,
municipal corporation, or other legally constituted authority of any other
state, or any instrumentality of such county, municipal corporation, or other
authority of any other state shall be eligible under the "pooled collateral"
option.





         (c)   The securities constituting the pool shall be
delivered to a trustee as described in division (A) of this section.  Fees
and expenses of the trustee shall be paid by the depository.





         (d)   The city shall have an individual security
interest in the pool of securities pledged by a public depository pursuant to
this section in the proportion that the total amount of the city's public
monies secured by the pool bears to the total amount of public deposits so
secured.





         (e)   If the depository fails to pay over any part of
the deposits due the city, the Finance Director may request the trustee to
deliver to the Finance Director any of the securities on deposit with the
trustee, not to exceed the amount necessary to produce an amount equal to the
deposits made by the Finance Director and not paid over to the city, less the
portions of the deposits covered by federal deposit insurance, plus any
accrued interest due on the deposits; and in any event not to exceed the
city's proportional security interest in the market value of the pool as of
the date of the depository's failure to pay over the deposits as such
interest and value are determined by the trustee.  The Finance Director
shall have the option to sell such securities in the manner determined by the
Finance Director.  Any surplus remaining after deducting the amount due the
city and expenses of the sale shall be paid to the depository.





         (f)   The depository at any time may substitute,
exchange, or release eligible securities deposited with a qualified trustee
pursuant to this section, provided that such substitution, exchange, or
release does not reduce the total market value of the securities to an amount
that is less than 110% of the total amount of public funds on deposit with
the depository.





         (g)   The institution shall provide to the Finance
Director a detailed quarterly statement of the face and market values of all
securities pledged to the pool within 30 days of the end of the quarter. 
The institution will also disclose the total amount of public funds on
deposit in each quarterly statement.





         (h)   If at any time the market value of the pool is
less than 110% of all public deposits held by the trustee, it is the
responsibility of the depository to immediately add sufficient securities to
the pool in an amount that will bring the market value of the pool to at
least 110% of all public funds on deposit with the trustee.





         (i)   Failure of the institution to abide by any of the
provisions of this section is cause for immediate suspension of the
institution as a qualified depository for any city funds.





            (Ord. 2973, passed 4-11-95)









32.32  SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.




   (A)   All security transactions, including collateral pledges,
except for certificates of deposit purchased from an institution utilizing
the "pooled collateral" option, shall be conducted on a delivery versus
payment basis.  Securities will be held by a third party custodian
designated by the Finance Director and evidenced by safekeeping receipts.










   (B)   Securities owned by the city and collateral securities pledged
to the city must be maintained in safekeeping at a bank other than the bank
or broker/dealer through which the specific owned security is purchased or
from which the specific collateral security is pledged.





(Ord. 2973, passed 4-11-95)









32.33  DIVERSIFICATIONS.




   The city will diversify the use of investment instruments to avoid
incurring unreasonable risks inherent in over-investing in specific
instruments, individual financial institutions or maturities.  With the
following exceptions no more than 50% of the city's total investment
portfolio will be invested in a single security type or with a single
financial institution:










   (A)   United States Treasury Securities;










   (B)   United States Government Agency Securities and
Instrumentalities of Government Sponsored Corporations, the principal and
interest of which are unconditionally guaranteed by the United States;










   (C)   Fully Collateralized Certificate of Deposit; and










   (D)   State Treasury Asset Reserve of Ohio. (Ord. 2973, passed
4-11-95)









32.34  MAXIMUM MATURITIES.




   To the extent possible, the city will attempt to match its investments
with anticipated cash flow requirements.  Unless matched to a specific cash
flow requirement, the city will not directly invest in securities maturing
more than two years from the date of purchase.





(Ord. 2973, passed 4-11-95)









32.35  COMPETITIVE BIDDING.




   (A)   The purpose of competitive bidding is to strengthen the
investment program in terms of level and consistency of performance.  All
sales of securities will be bid competitively to the extent practical and all
investments will be placed with vendors yielding the highest returns to the
city.  The right is reserved to reject the bid yielding the highest rate of
return on any investment if inconsistent with the city investment strategy,
i.e., maturity, risk, liquidity, etc.










   (B)   Price and rate rotations on all trades may be obtained from
sources within and outside the city.  In the case of the sale of securities
or the purchase of securities where all other factors are considered by the
Finance Director to be equal, placement will be made in favor of the
institution situated within the city if two bids or more are the same.





(Ord. 2973, passed 4-11-95)









32.36  LIABILITY.




   The City Manager and Finance Director acting in accordance with written
procedures and this investment policy and exercising due diligence shall be
relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security's credit risk
or market price changes, provided deviations from expectations are reported
in a timely fashion and appropriate action is taken to control adverse
developments.





(Ord. 2973, passed 4-11-95)









32.37  ETHICS AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST.




   Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain
from activity that could conflict with proper execution of the investment
program, or which could impair their ability to make impartial investment
decisions. Employees and investment officials shall disclose to the City
Manager any material financial interests in financial institutions that
conduct business with the city, and they shall further disclose any large
personal financial/investment positions that could be related to the
performance of the city's portfolio.  Employees and officers shall
subordinate their personal investment transactions to those of the city.





(Ord. 2973, passed 4-11-95)









32.38  REPORTING.




   The Finance Director is charged with reporting on the investment
activity and earnings in the city's quarterly and annual financial reports.





(Ord. 2973, passed 4-11-95)









32.39  POOLING OF FUNDS.




   (A)   The Finance Director is authorized to pool cash balances from
the several different funds of the city for investment purposes.










   (B)   Interest on invested funds will be distributed to the funds
listed below based on percentages computed from three month moving averages
of balances in each fund.










   (C)   Interest on certificates of deposit will be distributed in the
month received.  Interest from the Star Ohio Investment Pool will be
distributed monthly.  Earnings from future investment vehicles will be
distributed in the month received.










   (D)   Funds receiving distributions will be:





      (1)   General;





      (2)   Law Enforcement and Education;





      (3)   Park;





      (4)   Law Enforcement;





      (5)   Civic Center;





      (6)   Water;





      (7)   Sewer;





      (8)   Pool; and





      (9)   Half Percent.










   (E)   Other funds are deemed to be either no balance funds or funds
supported by one of the funds listed above which receive distributions. Any
funds established by the city required by law to receive earnings will be
included.





(Ord. 2973, passed 4-11-95)
























CHAPTER 33
DEPARTMENTS; BOARDS; AND COMMISSIONS









Section










Department of Finance










33.01   Duties of Director





33.02   Contracts and purchase orders





33.03   Payment of funds





33.04   Payrolls





33.05   Payments on construction type contracts





33.06   Bond of the Finance Director





33.07   Treasury investment authorized





33.08   Allocation of earnings and losses of treasury investment





33.09   Division of income tax




 



Department of Safety



 




33.10   Composition of department





33.11   Division of Police





33.12   Chief of Police





33.13   Bond of Chief of Police





33.14   Division of Fire





33.15   Fire Chief





33.16   Bond of Fire Chief





33.17   Auxiliary police





33.18   Law Enforcement Trust Fund established





33.19   Emergency ambulance services










Department of Service










33.20   Division of Streets





33.21   Division of Refuse Collection





33.22   Division of Water





33.23   Division of Sanitary Sewer





33.24   Division of Building and Zoning Inspection





33.25   Bond of Building and Zoning Inspector





33.26   Transfer of personnel





33.27   Bond of Service Director










Department of Law










33.30   Duties of Director





33.31   Bond counsel





33.32   Bond of the Law Director










Department of Parks and Recreation










33.40   Powers and duties





33.41   Bond of Parks and Recreation Director










City Beautiful Commission










33.45   Establishment of commission





33.46   Objectives of commission





33.47   Number of members





33.48   Length of term





33.49   Yearly budget proposal





33.50   Records to be kept










Board of Trustees of the Dayton-Miami Valley Regional Arts and Cultural
District










33.55   Definitions





33.56   Creation; purpose





33.57   Board of trustees





33.58   Powers of the board





33.59   Powers of the district





33.60   Expenses





33.61   Dissolution










Department of Planning and Community Development










33.70   Powers and duties





33.71   Bond of Planning and Community Development Director










Department of Personnel










33.80   Duties





33.81   Bond of Director of Personnel










Board of Water and Sewer Charge Adjustment










33.90   Establishment










Attendance Policy for Boards and Commissions










33.100   Establishment, effect of policy





33.101   Notice of meetings





33.102   Unexcused absences










Municipal Recreation Board










33.110   Objectives





33.111   Meetings; quorum





33.112   Officers





33.113   Capacity of board










Business Advisory Council










33.120   Establishment





33.121   Objectives





33.122   Membership; compensation





33.123   Terms





33.124   Rules; officers










Technology Advisory Group










33.130   Establishment





33.131   Objectives





33.132   Membership; compensation





33.133   Terms





33.134   Rules; officers










Independence Day Festival Committee










33.135   Establishment





33.136   Objectives





33.137   Membership; compensation





33.138   Terms




 




DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE




 



33.01  DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.




   The Department of Finance shall be under the direction of a Director of
Finance, who shall be responsible to the City Manager. The Director of
Finance shall perform the following duties:










   (A)   Keep in proper books a full and accurate record of all moneys
received and disbursed on behalf of the city and of all moneys due to and
from the city upon contracts and orders upon which the city is obligated and
otherwise.










   (B)   Have custody of all moneys paid to the city, when received by
him, and to disburse all city moneys in accordance with the Charter and
ordinances, signing all warrants upon the city treasury in making the
disbursements.










   (C)   Render a monthly report to the City Manager and to Council
reflecting the  financial condition of the city, showing monthly balances of
all appropriations and quarterly receipts in all funds.










   (D)   Certify that funds are available according to law to pay
moneys provided by all contracts, agreements or other obligations for the
expenditure of city funds, and no contract, agreement or other obligation
shall be valid until so certified.










   (E)   Make payment of the interest and principal on the bonded debt
when due, and keep accurate records of the debt and of the payments thereon.










   (F)   Prepare the city payrolls.










   (G)   Administer all employee pension and benefit funds, receiving
the funds, acting as custodian thereof and making disbursements therefrom,
signing warrants and checks for the purposes, according to law.










   (H)   Enter into contracts with legal depositories for the deposit
of all funds of the city with depositories; rent safe deposit boxes or
otherwise provide for the safekeeping of securities and other documents for
payment of money to the city, and maintain custody of all documents
evidencing investments of the city and of pension and benefit funds of city
employees.










   (I)   Render invoices for water consumption and sanitary sewer rents
to purchasers, collect, and deposit moneys from consumers in payment for
water consumption and sanitary sewer rents.  Render such reports of
receipts, deposits, and balances as determined to be necessary for proper
accounting records.  The above invoices and records shall be based on
records provided by the Department of Service.  Submit quarterly report to
Service Director of total gallons of water registered for revenue.










   (J)   Prepare and submit reports as may be required by law.










   (K)   Assist the City Manager in the preparation of the annual
budget.










   (L)   Perform such other duties as the City Manager may prescribe.





('70 Code, § 135.01; amend. Ord. 2154, passed 8-28-79; amend. Ord. 2291,
passed 10-27-81)









33.02  CONTRACTS AND PURCHASE ORDERS.




   Every undertaking by the city involving the expenditure of city money
shall be in writing, in the form of a purchase order or of a contract as may
be appropriate, and no officer or employee of the city shall have authority
to enter into any oral agreement involving the expenditure of money.  The
City Manager shall sign all contracts on behalf of the city and he or those
designated by him shall sign all purchase orders. The Finance Director shall
attach to each contract a certificate signed by the Finance Director that the
estimated amount of money required to meet the obligation of the city by the
contract has been lawfully appropriated and in the city treasury or in the
process of collection to the credit of the fund involved, free from any prior
encumbrance.  In the case of a contract to continue beyond any current year
and to involve expenditures of money in future years, the Director of Finance
shall only certify as to the money estimated to be paid by the city
thereunder during the current year. 
('70 Code, § 135.02; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.03  PAYMENT OF FUNDS.




   The Finance Director shall require invoices to be submitted to him with
written certificate thereon by the head of the department and division of the
city concerned to the effect that the goods or services for which the invoice
is rendered have been delivered or performed in the manner, quantity and
quality specified, prior to the issuance of the city's warrant in payment
thereof, whereupon the city's warrant shall be promptly issued in payment. 
('70 Code, § 135.03; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.04  PAYROLLS.




   (A)   Department heads shall be responsible to see that time sheets
or time cards with their verification thereon are submitted to the Finance
Director at a time and in a form as prescribed by the Finance Director.










   (B)   Payrolls shall be submitted to the City Manager for approval,
when prepared by the Finance Director and, upon the City Manager's approval
thereof, the Director shall issue his warrants in payment thereof when due. 
It shall not be necessary for the Director to encumber in advance or to
certify as to the availability of funds appropriated for personal services,
except those obtained on a contractual basis, provided that upon issuance of
the warrants the Director shall immediately cause the appropriate funds to be
encumbered to the extent of the warrants issued. 
('70 Code, § 135.04; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.05  PAYMENTS ON CONSTRUCTION TYPE  CONTRACTS.




   Prior to the making of partial or final payments on construction type
contracts, the City Manager and the City Engineer shall certify that the
conditions of the contract for which the payment is to be made have been
complied with.  In the case of partial payments, the payments shall be made
on estimates of the amount and value of the work accomplished; the
certificates or estimates shall include only the amount and value of the work
accomplished and materials used since any preceding estimate; the
certificates or estimates shall further indicate that a greater portion of
the contract has been performed by the contracting party than that which is
represented by the requested partial payment, in addition to any preceding
partial payments.  Upon receiving the certificates, estimates or invoices,
properly certified, the Finance Director shall then issue warrants in
payment. 
('70 Code, § 135.05; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.06  BOND OF THE FINANCE DIRECTOR.




   The Finance Director shall furnish bond, as required by the Charter, in
the sum of $50,000, the premium for which shall be paid by the city.  The
bond shall be for the protection of the city and the public against loss due
to acts or omissions of the Finance Director.
('70 Code, § 135.06; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.07  TREASURY INVESTMENT AUTHORIZED.




   Whenever there are moneys in the treasury of the city which will not be
required to be used for a period of 6 months or more, the moneys may, in lieu
of being deposited in a bank or banks, be invested by the Director of Finance
in accordance with the provisions of R.C. §§ 731.56 through 731.59. 
Investments so purchased shall be sold in accordance with R.C. § 731.57.





('70 Code, § 135.07)









33.08  ALLOCATION OF EARNINGS AND LOSSES OF TREASURY INVESTMENT.




   (A)   Premiums and discounts on treasury investment purchases shall
be credited to or charged against and amortized over the period from purchase
to date of maturity of the security.  Gains and losses in the sale of
treasury investment securities shall be credited to or paid from interest.










   (B)   Net interest realized by the treasury investment account shall
be distributed quarterly as follows: interest on bonds and special assessment
funds shall be paid to the bond retirement fund; the interest on any fund
created by the terms of any trust, will or agreement, which by the terms of
the instrument must be credited to the fund, shall be paid to each of the
respective funds; the balance of the interest from any fund or security held
by the treasury investment account shall be paid to the general fund.










   (C)   For the purpose of distributing interest, each fund shall be
considered as having, during the period for which distribution is to be made,
an average daily balance in the treasury investment account equal to the
average of the balances each fund has in such account on the first day of
each month during the period for which distribution is to be made. 
('70 Code, § 135.08)









33.09  DIVISION OF INCOME TAX.




   The Division of Income Tax shall be under the direction of the Finance
Director.  The Division shall perform the following functions:










   (A)   See that all persons required by the income tax ordinance file
necessary returns, and that all income tax moneys due the city are collected
when due and deposited.










   (B)   Render reports of total receipts, deposits and balances to the
Finance Director as determined by him to be necessary for his records.










   (C)   Keep accurate records of all accounts and make sure that all
information concerning individual and business returns is kept in strictest
confidence.










   (D)   Analyze any returns which are questionable by obtaining
information needed to determine accuracy of such returns as provided for in
the income tax ordinance and resolution, or subsequent amendments thereto. 
Refer unresolved cases to the Income Tax Board of Review, along with
sufficient information for them to reach a decision.










   (E)   To administer the income tax ordinance and resolution and all
subsequent amendments thereto.










   (F)   To perform other duties pertaining to the Division of Income
Tax as the City Manager may direct. 
('70 Code, § 145.01; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)










DEPARTMENT OF SAFETY









33.10  COMPOSITION OF DEPARTMENT.




   The Department of Safety shall be under the direction of the Safety
Director.  It shall be composed of the Division of Police and Division of
Fire, and any other divisions as may hereafter be established. 
('70 Code, § 137.01)









33.11  DIVISION OF POLICE.




   The Division of Police shall perform the following duties in providing
police services to the city:










   (A)   Be responsible for the preservation of the public peace and
order, the prevention and detection of crime, the apprehension of offenders
of law and ordinances, the protection of persons and property and the
enforcement of the criminal laws of the United States and of this state and
the ordinances of the city.










   (B)   Perform such other duties as the City Manager may prescribe.





('70 Code, § 137.02; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.12  CHIEF OF POLICE.




   The Chief of Police shall be in charge of the operation of the Division
of Police and of the personnel thereof, and shall be responsible to the
Safety Director.  He shall perform the following duties:










   (A)   Formulate and recommend to the Safety Director for approval
policies, procedures, rules and regulations for the government and operation
of the Division of Police and its personnel.










   (B)   Be responsible for the performance by the Division of Police,
of the duties assigned to it by the Charter, by the law, by this
administrative code and by the Safety Director.










   (C)   Have control of the assignment of all police personnel.










   (D)   Provide for the training and instruction of all personnel in
the Division of Police.










   (E)   Act as liaison officer in the cooperation by the city with
other law enforcement agencies.










   (F)   Perform any other duties as the City Manager may prescribe to
the Safety Director. 
('70 Code, § 137.03; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)










33.13  BOND OF CHIEF OF POLICE.




   The Chief of Police shall furnish bond in the amount of $10,000, the
premium for which shall be paid by the city.  The bond shall be for the
protection of the city and the public against loss due to the acts or
omissions of the Chief of Police. 
('70 Code, § 137.04; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.14  DIVISION OF FIRE.




   The Division of Fire shall perform the following duties in providing
fire and ambulance services to the city:










   (A)   Be responsible for the prevention and detection of fire, and
the protection of persons and property where fires or other disasters are
involved.










   (B)   Be responsible for providing ambulance services.










   (C)   Perform such other duties as the City Manager may prescribe.





('70 Code, § 137.05; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.15  FIRE CHIEF.




   The Fire Chief shall be in charge of the operation of the Division of
Fire and of the personnel thereof, and shall be responsible to the Safety
Director.  He shall perform the following duties:










   (A)   Formulate  and recommend to the Safety Director for approval,
policies, procedures, rules and regulations for the government and operation
of the Division of Fire and its personnel.










   (B)   Be responsible for the performance by the Division of Fire of
the duties assigned to it by the Charter, by the law, by this title and by
the Safety Director.










   (C)   Have control of the assignment of all fire officers and
equipment.










   (D)   Provide for the training and instruction of all firemen and
officers.










   (E)   Act as liaison officer in the cooperation by the city with
other fire agencies.










   (F)   Perform the other duties as the City Manager may prescribe to
the Safety Director. 
('70 Code, § 137.06; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.16  BOND OF FIRE CHIEF.




   The Fire Chief shall furnish bond in the amount of $10,000, the premium
for which shall be paid by the city.  The bond shall be for the protection
of the city and the public against loss due to the acts or omissions of the
Fire Chief. 
('70 Code, § 137.07; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.17  AUXILIARY POLICE.




   (A)   Organization.





      (1)   A volunteer department to be hereafter known as the West
Carrollton Auxiliary Police Department is hereby established and organized
pursuant to R.C. § 737.051.  The primary purpose of this department shall
be to assist the police department in their regular and special duties.





      (2)   All members shall serve on a volunteer basis and the
compensation for the service shall be $1 per year, payable annually.










   (B)   Membership.





      (1)   The membership shall be limited to 12 regular (active)
members and 6 standby (inactive) members.





      (2)   Applications for membership shall be forwarded to the
police chief who shall check the applicant and recommend approval or
disapproval to the City Manager.  The police chief will appoint and remove
members with the advice and consent of the City Manager.





      (3)   Auxiliary police do not have the right to appeal in case
of removal or discharge.





      (4)   Applicants shall complete the standard city employee
application form.





      (5)   Applicants must pass a physical given by the city doctor.





      (6)   All new members shall be required to complete the state
approved police course as soon as practical after acceptance. Attendance at
training courses sponsored by the police department is mandatory.





      (7)   Resignation of any member shall become effective upon
written notice to the police chief and return of the badges, patches,
uniforms and equipment that were issued to him.





      (8)   Any auxiliary policeman may request being placed on
temporary inactive status due to personal or business reasons. The request
must be in writing and must be approved by the police chief.










   (C)   Uniforms and equipment.





      (1)   Any uniforms or equipment purchased from the auxiliary
organization funds shall become the property of the police department.





      (2)   Uniforms and equipment will be prescribed, replaced,
furnished by and will remain the property of the city.





      (3)   Uniforms will be furnished to active members only.










   (D)   Auxiliary duty rules.





      (1)   Auxiliary members shall be governed by rules and
regulations of the police department.





      (2)   Any member on regular duty shall be under orders of the
regular police officer on duty.





      (3)   A member on cruiser duty will remain in the car unless
otherwise ordered by the regular officer, except as otherwise covered under
rules and regulations of the police department.





      (4)   A member will drive a cruiser only on orders of or by
permission of a regular officer, and the cruiser will be driven in the manner
prescribed by the state and city ordinances for emergency vehicles.  The
dispatcher will be informed when an auxiliary policeman is driving a cruiser.





      (5)   A member on regular duty will wear the complete uniform
in a neat and proper manner.  A member on emergency duty will wear his badge
and should wear the cap, if possible.





      (6)   An auxiliary detail on sports, parade or other special
duty will be under orders of the police chief or the regular officer on duty.










   (E)   Auxiliary police fund.





      (1)   An auxiliary police fund may be maintained by the
organization.





      (2)   The auxiliary police may accept donations to the
aforementioned fund for services performed, but may in no instance solicit
for funds for the organization.










   (F)   Auxiliary off-duty rules.





      (1)   A member shall not use his badge, wear the uniform or
engage in auxiliary work when not on regular, special or emergency duty.





      (2)   When reporting for any type of duty, the member shall
drive any personal or privately owned vehicle in the normal and lawful
manner, and not as an emergency vehicle.





      (3)   When reporting for any type of duty, the member shall
report to the regular officer or dispatcher and sign the time card, and his
presence for duty shall be noted.










   (G)   Auxiliary rules of disciplinary action.  Members shall be
governed by the same rules as regular police officers, except they do not
have the right to appeal, as specified in division (B) (3) of this section.










   (H)   Meetings.





      (1)   The regular meetings of the organization shall be set by
the Police Chief.





      (2)   Any active member who shall absent himself from 3
consecutive regular meetings without acceptable cause shall be discharged
from the organization.










   (I)   Officers.





      (1)   The officers of the auxiliary shall be the president and
secretary-treasurer.





      (2)   The president and secretary-treasurer shall be appointed
by the Police Chief.
('70 Code, § 137.08; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.18  LAW ENFORCEMENT TRUST FUND  ESTABLISHED.




   (A)   The Finance Director is hereby directed to establish a Law
Enforcement Trust Fund in the records of the city.










   (B)   All contraband proceeds shall be deposited in the Law
Enforcement Trust Fund established.










   (C)   Such contraband funds shall be used only for law enforcement
purposes as appropriated by the City Council.
(Ord. 2693, passed 1-10-89)









33.19  EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICES.




   (A)   The following fees are hereby established to be charged for
emergency ambulance services provided by the city:










      (1)   For Residents and Non-Residents of the City of West
Carrollton, Ohio:




 


Basic Life Support Service (BLS)

 

$ 650.00




Advanced Life Support  (ALS-1)

 

$ 850.00




Advanced Life Support Service (ALS-2)

 

$ 1050.00




Mileage (per mile to the hospital)

 

$  15.00










      (2)   With respect to charges established for city residents,
the City of West Carrollton shall accept the assignment of third party
benefits paid on behalf of the patient as the usual and customary charge for
the service provided as payment in full for services rendered.  City
residents shall not be responsible for any out-of-pocket expenses as a result
of the taxpayer supported income tax. For purposes of this section, a West
Carrollton resident shall be any person whose principal place of residence is
located within the City of West Carrollton at the time the service is
rendered.





         (Ord. 3540.  Passed 12-10-13.)










   (B)   The following policies are hereby established by this Council
to govern the collection procedures to be used by the city in recovering said
charges:





      (1)   EMT/Paramedic personnel will make reasonable efforts to
obtain the address and insurance information of all recipients of emergency
ambulance services.





      (2)   All recipients of emergency ambulance services will be
sent an informational letter explaining the charges established herein and 
requesting additional insurance information as necessary.





      (3)   Claims will be filed with recipients' insurance carriers
for reimbursement of charges.





      (4)   Recipients will be furnished a statement showing
insurance payment collected.





      (5)   Under no circumstances will threats of litigation be
issued or suits be filed by the municipality in an effort to collect the
charges established herein, without prior approval of Council.





         (Ord. 3085, passed 2-24-98)










DEPARTMENT OF SERVICE









33.20  DIVISION OF STREETS.




   The Division of Streets shall be under the direction of the Service
Director.  The Division shall perform the following functions:










   (A)   Maintain, repair, construct, improve and extend the public
streets of the city.










   (B)   Maintain, repair, construct, improve and extend the storm
sewer systems of the city.










   (C)   Apply and maintain all traffic control signals, signs and
markings upon the streets and curbs of the city.










   (D)   Maintain maps and records of the streets, storm sewers,
buildings and premises which may be necessary to properly operate the
department.










   (E)   Perform such other duties as the City Manager may prescribe to
the Service Director.
('70 Code, § 139.01; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.21  DIVISION OF REFUSE COLLECTION.




   The Division of Refuse Collection shall be under the direction of the
Service Director.  The Division shall perform the following functions:










   (A)   Collect, remove and dispose of garbage, brush, trimmings,
refuse and trash from residences and other places within the city in
accordance with Chapter 53, or subsequent amendments thereto.










   (B)   Perform such other duties as the City Manager may prescribe to
the Service Director. 
(Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.22  DIVISION OF WATER.




   The Division of Water shall be under the direction of the Service
Director.  The Division shall perform the following functions:










   (A)   Operate, maintain and repair the water works system of the
city, including the buildings used by the same, the wells, distribution
lines, meters, tanks and fire hydrants; and perform the distribution of water
through the system as pumped by the city from its wells and as purchased from
other agencies, to the residences, hydrants and other places where water is
used within the city.










   (B)   Maintain accurate records of water pumped for annual state
reports.










   (C)   Operate and maintain the water system in accordance with state
requirements and maintain necessary records of operation.










   (D)   Maintain proper maps of the water distribution system of the
city.










   (E)   Perform other duties as the City Manager may prescribe to the
Service Director. 
('70 Code, § 139.02; amend. Ord. 2154, passed 8-28-79; amend. Ord. 2291,
passed 10-27-81)









33.23  DIVISION OF SANITARY SEWER.




   The Division of Sanitary Sewer shall be under the direction of the
Service Director.  The Division shall perform the following duties:










   (A)   Operate, maintain and repair the sanitary sewer system of the
city, including the buildings used by the same and the water pollution
control facilities.










   (B)   Operate and maintain the water pollution control facilities in
accordance with state requirements and maintain necessary records of
operation.










   (C)   Maintain proper maps of the sanitary sewer system of the city.










   (D)   Perform other duties pertaining to the sanitary sewer system
as the City Manager may prescribe to the Service Director.





('70 Code, § 139.03; amend. Ord. 2154, passed 8-28-79; amend. Ord. 2291,
passed 10-27-81)









33.24  DIVISION OF BUILDING AND ZONING  INSPECTION.




   The Division of Building and Zoning Inspection shall be under the
direction of the Service Director.  The Building and Zoning Division shall
perform the following duties:










   (A)   Make inspections of buildings and premises, and issue permits
for the construction, alteration and demolition of buildings pursuant to the
building code of the city and/or state, individually and with the assistance
of other agencies with whom the city may now or hereafter contract to perform
inspection services.










   (B)   Receive applications for permits, review proposed plans for
buildings and determine compliance of prepared plans with uses permitted
under the zoning ordinance of the city.  Issue, upon approval by the Service
Director, permits under the zoning ordinance upon applications complying with
the ordinance.  Make inspections of premises and buildings for the purpose
of enforcing compliance with the zoning ordinance and make reports of
violations thereof to the Service Director.










   (C)   Maintain accurate records of new sewer taps and render such
records to the Finance Department for billing.










   (D)   Issue zoning certificates as required by zoning ordinances,
upon approval of the Service Director.










   (E)   Perform such other duties pertaining to the Division of
Building and Zoning Inspection as the City Manager may prescribe to the
Service Director. 
('70 Code, § 139.04; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.25  BOND OF BUILDING AND ZONING INSPECTOR.




   The Building and Zoning Inspector shall furnish bond in accordance with
the Charter in the amount of $5,000, the premium for which shall be paid by
the city.  The bond shall be for the protection of the city and the public
against loss due to the acts or omissions of the Building and Zoning
Inspector. 
('70 Code, § 139.05; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.26  TRANSFER OF PERSONNEL.




   The Service Director may temporarily transfer employees from one
division under his jurisdiction to another division under his jurisdiction to
expedite the work of a particular division or to meet increased duties of a
seasonal, emergency or periodic nature which may occur. 
('70 Code, § 139.06; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.27  BOND OF SERVICE DIRECTOR.




   The Service Director shall furnish bond in accordance with the Charter
in the amount of $10,000, the premium for which shall be paid by the city. 
The bond shall be for the protection of the city and the public against loss
due to the acts or omissions of the Service Director. 
('70 Code, § 139.07; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)










DEPARTMENT OF LAW









33.30  DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.




   The Department of Law shall be under the direction of the Law Director
and responsible to Council.  He shall perform the following duties:










   (A)   Attend all regular meetings of Council and special meetings of
Council committees, boards and commissions, when requested.










   (B)   Advise and render opinions to Council, to the City Manager, to
boards and commissions and to the administrative officers and departments on
all matters of law involving the city and Council members, officers and
departments in the performance of their official duties.










   (C)   Draft or approve as to form, all ordinances, contracts,
resolutions and other documents of a legal nature to be made and entered into
by the city.










   (D)   Represent the city before all courts sitting within the state
in actions at law in which the city is a party.










   (E)   Assist in the preparation of documents and transcripts for the
issuance of bonds and notes of the city.










   (F)   Prosecute in the Mayor's court and other courts of
jurisdiction when necessary, all cases based on affidavits filed therein by
the police division and by other city officials, alleging violations of city
ordinances and of state laws, and prosecute cases based upon affidavits filed
in court by private parties as appear to the Law Director to be meritorious.










   (G)   The Law Director may, with the approval of Council, retain the
services of an assistant and/or trial counsel to perform the duties herein
required to be performed by the Law Director.










   (H)   The Law Director shall perform such other duties consistent
with his office as may be required by the Charter, by ordinance or resolution
of the Council, or by the laws of the state unless otherwise provided by
ordinance of Council. 
('70 Code, § 141.01; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.31  BOND COUNSEL.




   Whenever Council proposes to issue bonds or notes to finance public
improvements, or for any other purpose authorized by the laws of the state,
the Law Director may, upon Council approval, engage the services of any firm
of recognized bond attorneys to assist the Law Director in causing the bonds
and notes to be issued and to render or furnish approving opinions thereon to
purchasers of bonds and notes. 
('70 Code, § 141.02; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.32  BOND OF THE LAW DIRECTOR.




   The Law Director shall furnish bond as required by the Charter, in the
amount of $5,000, the premium for which shall be paid by the city.  The bond
shall be for the protection of the city and the public against loss due to
acts or omissions of the Law Director. 
('70 Code, § 141.03; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)










DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION









33.40  POWERS AND DUTIES.




   The Department of Parks and Recreation shall be under the direction of
the Parks and Recreation Director who shall be responsible to the City
Manager.  The Parks and Recreation Director shall perform the following
duties:










   (A)   Develop and implement a variety of recreation programs and
activities for leisure time enjoyment.










   (B)   Maintain and repair city buildings and grounds.










   (C)   Operate and maintain the swimming pool.










   (D)   Develop plans and implement improvements in the city parks
system.










   (E)   Perform such other duties as the City Manager may prescribe to
the Parks and Recreation Director. 
(Ord. 1777, passed 4-10-73; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.41  BOND OF PARKS AND RECREATION DIRECTOR.




   The Parks and Recreation Director shall furnish bond, as required by
the Charter, in the amount of $10,000, the premium for which shall be paid by
the city.  The bond shall be for the protection of the city and the public
against loss due to acts or omissions of the Parks and Recreation Director. 
(Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)





Cross-reference:





   See Municipal Recreation Board, §§ 33.110 through 33.113










CITY BEAUTIFUL COMMISSION









33.45  ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.




   A city beautiful commission is established for the city.
(Ord. 1707, passed 11-23-71)









33.46  OBJECTIVES OF COMMISSION.




   The objectives of this commission shall be as follows:










   (A)   To make specific recommendations to Council for improvements
in the appearance of streets, parks, buildings and other property owned or
controlled by the city.










   (B)   To sponsor, promote, coordinate and otherwise encourage both
individual and collective beautification efforts by business, industry and
the general citizenry.










   (C)   To generate city-wide interest, pride and action related to
beautification through contests, awards and similar programs.





(Ord. 1707, passed 11-23-71)









33.47  NUMBER OF MEMBERS.




   The City Beautiful Commission shall consist of fifteen (15) members who
shall be residents of the City, or persons who work within the City, and
shall be appointed by the Council in such a manner as to provide broad
geographical representation.  Members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation.





(Ord.  3191.  Passed 10-23-01.)









33.48  LENGTH OF TERM.




   All members of the commission shall serve for a term of 2 years except
that 7 members of the commission first appointed shall serve for one year in
order to provide for overlapping of terms.  The terms of those members first
appointed shall be effective January 1, 1972, and the appointment of new
members to the commission shall be made effective on January 1st of each year
thereafter. 





(Ord. 1707, passed 11-23-71)









33.49  YEARLY BUDGET PROPOSAL.




   The city beautiful commission shall annually submit a budget proposal
to the City Manager for funds to carry out its activities for the ensuing
year.  This budget proposal shall be subject to the same review,
modification and approval procedures as other departmental budgets.  All
purchases and expenditures of moneys by the commission shall be according to
rules and regulations adopted by the City Manager and in accordance with
purchasing requirements established for all city departments. 





(Ord. 1707, passed 11-23-71)









33.50  RECORDS TO BE KEPT.




   The city beautiful commission shall adopt its own rules and elect its
own officers annually.  It shall keep current and complete records of its
meetings and activities, and shall present an annual report to the Council on
its yearly activities prior to January 31 of each year.





(Ord. 1707, passed 11-23-71)










BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE DAYTON-MIAMI VALLEY





REGIONAL ARTS AND CULTURAL DISTRICT









33.55  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.










   ARTISTIC OR CULTURAL FACILITY.  Includes, but is not limited to, a
performing arts center, a concert hall, a museum, a living arts center, and
other property, improvements, or facilities used in connection therewith.










   ARTS OR CULTURAL HERITAGE.  Includes, but is not limited to,
literature, theater, music, dance, ballet, painting, sculpture, photography,
motion pictures, architecture, archaeology, history, natural history, and the
natural sciences.










   ARTS OR CULTURAL ORGANIZATION.  Any nonprofit corporation, arts or
cultural council, association, institution, or other organization, no part of
the net earnings of which inures or may lawfully inure to the benefit of any
private shareholder, member, or individual, that provides programs or
activities in areas directly concerned with the arts or cultural heritage.










   BOARD.  The board of trustees of the district.










   DISTRICT.  The Dayton-Miami Valley regional arts and cultural district
created in § 33.56, and includes the territory within the geographical
limits of each member, as the limits may change from time to time.










   DIVISION LINE.  U.S. Route 35 except that the division shall follow
the boundaries of Mad River Township, Village of Riverside, and Village of
New Lebanon which are north of U.S. Route 35.










   MEMBER.  Each political subdivision joining in the creation of the
district, as enumerated in § 33.56.










   NORTHERN MEMBERS.  Those members (excluding the County of Montgomery
and the City of Dayton), all or a majority of the territory which lies north
of the division line.










   SOUTHERN MEMBERS.  Those members (excluding the County of Montgomery,
the City of Dayton, and the City of Kettering), all or a majority of the
territory of which lies south of the division line.





(Res. 20-80, passed 8-12-80)









33.56  CREATION; PURPOSE.




   The County of Montgomery, Ohio, the City of Dayton, Ohio, the City of
Oakwood, Ohio, the City of Kettering, Ohio, the City of Centerville, Ohio,
the City of Trotwood, Ohio, the City of Vandalia, Ohio, and the City of West
Carrollton, Ohio hereby join in creating a regional arts and cultural
district pursuant to the provisions of R.C. Ch. 3381.  The official name of
the district shall be Dayton-Miami Valley regional arts and cultural
district.  The principal office of the district shall be located in Dayton,
Ohio, or in another place in Montgomery County, Ohio as may be selected by
the board.  The purposes of the district shall be to make grants to support
the operating or capital expenses of arts or cultural organizations located
within the district, and to acquire, construct, equip, furnish, repair,
remodel, renovate, enlarge, improve, or administer artistic or cultural
facilities.





(Res. 20-80, passed 8-12-80)









33.57  BOARD OF TRUSTEES.




   (A)   The board shall be composed of 11 trustees who shall serve
without compensation, provided that with the approval of the board, trustees
may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties.










   (B)   The city commission of the City of Dayton shall appoint three
trustees; the board of county commissioners of the County of Montgomery shall
appoint three trustees; the city council of Kettering shall appoint one
trustee; and one trustee shall be appointed by the southern members and one
trustee shall be appointed by the northern members, all in accordance with
division (C) below.










   (C)   The appointment of trustees by the southern members and the
northern members shall be accomplished by rotating the appointment power as
provided in this paragraph.  With respect to the southern members, initially
the legislative authority of the City of Centerville shall appoint one
trustee.  Thereafter, the appointment power shall rotate among the
legislative authorities of the southern members in alphabetical order.  With
respect to the northern members, initially the legislative authority of the
City of Trotwood shall appoint one trustee.  Thereafter, the appointment
power shall rotate among the legislative authorities of the northern members
in alphabetical order.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the legislative
authority of any southern member or northern member may, by written notice to
the board given at least 90 days prior to the commencement of a trustee term
for which the member has the appointment power, waive the right of the member
to appoint the trustee for such term, whereupon the appointment power shall
vest in the member next having the appointment power as herein provided.










   (D)   In addition to the trustees appointed as stated above, there
shall be two trustees appointed in the following manner, which trustees shall
be persons who devote a major portion of their time to practicing,
performing, or teaching any of the arts or who are professional
administrators in any field of the arts or cultural heritage.  The city
commission of the City of Dayton and the board of county commissioners of the
County of Montgomery shall each propose one of such trustees for
consideration by the other four members which have appointed or have the
power to appoint trustees at such time under division (B) above, and each
such proposed trustee shall be appointed by the proposer only if the proposed
trustee is approved, prior to the appointment, by at least two of the other
members.










   (E)   The initially appointed trustees shall serve staggered terms
of one, two, and three years as follows:  of the trustees appointed by the
city commission of the City of Dayton, one shall serve a term of one year and
two shall serve terms of two years; of the trustees appointed by the board of
county commissioners of the County of Montgomery, one shall serve a term of
one year and two shall serve terms of two years; and the trustees appointed
by Kettering, the southern members and the northern members shall each serve
terms of three years.  The trustees initially appointed in accordance with
division (D) above shall serve a term of one year.  Thereafter, each trustee
shall serve a term of three years, except that any person appointed to fill a
vacancy shall be appointed only to the unexpired term.  Any appointed
trustee is eligible for reappointment.  The initial trustees shall be
appointed within 60 days after the creation of the district by all of the
members.  The term of each trustee of the board shall be deemed to run from
the date of his appointment. The legislative authority of each member may at
any time remove any trustee appointed by the legislative authority.










   (F)   All trustees of the board shall be persons who are qualified
electors in the district's territory and who have broad knowledge and
experience in the arts and cultural heritage.  Each legislative authority
with appointing power shall consider for appointment as trustees of the
board, but need not appoint, such persons as are nominated by area art
councils, as defined in R.C. § 757.03, located within the district, provided
that all such persons shall meet the qualifications specified in the first
sentence of this division (F).










   (G)   If any trustee resigns, expires, becomes disqualified, or is
removed from office, the legislative authority of the member which appointed
the trustee shall promptly appoint a person meeting the requirements of this
section to fill the vacancy.










   (H)   Upon the expiration of his term, a trustee shall remain in
office until a successor trustee is selected by the appropriate legislative
authority.










   (I)   A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum, the
affirmative vote of which is necessary for any action taken by the
district.  No vacancy in the board shall impair the rights of a quorum to
exercise all rights and perform all the duties of the district.










   (J)   Each trustee of the board, before entering upon his official
duties, shall take and subscribe to an oath or affirmation that he will
honestly, faithfully, and impartially perform the duties of his office.










   (K)   After each trustee of the board has taken the oath required by
this section the board shall meet and organize by electing one of its
trustees as president and another as vice-president, who shall hold their
respective offices until the next annual meeting of the board.  At each
annual meeting thereafter the board shall elect from its membership a
president and a vice-president who shall serve for a term of one year.










   (L)   The board shall appoint and fix the compensation of an
executive director, who shall be the fiscal officer and shall not be a
trustee of the board and who shall serve at the pleasure of the board.





(Res. 20-80, passed 8-12-80)









33.58  POWERS OF THE BOARD.




   All the power and authority granted to the district shall be vested in
and exercised by the board, which shall manage and conduct the affairs of the
district.  The board shall, within the limitations of R.C. Ch. 3381, provide
by rules the procedure for its actions, the manner of selection of its
executive director, and other employees, their titles, terms of office,
compensation, duties, number, and qualifications, and any other lawful
subject necessary or desirable to the operation and administration of the
district and the exercise of the powers granted to it. 
(Res. 20-80, passed 8-12-80)









33.59  POWERS OF THE DISTRICT.




   Upon the creation of the district and upon the qualifying of the board
and the election of a president and vice-president, the district shall
exercise in its own name all the rights, powers, and duties vested in and
confirmed upon it by R.C. Ch. 3381. 





(Res. 20-80, passed 8-12-80)









33.60  EXPENSES.




   (A)   On or before November 1 of each year, the district shall adopt
and transmit to each member a budget for the following calendar year.  The
budget shall determine the estimated operating expenses of the district to be
borne by the members (local expenses) during the calendar year.  Revenues
received by the district from any tax levied pursuant to R.C. § 3381.16
shall be applied to payment of local expenses before apportionment of local
expenses among members.  Until any tax is levied, local expenses in any
calendar year to be borne by the members shall not exceed $50,000.










   (B)   For any calendar year, local expenses shall be borne in the
proportions set forth herein by the members as have appointed or have the
power to appoint, pursuant to § 33.57 (B), trustees who will serve during
the calendar year.  Each of the members shall pay to the district local
expenses up to a maximum of $.02 per capita of the population of the member,
provided that for purposes of this sentence the population of Montgomery
County shall be deemed to be the same as the population of the City of
Dayton.  Any additional amount of local expenses shall be borne and paid
equally by the City of Dayton and the County of Montgomery if, and only to
the extent, provided in a resolution of the board of trustees adopted with
the affirmative vote of the six trustees appointed by the City of Dayton and
the County of Montgomery pursuant to § 33.57 (B).  All payments under this
paragraph shall be made quarterly on or before January 1, April 1, July 1,
and October 1 of each year.  For the purposes of this paragraph, a member
shall not be deemed to have the power to appoint a trustee if it has waived
the power pursuant to § 33.57 (D).










   (C)   Each member of the district may determine to provide its share
of local expenses from any funds authorized by law to be used for these
purposes.










   (D)   For the calendar year 1980, each member shall pay to the
district an amount of money agreed upon between the district and the
members.  The payments shall be made in equal installments on January 2, and
July 1, 1980.










   (E)   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no member
shall be obligated to bear any local expenses for any calendar year after
calendar year 1982. 
(Res. 20-80, passed 8-12-80)









33.61  DISSOLUTION.




   The district may be terminated and dissolved at any time by the
adoption of a resolution of termination and dissolution by either the
legislative authority of any member having a population of at least 55,000,
or the board and by the legislative authority of each member. The resolution
of termination and dissolution shall fix a date on which the district shall
be terminated and shall become effective upon the filing of a copy of each
resolution or ordinance adopting the resolution with the clerk of the
legislative authority of each member. In addition, the district shall
automatically terminate on the tenth anniversary of its creation unless by
that date a tax levy shall have been authorized by the qualified electors
pursuant to R.C. § 3381.16 (A) or 3381.16 (B).  Before any termination
date, the district shall proceed to wind up its affairs, fulfill or discharge
its contracts, collect its assets, sell its assets for cash at public or
private sale, discharge or pay its liabilities, make distributions to arts or
cultural organizations to the extent practicable, and do all other acts
appropriate to liquidate its business.  On the termination date, the
district, after paying or adequately providing for the payment of its
liabilities, shall distribute the remaining assets of the district (if any)
to the members in such a manner as may be agreed upon by the members.  After
the termination date, the district, its trustees, officers, and members may
continue to function for the purpose of winding up the affairs of the
district in the same manner as if the termination had not taken place.  In
so doing, the trustees shall not be deemed to be trustees for the assets of
the district and title to the assets shall remain in the district until
transferred by it. Until the winding up of the affairs of the district is
completed, this resolution and the bylaws of the district shall continue in
full force and effect.





(Res. 20-80, passed 8-12-80; Am. Res. 12-85, passed 10-8-85)










DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT









33.70  POWERS AND DUTIES.




   The Department of Planning and Community Development shall be under the
direction of the Director of Planning and Community Development who shall be
responsible to the City Manager.  The Director of Planning and Community
Development shall perform the following duties:










   (A)   Develop and maintain an up-to-date Comprehensive Plan for the
city including associated documents such as the zoning code and zoning map,
housing data, existing land use data, transportation plan and land use plan.










   (B)   Develop and maintain an up-to-date subdivision ordinance and
enforce the development standards set forth therein.










   (C)   Develop and implement various programs to foster economic
development.










   (D)   Develop and implement various community development programs
to improve the quality of life in the city including such programs as
downtown revitalization, housing rehabilitation, and the community
development block grant program.










   (E)   Develop and maintain an up-to-date sign code.










   (F)   Perform such other duties as the City Manager may prescribe to
the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
(Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.71  BOND OF PLANNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.




   The Director of Planning and Community Development shall furnish bond,
as required by the Charter, in the amount of $10,000, the premium for which
shall be paid by the city.  The bond shall be for the protection of the city
and the public against loss due to acts or omissions of the Director of
Planning and Community Development.
(Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)










DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL









33.80  DUTIES.




   The Department of Personnel shall be under the direction of the
Personnel Director who shall be responsible to the City Manager.  The
Personnel Director shall perform the following duties:










   (A)   Establish and maintain a merit system as required by the
Charter and carry out such other personnel functions as directed by the
Charter.










   (B)   Establish and maintain an up-to-date personnel rules and
regulations, including a classification and pay plan.










   (C)   Perform such other duties as the City Manager may prescribe to
the Personnel Director. 
(Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)









33.81  BOND OF DIRECTOR OF PERSONNEL.




   The Personnel Director shall furnish bond, as required by the Charter,
in the amount of $10,000, the premium for which shall be paid by the city. 
The bond shall be for the protection of the city and the public against loss
due to acts or omissions of the Personnel Director. 
(Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81)










BOARD OF WATER AND SEWER CHARGE ADJUSTMENT









33.90  ESTABLISHMENT.




   For provisions regarding the Board of Water and Sewer Charge
Adjustment, see § 50.30.










ATTENDANCE POLICY FOR BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS









33.100  ESTABLISHMENT, EFFECT OF POLICY.




   (A)   The following attendance policy is hereby adopted and made
applicable to any board or commission of the city which has not heretofore
adopted an attendance policy.  This policy shall in no way inhibit a board
or commission which has been granted the power or authority to adopt its own
rules and regulations from adopting its own attendance policy, so long as the
policy adopted is in substantial compliance with the policy stated herein.










   (B)   Boards and commissions which have previously adopted rules and
regulations shall submit a copy of their rules and regulations and any
amendments thereto to the City Manager in order to have those rules and
regulations recognized for the purposes of this subchapter.










   (C)   The City Manager shall provide a copy of this subchapter to
all present members of boards and commissions and to all members appointed
subsequent to its adoption.





(Res. 3-83, passed 1-11-83)









33.101  NOTICE OF MEETINGS.




   (A)   Each board or commission which holds regular meetings shall
publish a list of its regular meeting dates for the current calendar year and
shall provide the list to each of its members no later than January 10 of
each calendar year.  Failure to publish the list does not excuse attendance
at any regular meeting.










   (B)   In the case of those boards and commissions which do not meet
on a regular basis, all members shall be notified of a meeting by regular
mail postmarked five days prior to each meeting, or by phone 24 hours prior
to the meeting; or in the manner otherwise prescribed by the charter,
ordinances, or resolutions of the city or any previously adopted rules by
that board or commission.










   (C)   Any board or commission may hold a special meeting subject
only to the notice requirements specified above.





(Res. 3-83, passed 1-11-83)









33.102  UNEXCUSED ABSENCES.




   (A)   Attendance is required at all regular and properly noted
special meetings of boards and commissions.  Any member who accumulates
three unexcused absences during any calendar year shall be considered to have
tendered his/her resignation from that board or commission to the City
Council, which resignation shall be subject to City Council's acceptance. 
It shall be the responsibility of the secretary or chairperson of the board
or commission to provide written notice to the City Council when a member has
accumulated three unexcused absences within a calendar year.  The
notification may be affected by sending the notice to the City Manager.










   (B)   An UNEXCUSED ABSENCE is defined as any absence from a regular
or properly noticed special meeting for which the member has not notified the
chairperson or secretary of the board or commission or City Manager's office
in advance of the meeting of his/her inability to attend the meeting.  The
unexcused absence shall be noted in the minutes of the meeting along with the
names of those present and the names of those members who are excused.










   (C)   Any member of a board or commission who is absent from a
special meeting that has not been properly noticed as specified above shall
not be considered to have accumulated an unexcused absence for the purpose of
this subchapter.





(Res. 3-83, passed 1-11-83)










MUNICIPAL RECREATION BOARD









33.110  OBJECTIVES.




   The objectives of the Municipal Recreation Board shall be as follows:










   (A)   To promote a comprehensive recreation program including
various recreational areas and facilities for the citizens of the city;










   (B)   To make recommendations to Council on matters concerning
parks, recreation and leisure activities; and










   (C)   To act as a voice for the Parks and Recreation Department in
the community and a voice for the community in the Parks and Recreation
Department.





(Ord. 34-90, passed 12-11-90)









33.111  MEETINGS; QUORUM.




   (A)   Meetings shall be held on the third Tuesday of each month. 
Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson of the Recreation Board or
the Parks and Recreation Director.










   (B)   A quorum shall consist of at least three members, in addition
to the presence of the Parks and Recreation Director.  If three or more
members are present at a called meeting, they may take action on any subject
which rightly may come before this board.





(Ord. 34-90, passed 12-11-90)









33.112  OFFICERS.




   The officers of the Board shall be a chairperson, who shall conduct the
meetings of the Board, a vice-chairperson to serve in the absence of the
chairperson, and a secretary to keep accurate minutes of all meetings.  The
officers are to be elected by the Board for one-year terms at the regular
meeting in January.





(Ord. 34-90, passed 12-11-90)









33.113  CAPACITY OF BOARD.




   The Recreation Board serves in an advisory capacity.  Its advice is to
be reflected in minutes of its meetings or in other written presentations
which it may choose to submit.  The Board may recommend action to City
Council or the Parks and Recreation Director but may not assume any
legislative or administrative authority in the operation of the Parks and
Recreation Department.





(Ord. 34-90, passed 12-11-90)










BUSINESS ADVISORY COUNCIL









33.120  ESTABLISHMENT.




   A Business Advisory Council is established for the city.





(Res. 39-94, passed 10-25-94)









33.121  OBJECTIVES.




   The objectives of this Advisory Council shall be as follows:










   (A)   To review and make specific recommendations to City Council
concerning programs, policies and capital improvements which have an impact
on businesses in the city.










   (B)   To advance, encourage and promote the economic development of
the City of West Carrollton.










   (C)   To sponsor, promote, coordinate and encourage cooperation
between businesses in the city and local government to ensure competitiveness.










   (D)   To guide development of an aggressive economic development
marketing program for the city.










   (E)   To guide the development of a long-term strategic economic
development plan for the city.










   (F)   To generate city-wide interest, pride and action related to
economic development.





(Res. 39-94, passed 10-25-94)









33.122  MEMBERSHIP; COMPENSATION.




   The Business Advisory Council shall consist of seven members who
conduct business in the city and shall be appointed by the Council in a
manner to provide broad representation of the types and sizes of businesses
located in the city.  Members of the Advisory Council shall serve without
compensation.





(Res. 39-94, passed 10-25-94)









33.123  TERMS.




   All members of the Advisory Council shall serve for a term of two
years, except that three members of the Advisory Council first appointed
shall serve for one year in order to provide for overlapping of terms.  The
appointment of new members to the Advisory Council shall be made effective on
January 1 of each year.





(Res. 39-94, passed 10-25-94)









33.124  RULES; OFFICERS.




   The Advisory Council shall adopt its own rules and elect its officers
annually.





(Res. 39-94, passed 10-25-94)










TECHNOLOGY ADVISORY GROUP









33.130  ESTABLISHMENT.




   The West Carrollton Technology Advisory Group is hereby established for
the city.





(Res. 22-97, passed 5-27-97)









33.131  OBJECTIVES.




   The objectives of the Technology Advisory Group shall be as follows:










   (A)   To guide and advise City Council and city staff concerning
programs, policies, and technological improvements which have or may have an
impact in the city.










   (B)   To increase citizen/community involvement in the application
of technology.










   (C)   To increase cooperative efforts with other area/regional
resources.





(Res. 22-97, passed 5-27-97)









33.132  MEMBERSHIP; COMPENSATION.




   The Technology Advisory Group shall consist of nine members appointed
by the Council in a manner to provide a broad range of technical expertise.
Members of the advisory group shall serve without compensation.





(Res. 22-97, passed 5-27-97)









33.133  TERMS.




   All members of the advisory group shall serve for a term of four years,
except that four members of the advisory group first appointed shall serve
for two years in order to provide for overlapping terms. The appointment of
new members to the advisory group shall be made effective on January 1st.





(Res. 22-97, passed 5-27-97)









33.134  RULES; OFFICERS.




   The advisory group shall adopt its own rules and elect its officers
annually.





(Res. 22-97, passed 5-27-97)










INDEPENDENCE DAY FESTIVAL COMMITTEE









33.135  ESTABLISHMENT.




   The West Carrollton Independence Day Festival Committee is hereby
established to organize, promote, and implement this annual event.





(Res. 14-2006.  Passed 5-9-06.)









33.136  OBJECTIVES.




   The objectives of the Independence Day Festival Committee shall be as
follows:










   (A)   To work closely with community volunteers from throughout the
community to organize and implement this annual event.










   (B)   To generate Citywide interest, pride and involvement related
to the Independence Day Festival. 
(Res. 14-2006.  Passed 5-9-06.)









33.137  MEMBERSHIP; COMPENSATION.




   The Independence Day Festival Committee shall consist of nine members
appointed by the City Council.  Members of the Independence Day Festival
Committee shall serve without compensation.





(Res. 14-2006.  Passed 5-9-06.)









33.138  TERMS.




   All members of the Independence Day Festival Committee shall serve for
a term of three years, except for those first appointed, three members will
be to a one-year term, three members to a two-year term, and three members to
a three-year term; this is to provide for overlapping terms.  The
appointment of new members to the Independence Day Festival Committee shall
be made effective on January 1.  The Independence Day Festival Committee is
encouraged to form subcommittees and to invite board participation by
volunteers to further the success of this annual event. 
(Res. 14-2006.  Passed 5-9-06.)
























CHAPTER 34
EMPLOYMENT POLICIES









Section










Personnel Provisions; Appeals Board










34.01   Title and purpose





34.02   Permanent status





34.03   Recruitment and selection





34.04   Eligible lists





34.045   Removal from eligible lists





34.05   Promotional examinations





34.06   Certifications and appointments





34.07   Temporary appointments





34.08   Provisional appointments





34.09   Probation





34.10   Absences, hours of work and sick leave





34.11   Discipline





34.12   Types of disciplinary action





34.13   Procedure in disciplinary action





34.14   Personnel appeals board





34.15   Reductions; layoffs




 



Employment Provisions



 




34.20   Blanket bond





34.21   Residency requirements





34.215   Premium pay





34.22   Overtime pay





34.23   Holidays





34.24   Comprehensive major medical insurance





34.25   Group life insurance





34.255   Accidental death and dismemberment insurance





34.26   Injury leave and wage continuation pay





34.27   Sick leave credit





34.28   Vacations





34.29   Jury duty





34.30   Military leave





34.31   Pay period





34.32   Supplemental rules





34.33   Bereavement leave





34.34   Educational incentive pay





34.341   Reimbursement for lost or damaged personal property





34.342   Tuition reimbursement





34.343   Deferred compensation





34.344   Pick up of contributions





34.345   Purchase of service credit in the Public Employees Retirement
System




 



Collective Bargaining



 




34.35   Definitions





34.36   Registration procedure prior to recognition





34.37   Procedures for establishing representation units





34.38   Certification as a recognized employee organization





34.39   Rules and regulations





34.40   Impasse resolution





34.41   Construction of §§ 34.35 through 34.42





34.42   Prohibition against strikes against city




 




PERSONNEL PROVISIONS; APPEALS BOARD




 



34.01  TITLE AND PURPOSE.




   (A)   This chapter shall be known as the Personnel Chapter and it
shall give effect to and augment the provisions of the City Charter
pertaining to personnel.  It is the policy of the city as a charter,
home-rule-municipality established under the constitution and laws of the
state, that this chapter and such rules as may be adopted in accordance with
the provisions herein shall supercede all civil service laws passed by the
state.  This shall be true even when this chapter and such rules are silent
on a particular topic which is included in the state civil service laws.










   (B)   Except as may otherwise be provided in this chapter, this
chapter shall only apply to personnel in the nonexempt positions of the
city.  Nonexempt positions are those which have not been exempted from the
civil service of the municipality or the competitive examination
requirements.  In accordance with the provisions of § 10.02 of the City
Charter, the following  positions are exempt from the civil service of the
municipality and the open competitive examination requirements:





      (1)   Members of Council;





      (2)   The Clerk of Council;





      (3)   The City Manager;





      (4)   The Directors of Departments;





      (5)   The Secretary to the City Manager;





      (6)   The Assistant to the City Manager;





      (7)   Members of Boards and Commissions appointed by the
Council; advisory committees appointed by the City Manager;





      (8)   Those positions requiring peculiar and exceptional
qualifications of a scientific, managerial, professional or educational
character;





      (9)   Unskilled laborers;





      (10)   Seasonal, provisional, temporary, or part-time
employees.










   (C)   In addition to the positions specified in division (B) above,
other positions may be exempted from the civil service or the competitive
examination requirements on the determination of the City Manager and the
approval by the Personnel Appeals Board.





('70 Code, § 153.01; amend. Ord. 2297, passed 12-22-81)









34.02  PERMANENT STATUS.




   When this chapter becomes effective, all persons then holding positions
not included among those exempted by the city Charter shall have a permanent
status if:










   (A)   They were employed in positions on the date of passage of this
chapter (May 14, 1968) and have served their full probationary period.










   (B)   They shall serve a probationary period of one year or any
other period as may be prescribed by this chapter for the position held. 
('70 Code, § 153.02)









34.03  RECRUITMENT AND SELECTION.




   (A)   Original appointments and promotions to vacancies to the civil
service of the municipality shall be made solely on the basis of merit and
fitness demonstrated insofar as practicable by open competitive examinations
or other evidence of competence, except where open competitive examinations
for particular vacancies may be dispensed with as provided by the City
Charter and this chapter.










   (B)   Each open competitive examination shall be publicly announced
by the Personnel Director in such media as he may deem expedient.  The
announcement shall specify the title of the position classification for which
the examination is to be held; the time, place, and manner of making
application; the closing date for applications; the time and place for the
examination; the minimum qualifications for the position as established by
the Personnel Director and approved by the City Manager; and any other
information deemed pertinent by the Personnel Director.










   (C)   Application shall be made on the form prescribed by the
Personnel Director, and he shall conduct such investigation as he may deem
necessary to verify the truth of the statements made therein and to determine
the qualifications of the applicant.  He may reject any application which,
on its face, indicates that the applicant does not possess the minimum
qualifications established for the position classification and may also
reject any application which is received after the closing date established
for the examination.  In addition to the above, the Personnel Director may
refuse to examine an applicant or, after an examination, disqualify an
applicant from further consideration if the applicant makes a false statement
of any material fact, practices or attempts to practice any deliberate
deception or fraud in the selection process, or for such other reasons as may
be provided in the rules promulgated by the Personnel Director and approved
by the City Manager.










   (D)   All examinations shall be of such a type that will fairly
assess the relative abilities and aptitudes of the candidates to efficiently
and effectively perform the duties of the position classification for which
the examination is given.  The examinations may be written, oral, physical,
psychological, a demonstration of skill, an evaluation of training and
experiences, or any combination thereof. The Personnel Director shall
determine the nature of the examinations and the weight to be given to each
part.  He shall see that the examinations are graded, taking care to
preserve the anonymity of the candidates in the written portion until grading
is completed.
('70 Code, § 153.03; amend. Ord. 2297, passed 12-22-81)










34.04  ELIGIBLE LISTS.




   (A)   From the results of each entry-level and promotional
examination, the Personnel Director shall prepare and certify an eligible
list for the positions for which the examination was conducted.  All
candidates receiving a passing score on the examination are to be ranked on
the eligible list in the order of their total scores.  In the event two or
more candidates receive the same total score on the examination, they shall
be placed in the same position on the eligible list and the tie shall be
noted.










   (B)   Reemployment.





      (1)   In the event it becomes necessary to lay off city
employees for any reason, the names of the persons laid off shall be placed
on a reemployment eligible list for the classification involved.  The names
on the list shall be ranked in order of classification seniority and each
name shall remain on the list for a maximum period of one year (except as
provided in division (2) below) unless such eligibility is extended by the
Personnel Director.





      (2)   Each name on a reemployment eligible list for the
classification of police officer, crime prevention officer, or dispatcher
shall remain on such list for a maximum period of 15 months unless the
eligibility is extended by the Personnel Director.










   (C)   All other eligible lists shall be valid for a minimum period
of one year from the original date of certification unless exhausted prior to
that time.  The validity of such lists may be extended for an additional
period, up to one year, by order of the Personnel Director.





('70 Code, § 153.04; Am. Ord. 2297, passed 12-22-81; Am. Ord. 2463, passed
9-11-84)









34.045 REMOVAL FROM ELIGIBLE LISTS.




   (A)   If, after an eligible list has been established, it is 
determined that any candidate whose name appears on the eligible list has
obtained his place thereon by deception or fraud either in the application or
in the selection process, or that the candidate does not possess the minimum
qualifications established for the position, or that the candidate is subject
to disqualification under the provisions of § 34.03 (C), the name of the
candidate may be removed from the eligible list by order of the Personnel
Director. The Personnel Director may also remove the name of any candidate
who indicates that he is no longer interested in the position, who declines
to be interviewed for the position, or who refuses to accept appointment
after being certified.  Furthermore, the Personnel Director may remove the
name of any candidate whom, after a reasonable effort, he has been unable to
contact by mail or phone to determine the candidate's interest in a position.










   (B)   The Personnel Director may also remove the name of a person
from the eligible list if that person has been certified three times to the
same department head for the same or similar positions and has not been
appointed. 
(Ord. 2297, passed 12-22-81)









34.05  PROMOTIONAL EXAMINATIONS.




   (A)   The Personnel Director, subject to the approval of the City
Manager, shall designate which classes of positions in the civil service are
entry-level positions and which are promotional positions.  Such designation
shall be based upon an analysis of the relative job requirements as well as
an examination of the logical career paths within the organization.










   (B)   A promotional examination shall be restricted to present
employees unless the City Council, on the recommendation of the City Manager,
adopts a resolution opening the examination to candidates outside of the
municipal service.  The promotional examination shall be competitive except
where the Personnel Director determines that there are three or less
qualified persons who are interested in the position, in which case the
examination may be noncompetitive.










   (C)   Eligibility for promotional examinations shall be determined
by the Personnel Director, subject to the approval of the City Manager, after
consideration of qualifications and length of service. For the Police
Division, eligibility requirements shall include a minimum of 12 months of
service in the next lower rank unless otherwise recommended by the Personnel
Director and approved by the City Manager.










   (D)   Where appropriate, promotional examinations shall give
consideration to the candidate's record of prior performance and seniority,
as may be provided in the rules promulgated by the Personnel Director and
approved by the City Manager.










   (E)   All candidates receiving a passing score on the examination
are to be ranked on the promotional eligible list in the order of their total
scores. 
('70 Code, § 153.05; amend. Ord. 2297, passed 12-22-81)









34.06  CERTIFICATIONS AND APPOINTMENTS.




   (A)   Whenever a vacancy is to be filled in the civil service of the
city, the appropriate department head shall request the Personnel Director to
certify the names of the persons standing highest on the applicable eligible
list.  If no list exists for the particular position classification, the
Personnel Director shall schedule an examination at his earliest possible
convenience to establish an eligible list.










   (B)   If the vacancy exists in an entry-level position, the
Personnel Director shall certify the names of the top five candidates
including ties, remaining on the original appointment eligible list. If more
than one position is to be filled, the Personnel Director may certify a list
of names that is equal to the number of vacancies plus four, which list shall
also include ties.  If one or more provisional, probationary or permanent
full-time city employee receives a passing score on the examination, the name
or names of those employees shall also be certified.  When an eligible list
is reduced to less than 5 names, or when the list has expired, the Personnel
Director may conduct an examination to prepare a new list.










   (C)   If the vacancy exists in a position to be filled through
promotion, the Personnel Director shall certify the names of the top three
candidates, including ties, remaining on the promotional eligible list.  If
more than one position is to filled, the Personnel Director may certify a
list of names that is equal to the number of vacancies plus 2, which list
shall also include ties.










   (D)   If the vacancy exists in a position for which there is a
current reemployment eligible list, the Personnel Director shall certify the
name of the candidate in the highest position remaining on that list.  The
reemployment list shall expire or be exhausted before names are certified
from any other appointment list pertaining to that position classification.










   (E)   Whenever a certified eligible indicates his unwillingness to
accept appointment or has otherwise had his name removed from the eligible
list, leaving fewer candidates from which the department head may choose than
can normally be certified under divisions (A) through (D) of this section,
the Personnel Director shall then certify to the department head the name in
the next position on the eligible list.










   (F)   After receiving the names of those eligible for appointment to
a vacancy, the department head shall make his selection and shall notify the
Personnel Director of the person recommended for appointment.  Although the
responsibility of making the recommendation shall lie primarily with the
department head, any such recommendation must be approved by the City
Manager, as the appointing authority under the City Charter, before becoming
official.  The Personnel Director shall see that the person appointed is
placed on the payroll and shall restore to the eligibility list the names of
the other persons who were certified but not appointed.





('70 Code, § 153.06; amend. Ord. 2193, passed 2-26-80; amend. Ord. 2297,
passed 12-22-81)









34.07  TEMPORARY APPOINTMENTS.




   Whenever an emergency exists which requires that a vacancy be filled on
a temporary basis in order to maintain public services, the appropriate
department head may recommend to the City Manager the appointment of a person
qualified to perform the duties of the position.  On approval of the City
Manager, the appointment shall become official.  However, no temporary
appointment shall be for a period longer than 60 days unless otherwise
approved by the City Manager. 
('70 Code, § 153.07; amend. Ord. 2297, passed 12-22-81)









34.08  PROVISIONAL APPOINTMENTS.




   (A)   Whenever a vacancy occurs in the civil service of the city and
there is no current eligible list from which a certification can be made, the
Personnel Director shall so inform the appropriate department head.  If, in
the judgment of the department head, it is not expedient to await the
establishment of a list, he shall request the Personnel Director to submit to
him the application of one or more persons who possess the minimum
qualifications established for the position to be filled.  On review of the
applications, the department head may recommend to the City Manager the
appointment of one of the candidates.  On approval by the City Manager, the
appointment shall become official.










   (B)   A provisional appointment shall not last longer than three
months, during which time an examination shall be given and an eligible list
established.  The name of the provisional employee shall be certified to the
department head along with the names of the other top candidates on the
eligible list, provided that the provisional employee receives a passing
score on the examination.  The probationary period of a provisional
appointee subsequently appointed as a probationary employee may be shortened
by the length of time spent in a provisional status. 
('70 Code, § 153.08; amend. Ord. 2297, passed 12-22-81)









34.09  PROBATION.




   (A)   With the exception of appointments to positions in the Police
Division and Fire Division, employees appointed from original appointment
eligible lists and from promotional eligible lists shall serve a minimum
probationary period of six months.  Employees appointed to positions in the
Police and Fire Divisions shall serve a minimum probationary period of 12
months.  During the probationary period, the performance and conduct of the
employee shall be subject to close scrutiny and evaluation.










   (B)   A probationary employee may be removed or demoted at any time
during the probationary period upon written notice by the City Manager to the
employee.  Any such removal or demotion shall not be subject to appeal
through any grievance procedure or to the Personnel Appeals Board.










   (C)   A probationary employee shall be granted permanent status
after satisfactory completion of the probationary period. 
('70 Code, § 153.09; amend. Ord. 2297, passed 12-22-81)









34.10  ABSENCES, HOURS OF WORK, AND SICK LEAVE.




   The Personnel Director may adopt rules prescribing hours of work and
the conditions and length of time for which leaves of absence with pay and
leaves of absence without pay may be granted.  Such rules shall include, but
shall not be limited to holidays, personal leave days, vacations, sick leave,
injury leave, maternity leave, bereavement leave, civil leave, and military
leave.  The rules, which shall be effective from and after the time that
they are approved by the City Manager, shall supplement and not be in
conflict with any valid ordinances pertaining to such leaves.





('70 Code, § 153.10; amend. Ord. 2297, passed 12-22-81)









34.11  DISCIPLINE.




   (A)   The tenure of every full-time, permanent officer, or employee
in the nonexempt service of the city shall be during good behavior and
efficient service, but any such officer or employee may be removed or
otherwise disciplined for just cause, including but not limited to
incompetency, inefficiency, dishonesty, drunkenness, immoral conduct,
insubordination, discourteous treatment of the public, neglect of duty,
violation of the provisions of the City Charter or the ordinances of the
city, violation of the laws of the state or the United States of America,
violation of the rules of the City Manager or the Personnel Director or a
department head, or any other acts of misfeasance, malfeasance, or
nonfeasance in office.










   (B)   The Personnel Director shall promulgate rules which shall
provide elaboration on the reasons for which employees may be removed or
otherwise disciplined.  Such rules shall be effective from and after the
time that they are approved by the City Manager.










   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the right
of the city to lay off or separate any officer or employee from the nonexempt
service in the event any position is abolished or for lack of work or lack of
funds. 
('70 Code, § 153.11; amend. Ord. 2297, passed 12-22-81)









34.12  TYPES OF DISCIPLINARY ACTION.




   Disciplinary action for full-time, permanent officers, or employees in
the nonexempt service of the city shall normally consist of one or more of
the following, based on the recurrence or magnitude of the violation:










   (A)   Informal reprimand;










   (B)   Formal written reprimand which becomes a part of the
employee's personnel record;










   (C)   Suspension from duty without pay for a period of not more than
3 days;










   (D)   Suspension from duty without pay for a period exceeding 3 days;










   (E)   Reduction in rank and salary;










   (F)   Dismissal.





('70 Code, § 153.12; amend. Ord. 2297, passed 12-22-81)









34.13  PROCEDURE IN DISCIPLINARY ACTION.




   The Personnel Director shall promulgate rules which shall prescribe the
procedure to be followed in applying discipline, including the person or
persons responsible for such discipline, and the method of appealing
disciplinary actions.  Such rules, which shall be effective from and after
the time that they are approved by the City Manager, may include any other
provisions relative to discipline as may be deemed necessary by the Personnel
Director and the City Manager to supplement the provisions of this chapter.





('70 Code, § 153.13; amend. Ord. 2297, passed 12-22-81)









34.14  PERSONNEL APPEALS BOARD.




   (A)   Any full-time, permanent officer, or employee in the civil
service, who has been suspended in excess of 3 days, reduced in rank, or
removed from his position, may request a hearing thereon before the Personnel
Appeals Board.










   (B)   The procedure to be followed in appealing any such
disciplinary action to the Personnel Appeals Board, including the time limits
for such appeals, shall be as provided in the rules promulgated by the
Personnel Director and approved by the City Manager and the rules of the
Personnel Appeals Board.










   (C)   The procedure to be followed on appeal shall be as provided in
the rules of the Personnel Appeals Board.  The Board shall make its own
rules, choose its own officers, and have the authority to subpoena witnesses
and to require the production of records.





('70 Code, § 153.14; amend. Ord. 2297, passed 12-22-81)









34.15  REDUCTIONS; LAYOFFS.




   (A)   In the event it becomes necessary to lay off employees for any
reason, the City Manager shall determine the classes of employment in which
such layoff shall be made, the number to be laid off, and the duration of
such layoff.  Employees shall be laid off at the time and in the number
specified by the City Manager.










   (B)   The manner in which any such layoff shall be conducted shall
be as provided in the rules promulgated by the Personnel Director and
approved by the City Manager. 
('70 Code, § 153.15; amend. Ord. 2297, passed 12-22-81)










EMPLOYMENT PROVISIONS









34.20  BLANKET BOND.




   The bond for all city employees not otherwise covered by this title
shall  be in the form of a $5,000 blanket bond, the premium for which shall
be paid by the city.  The bond shall be for the protection of the city and
the public against loss due to acts or omissions of the city employees.  The
amount of the bond may be more than $5,000 for certain employees as
determined by the City Manager.





('70 Code, § 155.01; amend. Ord. 2291, passed 10-27-81; amend. Ord. 2297,
passed 12-22-81)









34.21  RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   For purposes of emergency response, the Police Chief, Deputy
Police Chief, Fire Chief, Fire Captains, Service Director, and Parks and
Recreation Director shall reside within a 20 road mile radius of the civic
center. This is measured by taking the most direct route from the Civic
Center to the employee's residence.



 




   (B)   For all other employees, residency within the corporate limits
of the City is not required by this section. However, where the availability
needs of a particular department or division require that its employees live
in proximity to the City, the City Manager may establish regulations
governing the distance such employees may live from the boundaries of the
City.  (Ord. 3601.  Passed 1-10-17.)









34.215 PREMIUM PAY.




   (A)   Court time call-in for Mayor's Court shall be compensated at
the rate of one and one-half times the normal rate of pay with a minimum of
three hours pay, two hours at a pay rate of time and one-half.










   (B)   Court time call-in for appearances in courts other than
Mayor's Court shall be compensated at the rate of one and one-half times the
normal rate of pay with a minimum of four and one-half hours pay, three hours
at a pay rate of time and one-half.










   (C)   Any witness fees received as a result of court appearances in
connection with city employment shall be turned over to the city within three
days of the receipt of such fees.










   (D)   There shall be no pyramiding of premium pay for the same hours
worked.





(Ord.  3254.  Passed 12-30-03.)









34.22  OVERTIME PAY.



   All employees, except those on salary and platoon shifts, will receive
overtime pay at the rate of time and one-half for all hours worked in an
active pay status in excess of (40) straight time hours per week or eight (8)
hours per day.



 




   Platoon shift employees will receive overtime pay at a rate of time and
one-half for all hours in an active pay status in excess of (212) hours in a
28-day work cycle.  (Ord. 3601.  Passed 1-10-17.)









34.23  HOLIDAYS.



   (A)   The following days are designated as holidays for full-time
employees not covered under bargaining agreements:



 



      New Year's Day



      



      President's Day (third Monday in February)



 



      Good Friday



 



      Memorial Day



 



      Independence Day



 



      Labor Day (first Monday in September)



 



      Thanksgiving Day



 



      Day after Thanksgiving



 



      Christmas Eve (December 24th)



 



      Christmas Day



 



      Three (3) Personal Leave Days



(Personal leave days shall be prorated for any new full-time employee who had
a hire date that is later than the end of the first (1st) quarter of the
payroll year. They will receive one personal day for each quarter employed)



 



   (B)   Except for platoon shift employees, when any of these days
fall on Saturday, Sunday or a scheduled day off for the employee, the City
Manager shall determine whether the preceding Friday, the following Monday,
or which other day shall be observed as the holiday.



 



   (C)   Platoon shift employees shall work their regular tour of duty,
regardless of the day on which the holiday falls, and shall receive 12.0
hours straight time of pay for such holiday. Such payment shall be made in
the pay period following completion of the 28-day work cycle.



 



      (1)   For all such full-time employees, except platoon shift
employees, the above days shall be considered as days off with pay unless, in
the opinion of the department head or his designee, failure to work on such
holidays would impair the public service. Hourly employees, except platoon
shift employees, who are required to work on a holiday, shall be compensated
at the rate of time and one-half for all hours worked in addition to holiday
pay.



 



      (2)   Payment shall be made for such holiday pay, provided the
employee works his/her last scheduled shift preceding the holiday and his/her
first scheduled shift following the holiday, or is otherwise excused by the
department head or his designee from the scheduled assignments during the
holiday week due to sick leave or vacation leave. An  employee on sick leave
status on a holiday shall receive holiday pay and not sick leave pay for that
day.



 



      (3)   Except for platoon shift employees, if a holiday occurs
during an employee's vacation, the employee shall be entitled to an
additional day of vacation to compensate for the holiday.



 



      (4)   a.   Platoon shift employees who work a complete
shift on a holiday will receive an additional 6.0 hours of straight time pay.
Pay will be in addition to the holiday pay of 12.0 hours of straight time
provided in Division (A) 3 above. Such payment shall be made in the pay
period following completion of the 28-day work cycle.



 




         b.   All regular part-time, EMT, driver or paramedic who
works on a holiday will receive holiday pay at time and a half for all hours
worked. Such payment shall be made in the pay period following completion of
the 28-day work cycle.  (Ord. 3601.  Passed 1-10-17.)









34.24  COMPREHENSIVE MAJOR MEDICAL INSURANCE.



   (A)   The City shall make available to all full-time employees
covered hereunder a group health care program, which shall consist of at
least one health care plan. If the City offers more than one health care plan
in the group health care program, then the City shall designate one of the
health care plans as the Core Plan, taking into consideration the
recommendation of the Insurance Committee as described below. If the City
offers one health care plan in the group health care program, then that plan
shall be designated as the Core Plan.



 



   In accordance with the Affordable Care Act, the City shall make
available the same health plans to all part-time employees assigned to a
schedule of 30 or more hours per week and to all variable hour part-time
employees working an average of 30 or more hours per week during their
designated measurement period. 



   Each employee will contribute fifteen percent (15%) toward the premium
of the Core Plan and the City will contribute eighty-five percent (85%)
toward the premium of the Core Plan. 



 



   If the City offers a High Deductible Health Plan (HDHP) with a Health
Savings Account (HSA), then the City shall annually contribute 65% of the
employees' annual HDHP deductible amount to the employees' HSA. This
contribution to the employees' HSA will be paid as follows:



 



•   The first half of the contribution shall be paid into the employees'
HSA in January.



 



•   The remaining half of the contribution will be paid in equal
installments on each remaining pay date for the year.



 



   If an employee encounters a hardship that will exhaust all of the
employee's HSA funds, then the employee may request an emergency distribution
of the remaining annual contribution. Such a request shall be made to the
Human Resources Manager, and the request will be approved at the discretion
of the City Manager. All health care costs beyond the City's 85% contribution
to the premium of the Core Plan and the City's 65% deductible contribution to
the HSA (when applicable as described above) shall be paid by the employees.



 



   (B)   Each employee must elect to subscribe to one of the plan
options before insurance payments for same will be made by the City. In the
event the employee should elect not to subscribe to a plan, additional
compensation shall not be paid to the employee. Employees not electing to
subscribe to a plan must sign a waiver form.




(Ord. 3601.  Passed 1-10-17.)









34.25  GROUP LIFE INSURANCE.




   The city shall furnish a life insurance policy of the amount and type
and with the company as they shall determine. The policy premium shall be
paid by the city and in the event an employee should elect not to subscribe
to the plan, additional compensation shall not be paid to the employee and
the pay scale provided for in the personnel classification ordinance shall be
the full and total compensation to be paid to the employee. The life
insurance mentioned therein, shall apply to regular full-time employees only.
Employees not electing to subscribe to the plan must sign a waiver form. An
employee shall become eligible for the insurance upon being hired in
full-time, non-temporary status.  (Ord. 3601.  Passed 1-10-17.)









34.255 ACCIDENTAL DEATH AND DISMEMBERMENT INSURANCE.




   The city shall furnish an accidental death and dismemberment (AD&D)
insurance policy for all full-time employees in the amount of $20,000 and of
the type with the company as the city shall determine, or in the amount and
of the type as agreed to by properly executed labor contracts.  The policy
premium shall be paid by the city.  In the event an employee should elect
not to subscribe to the plan, additional compensation shall not be paid to
the employee, and the pay scale provided for in the personnel classification
ordinance shall be the full and total compensation to be paid to the
employee.  Employees not electing to subscribe to the plan must sign a
waiver form.  An employee shall become eligible for the insurance upon being
hired in a full-time, non-temporary status. 





(Ord.  3182.  Passed 3-13-01.)









34.26  INJURY LEAVE AND WAGE CONTINUATION PAY.



   (A)   Injury Leave and Wage Continuation for employees who are
injured or who contract an occupational disease as determined by the
Industrial Commission, while in the course of employment. Injury leave
represents a continuation of the employee's regular wages (wage continuation)
in lieu of receiving workers' compensation benefits.



 



   (B)   Probationary employees, as well as regular full-time
employees, may receive injury leave/wage continuation for up to twenty-six
(26) weeks in connection with an occupational illness or injury, but only if
the injury is certified by the city and/or deemed compensable by the
Industrial Commission of Ohio. Once the 26 weeks of injury leave has been
exhausted, the employee shall use accumulated sick leave and vacation leave
credits if additional leave time is needed. After the exhaustion of injury,
sick, and vacation leave, the employee may be eligible for workers'
compensation benefits.



 



   (C)   Receipt of wage continuation payments will be in lieu of
workers' compensation lost time benefits. After 26 weeks, the city will
require the employee to use accumulated sick and vacation leave credits, and
then may request that the employee commence payment from the Bureau of
Workers' Compensation. 




(Ord. 3601.  Passed 1-10-17.)









34.27  SICK LEAVE CREDIT.



   (A)   All provisional, probationary, and regular full-time employees
shall accrue sick leave credits at the rate of 4.616 hours of sick leave
credit for every 80 hours of completed regularly scheduled work. An employee
shall accrue sick leave credits at the normal rate during any leave with pay,
except while on extended sick leave (see Division (C) below). However, those
additional sick leave credits earned by an employee while on leave with pay
shall not be available for the employee's use until the employee has returned
to work. An employee will not be considered returned to work until they have
been back to work for a period of thirty (30) days or more. An employee shall
not accrue sick leave credits while on suspension without pay, unpaid leave,
or absence without leave. Employees on paid or unpaid FMLA leave will be
treated in the same manner as other employees on leave.



 



   For example, an employee on FMLA leave with pay (e.g. using vacation or
sick pay) will be entitled to accrue sick leave credits at the normal rate
during his/her paid leave status. The same rules governing employees on
extended sick leave, as  described in Division (C), will also apply to
employees on FMLA leave. If, on the other hand, an employee is absent from
work on unpaid FMLA leave, he/she will not be entitled to accrue sick leave
credits.



 



   Except for platoon shift employees, the maximum accumulation of sick
leave credits by employees covered hereunder shall be 1500 hours. The maximum
accumulation for platoon shift employees shall be 2100 hours. An employee who
reaches the maximum allowable accrual on sick leave hours will cease to
accrue sick leave hours until their balance has dropped below the maximum
allowable accumulation. 



   Platoon shift employees shall accrue sick leave credit at the rate of
6.462 hours for each two week pay period. (This is the same rate of accrual
as other employees recognizing the greater number of hours worked on a 24/48
schedule as allowed under the FLSA.) This rate is effective as of 7-1-90.



 



   (B)   (1)   An employee who has had prior service with another
public agency may receive credit for all unused sick leave (up to a maximum
of 90 days or its hourly equivalency for platoon shift employees) credited to
the employee by such public agency provided that he/she is employed by the
City of West Carrollton within one year of his/her separation from employment
with such public agency. If the employee has had prior service with more than
one public agency, only those accumulated and unused sick leave credits
recognized by the most recent public agency shall be eligible for transfer to
the city. The employee, within one year of hire by the City of West
Carrollton, must furnish a properly certified letter from the prior public
employer stating the amount of unused sick leave credits accumulated by the
employee at the time of his/her separation from employment. Accumulated and
unused sick leave so certified shall be credited to the employee's record as
of the date received by the City of West Carrollton. 



 



      (2)   An employee who is separated from the city service
through resignation, lay-off, or retirement, and then later reinstated, shall
receive credit for all previously unused sick leave, provided such
reinstatement occurs within  eighteen months of the initial separation. If
the employee previously received reimbursement for such accumulated sick
leave, as provided in Division (E), (F), and (G) below, reinstatement of the
accumulated sick leave shall not be permitted.



 



   (C)   Salaried employees with at least one year of service shall be
eligible for extended illness or injury pay at one half (1/2) their regular
salary for up to 60 work days, after their sick leave and injury leave have
been depleted. Extended illness or injury shall be interpreted to mean an
illness or injury with doctor's certificate, of an uninterrupted continuous
nature.



 



   Extended illness or injury may occur more than one time during a one
year period, but must be of a different, unrelated nature.



 



   (D)   (1)   Except for platoon shift employees, accumulated and
unused sick leave in excess of 720 hours as of December 31st of each year may
be converted by any regular full-time employee not covered under a bargaining
agreement to vacation leave at the rate of three (3) hours of accumulated
sick leave for one (1) hour of vacation leave.



 



         A maximum of forty (40) such vacation hours may be acquired
by an employee through such conversion in any one calendar year. To effect
such a conversion, an employee shall notify the City Manager in writing of
the number of days to be converted, whereupon such conversion may be
approved. In the event an employee converts sick leave to vacation  leave as
provided herein, such vacation leave shall not be subsequently reconverted to
sick leave, unless the conversion is elected within the same calendar year
and is supported by a medical certificate.



   



      (2)   Accumulated and unused sick leave for platoon shift
employees in excess of 1008 hours as of December 31st of each year, may be
converted by any such regular full-time employee not covered by a bargaining
agreement to vacation leave at the rate of three hours of accumulated sick
leave for one hour of vacation leave. A maximum of 168 sick leave hours may
be converted to 56 hours of vacation leave in any one calendar year. To
effect such a conversion, an employee shall notify the City Manager in
writing of the number of days to be converted, whereupon such conversion may
be approved. In the event an employee converts sick leave to vacation leave
as provided herein, such vacation leave shall not be subsequently reconverted
to sick leave, unless the conversion is elected within the same calendar year
and is supported by a medical certificate.



 



   (E)   A full-time employee not covered under a bargaining agreement
hired before January 1, 1990 may convert any accumulated and unused sick
leave benefits existing at the time of the employee's retirement under the
state retirement system or at the time of their early retirement (where the
sum of employee's age plus years of credited service equals or exceeds
seventy (70)) to cash payment at the following rate:



 



      (1)   For accumulated and unused sick leave days up to a
maximum of 720 hours (90 days), conversion at the rate of two (2) sick leave
hours equal to one (1) cash payment hour.



 



      (2)   For accumulated and unused sick leave days in excess of
720 hours (90 days) up to a maximum of 1200 hours, conversion at the rate of
one (1) sick leave hour equal to one (1) cash payment hour.



 



      (3)   For accumulated and unused sick leave days in excess of
1200 hours up to a maximum of 1500 hours, conversion at the rate of three (3)
sick leave hours equal to one (1) cash payment hour.



 



      (4)   The reference to days as set forth herein shall be
converted to the hourly equivalence for platoon shift employees.



 



   (F)   A full-time employee not covered under a bargaining agreement
hired after January 1, 1990, may convert any accumulated and unused sick
leave benefits existing at the time of the employee's retirement under the
state retirement system or at the time of their early retirement (where the
sum of employee's age plus years of credited service equals or exceeds
seventy (70)) to cash payment at the following rate:



 



      (1)   For accumulated and unused sick leave days up to a
maximum of 1500 hours,  conversion at the rate of three sick leave hours
equal to one cash payment hour.



 



      (2)   The reference to days as set forth herein shall be
converted to the hourly equivalence for platoon shift employees.   



 



   (G)   Except for Platoon Shift Employees, a regular full-time
employee who has been employed a minimum of six (6) months and uses
thirty-two (32) or less sick hours between during the previous payroll year
of any given year will be eligible for the following incentive:



 



      (1)   Any employee who has utilized thirty-two (32) or less
hours of sick time will be awarded a cash incentive payment of $150 no later
than January 31st of the next year.



 



      (2)   Any employee who has utilized twenty-four (24) or less
hours of sick time will be awarded a cash incentive payment of $300 no later
than January 31st of the next year.



 



      (3)   Any employee who has utilized sixteen (16) or less hours
of sick time will be awarded a cash incentive payment of $500 no later than
January 31st of the next year.



 



      (4)   Any employee who has perfect attendance for the year
will receive one (1) extra personal leave day in addition to the cash
incentive payment of $500. Both will be reflected no later than January 31st
of the next year. Vacation leave and Personal leave will not count as missed
work for the purposes of the attendance incentive.



 



   (H)   A regular full-time Platoon Shift Employees who has been
employed with the city for a minimum of six (6) months and uses forty-eight
(48) or less sick hours during the previous payroll year of any given year
will be eligible for the following incentive:



 



      (1)   Any employee who has utilized forty-eight (48) or less
hours of sick time will be awarded a cash incentive payment of $150 no later
than January 31st of the next year.



 



      (2)   Any employee who has utilized thirty-six (36) or less
hours of sick time will be awarded a cash incentive payment of $300 no later
than January 31st of the next year.



 



      (3)   Any employee who has utilized twenty-four (24) or less
hours of sick time will be awarded a cash incentive payment of $500 no later
than January 31st of the next year.



 



      (4)   Any employee who has perfect attendance for the year
will receive twelve (12) extra personal leave hours in addition to the cash
incentive payment of $500. Both will be reflected no later than January 31st
of the next year. Vacation leave and Personal leave will not count as missed
work for the purposes of the attendance incentive.



 



   (I)   Except for Platoon Shift Employees, employees who experience
forty-eight (48) or more hours of sick leave usage during a 12-month period
may be subject to the following procedure:



 



      (1)   On the request for the 48th hour of sick leave usage and
for each subsequent sick leave request within a 12-month period, the
Department Director may counsel the employee regarding absenteeism. Usage
will be calculated during the preceding 12 months from the date of the most
recent absence and not on a calendar year. A written record of the counseling
will be documented on an "Excessive Absenteeism Counseling" Form and signed
by the employee. Distribution of the record will be to the Department
Director, the employee, and the employee's personnel file (original). Sick
leave absences for which the employee provides a Doctor's note will not be
included in the 48 hours of sick leave usage for purposes of this section.
(Section J)



 



      (2)   If after formally counseling the employee, the
Department Director feels that the employee is continuing to experience
excessive absenteeism, he/she may issue a "Letter of Reprimand" to the
employee. The employee is to sign the document acknowledging receipt thereof.
The original "Letter of Reprimand" will be placed in the employee's personnel
file with a copy given to the employee. 



 



      (3)   If after issuing the letter of reprimand and it is
determined that the employee continues to abuse the sick leave policy, that
employee may be subject to progressively more disciplinary action.



 



   (J)   For Platoon Shift Employees, Section I shall apply to
employees who experience seventy-two (72) or more hours of sick leave usage
during a 12-month period.




(Ord. 3601.  Passed 1-10-17.)









34.28  VACATIONS.



   (A)   Regular full-time Non-Platoon employees not covered under
bargaining agreements shall accrue vacation credits on an accrual basis
consistent with the vacation accrual rates shown below. Each employee shall
be subject to a maximum limit on the amount of vacation hours that may be
carried on their individual account.



 



   Regular full-time employees shall maintain their vacation credit level
below their maximum unless they have approval of the City Manager.



 



 

Length of Service
 
Vacation Accrual Rate


Less than five years
 
3.08 hours per pay period

136 hrs. max. accumulation)


After five but les than six years
 
3.385 hours per pay period

(144 hrs. max.

accumulation)


After six years but less than twelve years
 
4.92 hours per pay period

(192 hrs. max.

accumulation)


After twelve years but less than fifteen years
 
5.539 hours per pay period

(208 hrs. max.

accumulation)


After fifteen years but less than twenty years
 
6.154 hours per pay period

(224 hrs. max.

accumulation)


After twenty years more
 
7.077 hours per pay period

(240 hrs. max.

accumulation)



 



 



   Regular full-time, non-salaried Fire Captains and Career 
Firefighters/Paramedics shall accrue vacation credits on an accrual basis
consistent with the annual totals below. Each employee shall be subject to a
maximum limit on the amount of vacation hours that may be carried on his/her
individual account. Employees shall maintain their vacation credit level
below their maximum unless they have approval of the City Manager.



 



 

Length of Service
 
Vacation Credit


Less than five years
 
4.312 hours per pay period

(156.8 hours maximum

accumulation)


After five years but less than six years
 
4.739 hours per pay period

(201.6 hrs. maximum

accumulation)


After six years but less than ten years
 
6.892 hours per pay period

(268.8hrs. maximum

accumulation)


After ten years but less than fifteen years
 
7.7546 hours per pay period

(291.2 hrs. maximum

accumulation)


After fifteen years but less than twenty years
 
8.6156 hours per pay period

(313.6 hours maximum

accumulation


After twenty  years or more
 
9.9078 hours per pay period

(336 hrs. maximum

accumulation)



 



 



Any employee with excess vacation hours above the allowable maximum
accumulation shall choose one or a combination of the following options on or
before December 31, 2016: 



 



      (1)   Bank Vacation Pay. The employee may choose to convert
any or all of his/her excess vacation hours at his/her base wage rate as of
December 25, 2016. Upon banking, this pay will be available only when an
employee terminates their employment with the City.  When an employee
separates from the City, banked pay will be paid out at the employee's base
wage rate established at the time the vacation pay was banked ; or



 



      (2)    Cash-in Hours. The employee may choose to cash in all
or a portion of his/her excess vacation hours, at its current value, at the
ratio of 2 to 1; or



 



      (3)   Use Hours.  Employees who choose to neither bank excess
vacation hours or cash-in excess vacation hours will have until the next
reconciliation date to use his/her excess vacation hours.  The City policies
on the scheduling and use of vacation hours shall apply to the use of these
hours. As of the next reconciliation date, all vacation in excess of the
allowable accumulation will be forfeited. Vacation from that point forward
will be treated as "use it or lose it" in compliance with the amended
benefits ordinance.



 



      (4)   Pay Out. Each year, the City Manager may approve the
payout of up to twenty (20) days but not less than five (5) days of an
employee's accumulated vacation pay that has been placed in the separate
vacation pay bank. Any such conversions shall be at the rate of pay in effect
at the time the hours were placed in the bank. Any decision on vacation
conversion by the City Manager shall be his/her exclusive management right
subject to available appropriations and shall be final.



 



      (5)   Retirement. At the time an employee has declared their
retirement date in writing, the City Manager may elect to pay out the
employee's accumulated vacation pay in installments over a period which
includes two (2) payroll years. Installment payments shall be at the
discretion of the city manager based on available budget appropriations, and
upon mutual agreement of the employee.



 



      (6)   Reconciliation of Hours. Each year in following the
final pay period of the year, employees who have accrued vacation hours in
excess of the maximum allowable accumulation will have their accrued vacation
hours adjusted to an amount not to exceed the allowable accumulation. All
hours exceeding the allowable accumulation will be forfeited at that time.
The actual reconciliation date will coincide with the final day of the
payroll year.



 



   (B)   When an regular full-time employee hired before 1-1-94,
completes the minimum number of years of service to qualify for the next
higher level in the vacation schedule, the employee shall begin on their
anniversary date accruing vacation at the higher rate to which they are
entitled and receive a lump sum of vacation hours equal to the differential
of the two levels.



 



   (C)   When a regular full-time employee hired after 1-1-94,
completes the minimum number of years of service to qualify for the next
higher level in the vacation schedule, the employee shall begin on their
anniversary date accruing vacation at the higher rate to which they are
entitled.



 



   (D)   A regular full-time employee of the city, hired after January
1, 1985, who was previously employed by a political subdivision, may claim
credit for the service time recognized by such political subdivision for the
purpose of granting vacation leave, provided that he/she is employed by the
City of West Carrollton within one year of his/her separation from employment
with such political subdivision. 



 




   To receive credit, the employee, within one year of the date of hire by
the City of West Carrollton, must furnish a properly certified letter from
the previous employer stating the length of service recognized by said
employer for vacation purposes. Service time so certified shall be credited
to the employee's record as of the date received by the City of West
Carrollton. Service time recognized by the immediately preceding employer
only will be honored by the city.  (Ord. 3601.  Passed 1-10-17.)









34.29  JURY DUTY.




   An employee required to serve on a jury before a Court empowered by law
to require such service, shall be excused from work for the time required for
such service and shall be paid his regular hourly rate less his jury pay,
provided he notifies his department three (3) days prior to such jury service
date.  (Ord. 3601.  Passed 1-10-17.)









34.30  MILITARY LEAVE.



   An employee shall be granted paid military leave not to exceed three
(3) days, or one (1) tour of duty for platoon shift employees, in order to
report for his physical examination for compulsory military service in the
Armed Forces of the United States. An employee shall be granted paid short
term military leave not to exceed thirty-one (31) calendar days per year for
active military service. The City Manager may approve longer paid leaves of
absence in the event an employee's reserve or national guard unit is called
into action by the President of the United States or Governor of Ohio,
respectively. The employee shall be paid their regular hourly rate, less the
amount paid them for their military service by the Armed Forces. Such paid
leave shall not affect the right of the employee to his regular annual
vacation. 




(Ord. 3601.  Passed 1-10-17.)









34.31  PAY PERIOD.




   The pay period shall be from midnight Sunday to midnight Sunday for all
city employees. Pay checks shall be on a biweekly basis. A 28-day work cycle
is hereby established for all platoon shift employees, commencing on a date
determined by the City Manager.  (Ord. 3601.  Passed 1-10-17.)









34.32  SUPPLEMENTAL RULES.




   The City Manager and Personnel Director are authorized to adopt such
rules and regulations as they deem are necessary to govern the personnel
system of the city.  Such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict
with the City Charter or this chapter.





(Ord.  2001, passed 4-12-77; amend. Ord. 2297, passed 12-22-81)









34.33  BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.



   (A)   A regular full-time employee not covered under a collective
bargaining agreement will be granted up to five (5) days, or up to two (2)
tours of duty for platoon shift employees, of bereavement leave as necessary,
not deducted from accumulated sick leave, in the event of the death of the
employee's spouse, child, parent, parent-in-law, step-child, step-parents,
step-parent-in-law, brother or sister.



 



   (B)   A regular full-time employee not covered under a collective
bargaining agreement will be granted up to three (3) days, or up to (1) tour
of duty for platoon shift employees, of bereavement leave as necessary, not
deducted from accumulated sick leave, to attend the funeral of a member of
the employee's family as defined below:



 



      Grandparent   



      Grandchild



      Step-Grandparent



      Other members of the employee's immediate family residing in the
employee's household.



 



   This provision is not to be interpreted as an automatic three (3) days
or one (1) tour of duty off with pay, especially if appropriate arrangements
can be made in a lesser amount of time. In those situations where attendance
at the funeral necessitates extended out-of-state travel, the employee may
use up to two days or its hourly equivalency for platoon shift employees of
accumulated sick leave, subject to the approval of the City Manager, for the
extended travel. Such time off may be in addition to the time off provided
above.



 




   (C)   A regular full-time employee not covered under a collective
bargaining agreement will be granted up to three (3) days, or up to one (1)
tour of duty for platoon shift employees, of unpaid leave to attend the
funeral of a member of the employee's immediate family not included in the
definitions set forth herein.  (Ord. 3601.  Passed 1-10-17.)









34.34  EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE PAY.



   (A)   Regular full-time employees specified in Division (C) of this
section who possess an Associates Degree or Bachelor Degree in a job-related
degree program and was approved by the City Manager as of December 31, 2009,
shall be eligible for educational incentive pay. (The degree must be from an
accredited or approved college, university, or technical school.)



 



   (B)   Regular full-time employees who satisfy the above criteria
shall receive annual educational incentive pay in the amount of $200 for an
approved Associate Degree and $400 for an approved Bachelor Degree. The
incentive pay shall be limited to a maximum of one degree per person. The
incentive pay shall be paid annually with the first pay in December.



 



   (C)   Full-time regular employees in the following classifications
shall be eligible for educational incentive pay upon satisfying the above
criteria:



 



      (1)   Account Analyst



 



      (2)   Clerk of Courts



 



      (3)   Budgetary Accountant



 



      (4)   Building & Zoning Inspector



 



      (5)   Chief Code Enforcement Officer



 



      (6)   Fire Prevention Officer/EMS Coordinator



 



      (7)   General Maintenance Supervisor



 



      (8)   Secretary



 



      (9)   Secretary to the City Manager



 



      (10)   Street & Refuse Superintendent



 



      (11)   Laboratory Supervisor



 



      (12)   Water & Sewer Supervisor



 



      (13)   Utility Superintendent



 



      (14)   Utility Maintenance Leader



 



      (15)   Fire Captain



 



      (16)   Firefighter/Paramedic



(Ord. 3601.  Passed 1-10-17.)








34.341 REIMBURSEMENT FOR LOST OR  DAMAGED PERSONAL PROPERTY.




   (A)   General restrictions.





      (1)   Under normal circumstances, the city will not accept
responsibility for loss of or damage to an employee's personal property
whether it is lost or damaged while on or off duty.  The city will not in
any instance assume responsibility for replacement or repair of an item which
exceeds $200.





      (2)   Damage to or loss of articles or possessions which are
brought to work by an employee for his own personal satisfaction (radios,
tape players, and the like) will not be reimbursed under any circumstance. 
Furthermore, no reimbursement shall be made for any loss or damage resulting
from an employee's misconduct.










   (B)   Provisions for reimbursement.





      (1)   Reimbursement may be made for loss of or damage to an
employee's personal property which:





         (a)   Occurs as a direct result of the employee actually
performing his duties; or





         (b)   Is not a result of employee negligence.





      (2)   Requests for reimbursement are to be submitted in
writing to the appropriate department head stating the following.





         (a)   What was damaged.





         (b)   When the damage occurred (date and time).





         (c)   Where the damage occurred (location).





         (d)   What happened.





         (e)   Attach estimates to repair or replace the damaged
item.





      (3)   These requests must then be forwarded to the Assistant
City Manager.  The claim may then be forwarded to the Law Director, who may
then determine the validity of the claim and make a recommendation to the
City Manager as to the disposition of the claim including the amount of
reimbursement he considers appropriate, if any.  The City Manager will then
determine the final disposition of the claim.





      (4)   When reimbursement is authorized, it will be limited to
the actual cost of repairs or reasonable replacement costs, taking into
consideration the original cost of the item, not to exceed $200.










   (C)   The provisions of this section shall be retroactive to June
29, 1985.





(Res. 16-85, passed 11-26-85)









34.342 TUITION REIMBURSEMENT.



   (A)   Regular full-time regular employees covered hereunder may
receive reimbursement for the tuition for job-related courses. Any employee
desiring to receive such reimbursement must receive approval from the
Department Head and the City Manager prior to enrolling in the course or
courses.



 



   (B)   The payment of tuition reimbursement shall be subject to the
following guidelines:



 



      (1)   The course or courses must be taken from an accredited
or approved college, university, secondary school, technical institute,
business institute, or trade school.



 



      (2)   The course or courses must be directly related to the
employee's current position or a promotional position for which the employee
is eligible, or must be part of a degree program related to the employee's
current position or a promotional position. The employee must submit an
outline of their degree course work and gain approval for participation in
the reimbursement program from the City Manager. Submissions must be prior to
starting any course work and prior to City budget hearings held each year.



 



   (C)   The City will pay 100% in tuition reimbursement for any course
that a member passes up to the maximum amount stipulated in Section D below.
Reimbursement will be made within thirty (30) days following the conclusion
of the course work, and after submission by the employee of documents showing
completion and passing grades.



 



   (D)   The maximum amount which an employee covered hereunder can
receive in any one calendar year for tuition reimbursement shall be $1,200.



 




   (E)   An employee covered hereunder who terminates employment with
the city within two years after completing a course or courses under the
tuition reimbursement program shall refund to the city all money received for
courses taken within two years of the employee's termination date. The amount
to be refunded may be withheld from any termination pay due the employee.
Employees whose services are terminated by the city will not be required to
make a refund.  (Ord. 3601.  Passed 1-10-17.)









34.343 DEFERRED COMPENSATION.




   The deferred compensation plan of the ICMA Retirement Corporation is
adopted by reference as fully as if set out at length herein.  This plan
permits all eligible employees of the city to defer a portion of their
compensation.  A copy of the plan is on file in the office of the City Clerk.





(Res. 5-86, passed 4-8-86)









34.344 PICK UP OF CONTRIBUTIONS.




   (A)   Effective May 17, 1992, the full amount of the statutorily
required contributions to the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio and
the Police and Firemen's Disability and Pension Fund of Ohio shall be
withheld from the gross pay of each person within any of the classes
established in division (C) of this section and shall be picked up (assumed
and paid to the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio and the Police and
Firemen's Disability and Pension Fund of Ohio) by the city.  This pick up by
the city is, and shall be designated as, Public Employee contributions and
shall be in lieu of contributions to the Public Employees Retirement System
of Ohio and the Police and Firemen's Disability and Pension Fund of Ohio by
each person within any of the classes established  in division (C).  No
person subject to this pick up shall have the option of choosing to receive
the statutorily required contributions to the Public Employees Retirement
System of Ohio and the Police and Firemen's Disability and Pension Fund of
Ohio directly instead of having it picked up by the city or of being excluded
from the pick up.










   (B)   The city shall, in reporting and making remittances to the
Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio and the Police and Firemen's
Disability and Pension Fund of Ohio report that the public employee's
contribution for each person subject to this pick up has been made as
provided by the statute.










   (C)   The pick up by the city provided by this section shall apply
to all persons who are full time administrative or police bargaining unit
employees of the city who are or become contributing members of either the
Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio and the Police and Firemen's
Disability and Pension Fund of Ohio.










   (D)   The city's method of payment of salary to employees who are
participants in the pick up program is hereby modified as follows, in order
to provide for a salary reduction pick-up of employee contributions to the
Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio and the Police and Firemen's
Disability and Pension Fund.










   (E)   The total salary for each employee participating in the pick
up program shall be the salary otherwise payable under the city's policies. 
Such total salary of each employee shall be payable by the city in two parts:
deferred salary and cash salary.  An employee's deferred salary shall be
equal to that percentage of that employee's total salary which is required
from time to time by the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio and the
Police and Firemen's Disability and Pension Fund to be paid as an employee
contribution by that employee, and shall be paid by the city to these funds
on behalf of that employee as a pick-up and in lieu of the employee
contribution otherwise payable by that employee.  An employee's cash salary
shall be equal to that employee's total salary less the amount of the pick-up
for that employee, and shall be payable, subject to applicable payroll
deductions, to that employee.  The city shall compute and remit its employer
contributions to the Retirement System based upon an employee's total
salary.  The total combined expenditures of the city for such employees'
total salaries  payable  under applicable city policies and the pick-up
provisions of this section shall not be greater than the amounts it would
have paid for those items had this provision not been in effect.










   (F)   Effective April 19, 1993, the pick up by the city provided by
this section shall apply to all persons who are full-time employees of the
West Carrollton Independent Employees Association bargaining unit who are, or
become, contributing members of the Public Employees Retirement System of
Ohio.










   (G)   The Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed to
implement the provisions of this section to institute the pick up of the
statutorily required contributions to the Public Employees Retirement System
of Ohio and the Police and Firemen's Disability and Pension Fund of Ohio for
those persons reflected in divisions (C) and (F) herein so as to enable them
to obtain the result in federal and state tax deferments and other benefits.





(Ord. 2856, passed 4-14-92; amend. Ord. 2894, passed 3-9-93)









34.345 PURCHASE OF SERVICE CREDIT IN THE PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM.




   (A)   Effective September 1, 1997, employees of the city may choose
to purchase additional service credit, tax-deferred, and the city shall
withhold the required service credit deduction from the gross pay of each
person who elects to do so and shall pick up (assume and pay) such deduction
to the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio.  A person electing this
pick up deduction shall not have the option of choosing to receive the
payroll deduction directly instead of having this deduction picked up by the
city. Members of the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio who have
elected to participate in this plan of tax-deferred payroll deduction cannot
increase, decrease, or terminate the amount of the pick up deduction.










   (B)   The pick up deduction by the city as provided by this section
shall apply to any city employee who is a contributing member of the Public
Employees Retirement System of Ohio, and who elects to use this tax-deferred
option for past service credit payments.










   (C)   The Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed to
implement the provisions of this section to effect the pick up of the payroll
deduction for the purchase of additional service credit to the Public
Employees Retirement System of Ohio for those persons choosing to do so as
set forth in this section.





(Ord. 3057, passed 6-24-97)










COLLECTIVE BARGAINING









34.35  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purposes of §§ 34.35 through 34.42 the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.










   (A)   CHARTER.  The Charter of the City of West Carrollton, as
amended from time to time.










   (B)   CITY MANAGER.  The Manager appointed by the city Council as
provided in the city Charter.










   (C)   COUNCIL.  The legislative body of the city.










   (D)   CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEES. Employees who in the usual course of
their duties have access to confidential information concerning
administrative, financial, personnel, or legal matters of the city, subject
to use by the city in collective bargaining.










   (E)   DIRECTOR.  The administrator of personnel matters of the city
and his senior assistants, as designated by the City Manager.










   (F)   EMPLOYEE.  Any person employed by the city, except:





      (1)   The Mayor and members of the Council;





      (2)   All employees in exempt positions, except those
enumerated in § 10.02(9) of the Charter;





      (3)   Employees within their probationary period;





      (4)   Part-time (other than regular part-time), temporary,
casual, and seasonal employees;





      (5)   Confidential employees, management employees,
professional employees, and supervisory employees, as defined herein.










   (G)   EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION.  Any organization in which employees
participate, and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of
dealing with the city in matters concerning wages, hours, fringe benefits,
and working conditions, and which has registered with the city in accordance
with the provisions of § 34.36, or is recognized as an employee organization
under the provisions of § 34.37.











   (H)   IMPASSE.  The failure of the parties to an existing agreement
to achieve agreement 30 days prior to the expiration date thereof, or the
failure of the city and an employee organization to reach agreement on an
initial agreement within 90 days after negotiations have commenced.










   (I)   MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEE.  A department director, his chief
assistant, and other positions as designated from time to time by the City
Manager.










   (J)   NEGOTIATE.  The mutual obligation of the city and the duly
authorized representatives of a recognized employee organization to negotiate
in good faith in order to freely exchange information, opinions, and
proposals, and to endeavor to reach agreement on matters within the scope of
representation.










   (K)   PROFESSIONAL EMPLOYEE.  Any employee  engaged in work which
is predominantly intellectual, involving the consistent exercise of
discretion and judgment in its performance, and requiring knowledge of an
advanced type in a field of science or learning customarily acquired by a
prolonged course in an institution of higher learning or  a  hospital, 
as  distinguished from a  general academic education or from an
apprenticeship; or an employee who has completed the courses of specialized
intellectual instruction, and is performing related work under supervision of
a professional person to qualify himself to become a professional employee.










   (L)   RECOGNIZED EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION.  An employee organization
which has been certified pursuant to the provisions of § 34.36, as
representing the employees in a particular representation unit.










   (M)   REPRESENTATION UNIT.  A unit of city employees established
pursuant to the provisions of § 34.37.










   (N)   SUPERVISORY EMPLOYEE.  An individual:





      (1)   (a)   Whose primary duty consists of the management
of the city or of a customarily recognized department or subdivision thereof,
or the customary and regular direction of the work of 2 or more other
employees therein, or





         (b)   Who does not devote more than 20% of his hours of
work to activities which are not directly or closely related to the
performance of work described in division (N) (2) of this section, provided
that the requirements of this division shall not apply in the case of an
employee who is in sole charge of an independent activity or a physically
separated establishment; or





      (2)   Who has some or all of the following responsibilities in
the interest of the city:  to hire, transfer, suspend, layoff, recall,
promote, discharge, assign, reward, or discipline employees, or
responsibility to direct them, or to adjust their grievances, or effectively
to recommend action, if, in connection with the foregoing, exercise of the
authority is not of a merely routine or clerical nature, but requires the use
of independent judgment. 
(Ord. 2051, passed 11-22-77)









34.36  REGISTRATION PROCEDURE PRIOR TO  RECOGNITION.




   (A)   Employee organizations shall register, in the manner
hereinafter set forth, with the director prior to representing their
membership in their employee relations with the city.










   (B)   No employee organization shall exercise any rights under the
provisions of §§ 34.35 through 34.42 unless it has registered with the
director.










   (C)   The registration shall consist of:





      (1)   The name and address of the employee organization;





      (2)   A list of the officers and principal representatives of
the employee organization, with a statement of their authority to bind the
employee organization in contractual matters;





      (3)   A statement that the employee organization has, as one
of its primary purposes, the function of representing employees in their
employee relations with the city;





      (4)   The designation of 2 or more persons and their addresses
to whom notice to the employee organization for any purpose may be given; and





      (5)   A statement that the employee organization has no
restriction on membership based on race, color, creed, national origin, sex,
or citizenship.










   (D)   Any change in the registration shall be reported in writing to
the director within 30 days of the occurrence of the change.





(Ord. 2051, passed 11-22-77)









34.37  PROCEDURES FOR ESTABLISHING  REPRESENTATION UNITS.




   (A)   Any employee organization desiring to represent employees in a
representation unit, or anyone seeking to decertify an employee organization,
shall first submit to the director a petition in a form as the director may
prescribe, together with evidence that at least 30% of the total number of
employees in the proposed representation unit are interested in
representation or decertification.










   (B)   The director shall recommend the appropriate representation
unit or units sought; thereafter, the City Manager shall establish the
representation unit or units, subject only to review as set forth in division
(D) of this section.










   (C)   The city shall not include in any representation unit any 
employee  who  is  excluded from the definition of employee.  The City
Manager shall initially designate the representation unit which, in his
opinion, will be appropriate for collective bargaining.










   (D)   The final action of the City Manager, in determining the
appropriate representation unit, or in certifying the results of an election
under § 34.38 shall be subject to appeal to an independent arbitrator by any
petitioner or intervenor in the proceeding.  The appeal must be in writing,
and must be filed with the City Manager in the form prescribed by him within
10 calendar days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays, of the action
appealed from.  The independent arbitrator shall be appointed by the
American Arbitration Association under its applicable rules.  The fees and
expenses of the independent arbitrator and of the American Arbitration
Association shall be shared equally by the parties involved.  The ruling of
the independent arbitrator shall not add to, subtract from, or amend any
rules or regulations validly adopted pursuant to the provisions of §
34.39.  The ruling of the independent arbitrator shall be final and
conclusive.  (Ord. 2051, passed 11-22-77)









34.38  CERTIFICATION AS A RECOGNIZED  EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION.




   (A)   If, after reviewing the petition, it appears that a question
concerning representation exists, the City Manager shall direct that a secret
ballot election be held to ascertain whether a majority of the employees in
the appropriate representation unit desire representation.  The City Manager
shall certify the results of any valid election to council.










   (B)   No employee organization will be recognized for purposes of
collective bargaining which has not been certified as the representative of a
majority of the employees voting in an appropriate representation unit.  Any
employee organization so certified shall be awarded, via council resolution,
the exclusive right to negotiate and to represent the representation unit for
a reasonable period of time (in no case less than one year).  No further
election shall be held for the duration of any collective bargaining
agreement, nor for the first 12 months after certification as a recognized
employee organization.










   (C)   If 2 or more employee organizations seek to represent the same
or similar  representation  units, the City Manager shall direct that a
secret ballot election be held in which the competing employee organizations
may participate, and in which employees in the representation unit shall have
the opportunity to vote for any employee organization, or for no employee
organization.  If no choice on the ballot has an actual majority, a runoff
election between the 2 highest choices will be conducted.





(Ord. 2051, passed 11-22-77)









34.39  RULES AND REGULATIONS.




   The City Manager, with the approval of council, may promulgate
appropriate rules and regulations to implement the provisions of §§ 34.35
through 34.42.  These rules and regulations shall be administrative, and
shall not change, add to, or subtract from the substance of these sections. 
They may include, but not be limited to, appropriate proceedings for
certification petitions and decertification petitions by employees, and
conduct of secret ballot elections. 
(Ord. 2051, passed 11-22-77)









34.40  IMPASSE RESOLUTION.




   (A)   In the event of an impasse, and on the request of the city or
an employee organization, the parties shall request the services of a
mediator from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service to assist the
parties in resolving the dispute.










   (B)   If the mediator indicates to the council that the city and the
employee organization are unable to reach agreement, the city and the
employee organization shall each appoint a member to a fact finding board. 
The 2 members so appointed shall mutually agree upon the third member, who
shall be disinterested in the dispute and representative of the public.  If,
for any reason, the public member is not appointed promptly, the third member
shall be appointed through procedures established by the Federal Mediation
and Conciliation Service.










   (C)   (1)   The fact finding board shall investigate and
determine the facts surrounding the dispute, and within 30 days after
appointment, report its findings of fact and recommendations to the council,
the City Manager and the employee organization.  The board may submit
majority and dissenting findings and recommendations, if appropriate.





      (2)   During  the  board's appointment  and work, the city
and the employee organization in the dispute shall be under an obligation to
cooperate with the board and continue to negotiate for the purpose of
resolving the dispute.










   (D)   If this dispute remains unresolved for 45 days following the
submission of the board's findings and recommendations, the findings and
recommendations shall be considered by the council, and upon a majority vote,
the council will render a decision in the dispute at a regular meeting.  The
clerk of the council shall notify the employee organization of the decision
in writing.










   (E)   The decision of the council shall be final unless within 10
days following receipt of the notice by the employee organization either the
City Manager or the employee organization files a written protest with the
clerk of the council.  The matter shall thereupon be resolved by advisory
arbitration as set forth in division (F) below; provided, however, that
following receipt of the advisory arbitration award, and upon the agreement
of the employee organization and vote of a majority of the council, all or
part of the arbitration may be authorized as final and binding on the parties.










   (F)   The city and the employee organization may mutually agree upon
an arbitrator, or a joint letter requesting the Federal Mediation and
Conciliation Service to submit the names of 5 arbitrators, signed and mailed
by the city and the employee organization.  Upon receipt of the names, the
city and the employee organization shall alternately cross off one name until
one name remains, that person being selected as the arbitrator.  A date for
arbitration shall be set as soon as possible in accordance with the wishes of
the city and the employee organization, and the availability of the
arbitrator.  Both the city and the employee organization shall share equally
the expenses and fees of the arbitrator, and other expenses incident to the
arbitration hearing.





(Ord. 2051, passed 11-22-77)










34.41  CONSTRUCTION OF §§ 34.35 THROUGH 34.42.




   (A)   Nothing in §§ 34.35 through 34.42 shall be construed to deny
any person, organization, employee, or employer any rights granted by federal
or state law, or local ordinance or charter.










   (B)   If any provisions of §§ 34.35 through 34.42, or the
application of any provision to any person, organization, employee, or
circumstance shall be held to be invalid, the remainder of the sections or
the application of the provisions to persons, organizations, employees, or
circumstances, other than those being held invalid, shall not be affected
thereby.










   (C)   Subject to the limitations pertaining to employees and
representation units contained in §§ 34.35 through 34.42, nothing contained
herein shall be construed to prohibit 2 or more employee organizations from
acting jointly, as a single organization, to register, to petition for a
representation unit, or to petition for certification as a recognized
employee organization, and if certified, to represent the employees within
the representation unit.





(Ord. 2051, passed 11-22-77)









34.42  PROHIBITION AGAINST STRIKES AGAINST CITY.




   (A)   Definitions.  For the purposes of this section, the following
words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them
respectively.





      (1)   EMPLOYEE.  Any person holding a position by appointment
or employment in the government of the city.





      (2)   EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION.  Any organization in which
employees participate, and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part,
of dealing with the city in matters concerning wages, hours, fringe benefits,
or working conditions.





      (3)   STRIKE.  The failure to report for duty, the willful
absence from one's position, the stoppage of work, or the abstinence in whole
or in part from the full, faithful, and proper performance of the duties of
employment, for the purpose of inducing, influencing, or coercing a change in
the conditions, compensation, rights, privileges, or obligations of
employment, or of intimidating, coercing, or unlawfully influencing others
from remaining in or from assuming public employment.  This section does not
limit, impair, or affect the right of any employee, as defined above, to the
expression or communication of a view, grievance, complaint, or opinion 
on  any  matter  related  to  the  conditions or  compensation  of 
public employment or their betterment, so long as the expression or
communication is not designed to and does not interfere with the full,
faithful, and proper performance of the duties of employment.










   (B)   Notice, suspension, and hearing.





      (1)   Any employee who, without the approval of his superior,
unlawfully fails to report for duty, absents himself from his position, or
abstains in whole or in part from full, faithful, and proper performance of
his position for the purpose of inducing, influencing, or coercing a change
in the conditions or compensation, rights, privileges, or obligations of
employment, or of intimidating, coercing, or unlawfully influencing others
from remaining in or from assuming employment shall be considered on strike.





      (2)   The employee shall be sent a notice by the director, or
the City Manager, addressed to his residence as set forth in his employment
record, that he is on strike, and is suspended without pay.  The employee
may request and subsequently be entitled to establish that he did not violate
the provisions of this section.  The request must be filed in writing, with
the director or the City Manager, within 10 calendar days after the regular
compensation of the employee has ceased.  In the event of a request, the
director shall, within 10 calendar days of receipt of the request, commence a
proceeding for the determination of whether the provisions of this section
have been violated by the employee.  The proceeding shall be undertaken
without unnecessary delay.  The director shall, upon hearing all facts
presented, make a recommendation as to the disposition of the matter to the
City Manager.  The City Manager shall finally decide what action is to be
taken, and the employee upon receipt of the written decision of the City
Manager, shall have the right to appeal the decision to the personnel appeals
board of the city in accordance with the board's rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 2052, passed 11-22-77)
























CHAPTER 35
PUBLIC RECORDS POLICY









35.01   Purpose





35.02   Custodian of Public Records; when available





35.03   General provisions





35.04   Denial of a public records request





35.05   Compliance





35.06   Failure to respond to a public records request




 



35.01  PURPOSE.




   The City of West Carrollton maintains many records that are used in the
administration and operation of the City.  In accordance with State law, the
City of West Carrollton Records Commission has adopted a schedule of records
retention and disposition that identify these records and this schedule is
available in the Mayor’s office.  This schedule lists generally the types
of records that are stored on a fixed medium (paper, computer, film, etc.)
that are created, received, or sent under the jurisdiction of the City and
document the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures,
operations, or other activities of the City.  The records maintained by the
City and the ability to access them are means to provide trust between the
public and the City.





(Res. 16-2007.  Passed 10-23-07.)









35.02  CUSTODIAN OF PUBLIC RECORDS; WHEN AVAILABLE.




   (A)   The Clerk of Council is the official Public Records Custodian
of all records which are centrally maintained by the City.  Department heads
are the official custodians of all records maintained within their
departments.  Public records requests may be made directly to Department
heads or through the Public Records Custodian.  Requests for records from
the police department may be made directly to the police records clerk.










   (B)   Public records requests will be accommodated during regular
business hours when offices maintaining said records are open for business. 
Public records requests will not be accepted on weekends or holidays. 





(Res. 16-2007.  Passed 10-23-07.)









35.03  GENERAL PROVISIONS.




   (A)   Public Records.  Public records include the following:  Any
document - paper, electronic (including, but not limited to, e-mail), or
other format - that is created or received by, or comes under the
jurisdiction of a public office that documents the organization, functions,
policies, decisions, procedures, operations, or other activities of the
office.  All records of the City of West Carrollton are public unless they
are specifically exempt from disclosure under the Ohio Revised Code or
Federal law.





      (1)   It is the policy of the City of West Carrollton that
records will be organized and maintained so that they are readily available
for inspection and copying.










   (B)   Record Requests.  Each request for public records should be
evaluated for a response using the following guidelines:





      (1)   Although no specific language is required to make a
request, the requester must at least identify the records requested with
sufficient clarity to allow the public office to identify, retrieve, and
review the records.  If it is not clear what records are being sought, the
Public Records Custodian must contact the requester for clarification, and
should assist the requestor is revising the request by informing the
requestor of the manner in which the office keeps its records.





      (2)   The Public Records Custodian may ask the requester to
put a verbal request in writing, may ask for the requester to give
identifying information, or may inquire about the intended use of the
information; but a written request is not mandatory, identifying information
is not required and the intended use does not have to be disclosed. 
However, providing such information would benefit the requester by enhancing
the ability of the Public Records Custodian to identify, locate and deliver
the public records requested.  Some Departments have forms that the
requester has the option of using in making the request. 





         Public records can be accessed by one of the following
methods:  a request to view public records in person; a request for copies
of public records that the requester will personally pick up from the Public
Records Custodian; or a request for copies of public records that the
requester wants to have mailed or otherwise transmitted to the requester.





         Public records must be made available for inspection
promptly.  Copies of public records must be made available within a
reasonable period of time.  “Prompt” and “reasonable” take into
account the volume of records requested; the proximity of the location where
the records are stored; and the necessity for any legal review of the records
requested.





         (a)   Request to view public records.  The requester
may make a request to view public records.  The Public Records Custodian
shall prepare the public records for inspection “promptly” as required by
the Ohio Revised Code.  The actual time required to comply with the request
may depend on the circumstances (such as the location of the records, the
manner kept or the volume of records requested).





         (b)   Copies of public records.  The requester may make
a request to the Public Records Custodian to have copies of public records
made.





         (c)   Transmitting copies of public records.  A
requester may request that copies of public records be transmitted to him or
her by U.S. Mail or by any other means of transmission that is available and
is conducive to transmitting the public records.  The cost of transmission
must be paid by the requester before the public records will be provided. 
While the City is under no obligation to provide records in electronic
format, it is the policy of the City to provide information to the public in
the most practical and convenient manner, considering all of the
circumstances.  Therefore, if the City receives a request for information to
be made available in an electronic format, such request will be forwarded to
the Public Records Custodian for a determination as to whether such
information will be generated and released in an electronic format.





      (3)   Each request should be evaluated for an estimated length
of time required to gather the records.  Routine requests for records should
be satisfied immediately if feasible to do so.  Routine requests include,
but are not limited to, meeting minutes (both in draft and  final form),
budgets, salary information, forms and applications, personnel rosters,
etc.  If fewer than 20 pages of copies are requested or if the records are
readily available in an electronic format that can be e-mailed or downloaded
easily, these should be made as quickly as the equipment allows.





      (4)   All requests for public records must either be satisfied
or be acknowledged in writing by the public office within three business days
following the office’s receipt of the request.  If a request is deemed
significantly beyond “routine”such as seeking a voluminous number of
copies or requiring extensive research, the acknowledgement must include the
following:





         (a)   An estimated number of business days it will take
to satisfy the request.





         (b)   An estimated cost if copies are requested.





         (c)   Any items within the request that may be exempt
from disclosure.





      (5)   Any denial of public records requested must include an
explanation, including legal authority.  If portions of a record are public
and portions are exempt, the exempt portions are to be redacted and the rest
released.  If there are redactions, each redaction must be accompanied by a
supporting explanation, including legal authority.










   (C)   Fees and Payment.  Those seeking public records will be
charged only the actual cost of making copies or printing pictures and shall
also pay the actual cost (e.g. postage) of delivery and other supplies used
in mailing, delivery or transmission of the public record.  Payment for
public records requests may be required prior to the actual copying or
printing of records.





      Copies made on letter or legal size paper are $0.05 per page. 
If the Public Records Custodian uses an outside copying service to make the
copies, the requester will be required to pay the cost of the entire copying
job, as billed by the copying service.  Copies that are requested in some
format other than normal letter or legal paper will be “at cost”, without
taking into account employee time spent preparing the copies.  (For example,
public records in electronic format placed on a CD will be assessed the cost
of the CD, plus the cost, if any, of creating the electronic copies.)





   Public records will only be copied by the Public Records Custodian or
other authorized officers, employees or representatives.  The Public Records
Custodian may use an outside copying service to make the copies, at the
Public Records Custodian’s discretion.  Under no circumstances will the
requester be permitted to make the copies himself or herself.  The manner of
copying is at the discretion of the Public Records Custodian.  Requests to
copy a certain number of public records on a given page, by “reducing”
copy size or otherwise, may be met at the discretion of the Public Records
Custodian.





   Individual departments may adopt a policy that if fewer than 10 pages
of copies are requested, no fee will be charged.  All requests exceeding 10
pages will be charged a fee of $0.05 per page for all pages copied.  No
receipt will be required to be issued for payments received of less than
$1.00.





   Ohio law may provide for specific fees to be charged for certain
records (e.g. police accident reports, $4.00 each, with photographs at an
additional cost, pursuant to R.C. §5502.12).





(Res. 16-2007.  Passed 10-23-07.)









35.04  DENIAL OF A PUBLIC RECORDS REQUEST.




   Under certain circumstances, records are not defined as “public
records” under Ohio law or are exempt from disclosure under federal law. 
In these situations, the public record request will be denied on that
basis.  The Ohio Revised Code requires that any denial be supported by legal
authority.  A denial that is responding to a written public records request
will also be given in writing.  Written reasons for denial will not be
required for verbal public records requests.  Any denial of public records
requested must include an explanation, including legal authority.  If
portions of a record are public and portions are exempt, the exempt portions
are to be redacted and the rest released.  If there are redactions, each
redaction must be accompanied by a supporting explanation, including legal
authority, unless federal or state law authorize or requires the redaction.
The Ohio Revised Code regards certain actions as being “denials” of
public record requests.  These situations are handled as follows:










   (A)   Redaction.  The Ohio Revised Code defines a “redaction”
as “obscuring or deleting any information that is exempt from the duty to
permit public inspection or copying from an item that otherwise meets the
definition of a “record” in Section 149.011 of the Revised Code.” 
Examples of redaction are “blacking out” or “whiting out” or
“cutting out” portions of a document.





      When a public record contains information that is not within the
definition of a “public record” as defined by law, or is exempt by law,
the Public Records Custodian will make available that portion of the public
record that does meet the definition of a “public record”.  The Public
Records Custodian shall make a copy of the public record, perform the
redaction, then make a copy of that sheet and make the second copy available
to the requester.  The requester will not be charged for the first copy
made.  If practical, the first copy will be retained by the Public Records
Custodian.










   (B)   Requests That Are Ambiguous, Overly Broad, or are Difficult to
Identify the Public Records Requested.  At times, a requester may make a
public records request from which the Public Records Custodian cannot
determine which public records are being sought.  In such circumstances, the
Public Records Custodian will inform the requester that the public records
request is denied, but will give the requester an opportunity to more
accurately describe the public records sought.  If the requester is seeking
public records organized in a certain way, but the public records are not
organized in that way, the  Public Records Custodian will inform the
requester of the manner that the public records of the office under
discussion are maintained and accessed.  The requester may then submit a
public records request that more accurately reflects the actual organization
of the public records sought. 
(Res. 16-2007.  Passed 10-23-07.)









35.05  COMPLIANCE.




   The Public Records Custodian reserves the right to consult with legal
counsel prior to the release of any public records.  This is to allow the
City to comply with laws regarding the release of certain records. 
(Res. 16-2007.  Passed 10-23-07.)









35.06  FAILURE TO RESPOND TO A PUBLIC RECORDS REQUEST.




   The City of West Carrollton recognizes the legal and non-legal
consequences of failure to properly respond to  a public records request. 
A public office’s failure to comply with a request may result in remedies
and damages according to R.C. 149.43.





(Res. 16-2007.  Passed 10-23-07.)
























CHAPTER 36: COUNCIL RULES AND PROCEDURES









36.01   Preamble





36.02   Meetings





36.03   Officers of Council





36.04   Clerk of Council





36.05   Definition of quorum





36.06   Appointed officials and members of the City staff as they relate
to Council





36.07   Conduct of Council business





36.08   Introduction of legislation





36.09   Voting





36.10   Debate





36.11   Motions





36.12   Amendments





36.13   Robert’s Rules of Order














36.01  PREAMBLE




   No provision or section of these rules which conflicts with, or
restricts those rights provided by the Constitution of the United States, the
Constitution of the State of Ohio, the General Law, the West Carrollton
Municipal Code, or the West Carrollton Charter shall have any force or effect.





(Ord. 3389.  Passed 8-26-08.)









36.02  MEETINGS.




   (A)   Definitions





      (1)   "Meeting" means any prearranged gathering that is
attended by a majority of the members of the public body and is arranged for
the purpose of conducting, transacting, deliberating, or discussing public
business.





      (2)   "Pre-scheduled meeting" means any pre-arranged regular
meeting of Council or Work Session.





      (3)   "News Media" means any newspaper, magazine of regular
and general circulation and any radio or television station.










   (B)   A regular meeting of the City Council will normally be held on
the second and fourth Tuesday of each month.  Such meetings shall be called
to order at 6:30 p.m. in the Council Chambers of the City of West Carrollton
or in any other public place within the corporate limits of the City of West
Carrollton. The first Council meeting in January of each year shall be the
organizational meeting of Council.  At such meeting, the newly elected
members of Council shall take the Oath of Office and the Council shall
proceed to elect a Deputy Mayor and may transact such other business as may
come before it. 










   (C)   Other special meetings may be called by the Mayor, or any four
(4) members of Council, provided that notice is given to all members of
Council, the Clerk of Council and the City Manager, at least twenty-four (24)
hours prior to such meetings, when practical, stating clearly the time, place
and purpose of the meeting and provided that notice is given to persons and
news media as provided in Subsections and hereof.  Council may, by motion,
at any meeting of the Council, establish another meeting date.  Notice will
be given as provided above.










   (D)   When any regular meeting of the Council falls due on a legal
Federal holiday, on an election day, or on a traditional holiday, the Council
may meet on a date to be established by Council.










   (E)   All meetings of Council, any committee thereof, and all boards
and commissions of the City shall be open to the public except as otherwise
provided by Ohio statute or by ordinance with respect to executive sessions.
A majority of members of Council shall constitute a quorum at all meetings.










   (F)   Work session meetings of Council shall be held upon call of
the Mayor on Tuesday evenings after the regular Council meeting or as
otherwise agreed to by the majority of Council.  Agendas for these meetings
shall include an item "Council/City Manager Communications" to provide time
for quick questions and announcements.  First priority of issues shall be
given to timely and urgent issues; second priority will be given to items
left from past agendas, and third priority shall be given to new subjects. 
It shall be the intent of Council to not revisit an issue previously
discussed for a period of two years unless otherwise determined by the
majority of Council to do so.  Work sessions of Council shall be considered
informal meetings for discussion purposes, shall be properly noticed, open to
the public, and only with no formal action being taken. 










   (G)   Executive sessions are not open to the public.  An executive
session shall be deemed a private conference of Council if not held during,
or immediately preceding or following, a regular meeting.  The decision to
hold an executive session may be made in any of the following ways:





      (1)   By listing it on an agenda of the Council meeting which
is available to persons attending the meeting.





      (2)   By a motion passed by affirmative vote of the members
present.





      (3)   By any other method which the Council is willing to use.





      (4)   Council members-elect may be invited to attend executive
sessions only at the invitation of a majority of council.





   The subjects for which an executive session may be held shall include
those described in the Ohio Revised Code 121.22.  It shall be sufficient
disclosure of the fact that an executive session has been or will be held and
of the subject of the session if the fact and subject are listed on the
meeting agenda, or are announced in the decision by the Mayor or a motion of
the members to hold an executive session, or are set forth in the minutes. 
Subjects may be identified by using the capital letter titles in the
following subparagraphs.





         (a)   Personnel. To consider the appointment,
employment, dismissal, discipline, promotion, demotion, or compensation of a
public employee, or official, or [to consider] the investigation of charges
or complaints against a public employee, official, licensee, or regulated
individual, unless the public employee, official, licensee, or regulated
individual requests a public hearing.  Except as otherwise provided by law,
the Council shall not hold an executive session for the discipline of an
elected official for conduct related to the performance of his official
duties or for his removal from office.





         (b)   Property. To consider the purchase of property
(real property and personal property, whether it is tangible or intangible)
for public purposes, or for the sale of property (real or personal property)
at competitive bidding, if premature disclosure of information would give an
unfair competitive or bargaining advantage to a person whose personal,
private interest is adverse to the general public interest.





If the minutes of the Council show that all meetings and deliberations have
been conducted in compliance with this provision, any instrument executed by
Council purporting to convey, lease, or otherwise dispose of any right,
title, or interest in any public property shall be conclusively presumed to
have been executed in compliance with this provision insofar as title or
other interest of any bona fide purchasers, lessees, or transferees of the
property is concerned.





         (c)   Court Action. To conduct conferences with the
public body's attorney to discuss pending or imminent court action.  Court
action is pending if a lawsuit has been commenced; court action is imminent
if it is on the point of happening or is impending.





         (d)   Collective Bargaining.  Preparing for,
conducting, or reviewing negotiations or bargaining sessions with public
employees concerning their compensation or other terms and conditions of
their employment.





         (e)   Confidential Matters.  Matters required to be
kept confidential by Federal law or rules or state statutes. 





         (f)   Security Arrangements.  Specialized details of
security arrangements where disclosure of the matters discussed might reveal
information that could be used for the purpose of committing, or avoiding
prosecution for, a violation of the law.





      A resolution, rule, ordinance, or formal action of any kind is
invalid unless adopted in an open meeting of the Council, committee thereof,
board or commission.  A resolution, rule, ordinance or formal action adopted
in an open meeting that results from deliberations in a meeting not open to
the public is invalid unless the deliberations were for a purpose
specifically authorized herein.










   (H)   Abstentions - Every member present shall vote when the
question is put, unless the member abstains.  If there is a public hearing
or any discussion among members of Council regarding a subject on which a
member intends to abstain from voting, that member should declare the intent
to abstain and should remove himself or herself from the discussion.  Any
member who abstains from voting may make a brief statement of the reason for
doing so.










   (I)   Minutes of all meetings of the Council, a committee thereof, a
board or commission shall be kept in the office of the Clerk of Council,
promptly recorded and open to the public.  They need not be verbatim but
instead may be a summary in form, listing only agenda topics discussed, other
matters of importance, and actions which involved votes of members.  Minutes
serve as records of actions, not as actions themselves.  Minutes need only
reflect the general subject matter of discussions in executive sessions (as
those executive session subjects are identified by capital letter titles) and
shall be inserted into the Minute book. Minutes found to have errors.
omissions or found to be invalid shall not invalidate the actions recorded in
the minutes.










   (J)   Any person may obtain the time and place of all regularly
scheduled meetings by contacting the Clerk of Council, who shall disclose
such requested information.










   (K)   Any person upon request and payment of a fee not to exceed
$1.00 per meeting or a supply of sufficient self-addressed stamped envelopes
given to the Clerk of Council, may receive reasonable advance notification of
all meetings of the Council, committees thereof, or all boards and
commissions at which any specific type of public business is to be
discussed.  Said person shall specify to the Clerk of Council the particular
meetings for which such notices are requested. In the event said
self-addressed stamped envelopes are not provided to the Clerk of Council, or
said fee is not paid, the Clerk of Council shall not mail said notices to
said person.










   (L)   No meeting of the Council, a committee thereof, a board or
commission shall be held unless at least twenty-four (24) hours advance
notice has been given to news media that have requested notification. Except
in the event of an emergency, the member or members calling the meeting shall
notify the news media that have requested notification immediately of the
time, place and purpose of the meeting. An emergency meeting is a special
meeting convened because a situation requires immediate official action. For
this type of meeting, the member or members calling the meeting must
immediately notify all media outlets that have requested such notification,
as well as all other persons that have specifically requested such
notification, of the time, place and purpose of the emergency meeting.










   (M)   Immediately upon any notice of meeting required by these Rules
having been given, the following certification shall be completed by the
person giving said notice and said certification shall be filed with the
Clerk of Council who shall maintain a record of said certifications:










CERTIFICATION OF NOTICE










   I,





_____________________________________________ do hereby certify:










   (1)   that I am the _____________________________(TITLE) of the City
of West Carrollton, Ohio; and










   (2)   That on this ______ day of __________________, 20_____, by
telephone, depositing in regular mail addressed to the last known address of
the recipient (cross out one) I gave notice of a meeting of the
__________________ (Public Body) of the City of West Carrollton to the
following persons and news media:















(Person certifying the giving of notice.)





(Ord. 3389.  Passed 8-26-08.)









36.03  OFFICERS OF COUNCIL.




   At the first meeting in January after the local election, Council shall
select a Deputy-Mayor in accordance with the City Charter.










Deputy-Mayor and Temporary Chair










   (A)   The Deputy-Mayor shall act as Mayor when the Mayor is absent
or unable to serve.










   (B)   The Deputy-Mayor, when presiding, shall have the same power
and duties as may be prescribed by the Charter, rules of Council, the
Municipal Code, and by the Ohio Revised Code.










   (C)   In the absence of both the Mayor and the Deputy-Mayor, the
Council may appoint from its members a temporary Chair.










   (D)   The temporary Chair, when presiding, shall have the same power
and duties as may be prescribed by the Charter, rules of Council, the
Municipal Code, and by the Ohio Revised Code.





(Ord. 3389.  Passed 8-26-08.)









36.04 CLERK OF COUNCIL.




   (A)   The Clerk of Council and/or the Assistant Clerk of Council
shall serve at the discretion of the Council and Council shall provide
reasonable compensation for the services provided.










   (B)   The Clerk of Council and/or the Assistant Clerk of Council
shall:





      (1)   Attend all meetings of Council and other meetings upon
request of the Mayor and/or Council.





      (2)   Prepare a record of proceedings of all meetings of
Council which shall be termed the "minutes" and be custodian of such
records.  All such proceedings shall be available to the public for
inspection.  The Clerk shall prepare a record of proceedings of other
meetings upon request.





      (3)   Prepare an agenda for each meeting of Council.





      (4)   The Clerk of Council shall furnish all transcripts,
orders, and certificates, which may be properly required of the Clerk and
shall be entitled to charge for all attested certificates and transcripts,
the same fees that are allowed by law for similar services; provided, that
the same shall be furnished free of charge when ordered by the Council or
required by any Councilmember or City officer, in the prosecution of official
duties.





      (5)   Assign numbers, in their proper sequence, to all
ordinances and resolutions.





      (6)   Maintain a permanent record of all ordinances and
resolutions, and by appropriate notation, show subsequent repeal and
amendment thereto.





      (7)   Perform all other duties incidental to the office.





      (8)   Perform such other duties as directed by the City
Charter, City Council, the Municipal Code, and the Ohio Revised Code.










   (C)   ASSISTANT CLERK OF COUNCIL - The Assistant Clerk of Council
shall perform such duties as are assigned to her/him by the Clerk of Council
and shall have the same authority and duties as the Clerk of Council in the
event of her/his absence or inability to serve.  (Ord. 3389.  Passed
8-26-08.)









36.05  DEFINITION OF QUORUM.




   “QUORUM”  -  a quorum shall be four (4) members of the City
Council.





(Ord. 3389.  Passed 8-26-08.)









36.06  APPOINTED OFFICIALS AND MEMBERS OF THE CITY STAFF AS THEY RELATE TO
COUNCIL.




   (A)   Appointed officials and Members of City Staff may be requested
to attend meetings of Council and answer questions directed to them by
Council, provided that such requests shall be made through the City Manager
in accordance with the provisions of the City Charter.   










   (B)   Mayor





      (1)   The Mayor, Deputy-Mayor, or temporary Chairman shall
serve as the presiding officer of Council, and shall be responsible for the
conduct and order of the meetings of Council. 





      (2)   The Mayor shall be considered a member of Council and
have the right to vote on all issues before the Council.





      (3)   The Mayor shall determine which committees shall
consider new business, subject to challenge by majority of Council.





      (4)   When a ruling or order has been made, it may be appealed
to Council on the demand of two members.  On such appeal there shall be no
debate, but the member making the appeal may briefly state his reasons for
the same, and the presiding officer shall have the right to a similar
statement.  A vote of the majority of the members present or 4 members if
all are present in favor of overriding shall be necessary to override a
ruling of order.





      (5)   The Mayor shall sign all ordinances, resolutions and
other matters requiring the approval of Council.





      (6)   The Mayor shall perform all other duties prescribed for
the office by Ordinance or Resolution of Council, by the City Charter, the
Municipal Code, and by the Constitution of the State of Ohio.  (Ord. 3389. 
Passed 8-26-08.)









36.07  CONDUCT OF COUNCIL BUSINESS.




   (A)   The Agenda  - An agenda of business to be considered by
Council and copies of all ordinances and resolutions listed thereon and other
pertinent material shall be prepared by the Clerk of Council and mailed or
delivered to each Council member at least 72 hours prior to each regular
meeting of Council, when possible.





      The agenda for a regular meeting shall contain:





      (1)   A listing by title of each ordinance to be considered.





      (2)   A listing by title of each resolution to be considered.





      (3)   A listing of known persons wishing to appear before
Council and the subject matter to be addressed.





      (4)   Any other matters of known business.










   (B)   Order of Business  - The presiding officer shall conduct the
Council meeting in the order outlined by the agenda.  However, agenda items
may be rearranged by the presiding officer during the meeting to accommodate
presenters, to make timely adjustments, and for other concerns that may
arise. The order of the agenda shall be as follows:





      (1)   Call the meeting to order.





      (2)   Pledge of allegiance to the flag.





      (3)   Roll call.





      (4)   Excuse absent Councilmembers.





      (5)   Action on minutes of previous meetings.





      (6)   Public Hearings.





      (7)   Communications and Presentations.





      (8)   Comments by the Audience - COMMENTS ARE LIMITED TO 5
MINUTES PER PERSON UNLESS MORE TIME IS GRANTED BY THE MAYOR. 





      (9)   Consent Agenda (A member of Council can remove an item
for separate discussion.  A second is not required to remove that item)





      (10)   Unfinished Business





      (11)   New Business





      (12)   Officials' Reports:





         Reports by Officers





      (13)   Unscheduled Business





      (14)   Comments by the Audience - COMMENTS ARE LIMITED TO 5
MINUTES PER PERSON UNLESS MORE TIME IS GRANTED BY THE MAYOR. 





      (15)   Comments by Council





      (16)   Work Session (if indicated)





      (17)   Adjourn the meeting.










      Any Council Member may request that a matter of business be
placed on the agenda provided sufficient notice is given the Clerk for its
preparation.  The Clerk will receive items for the agenda (not less complete
than rough draft form) until 12 o'clock noon on Thursday preceding a
scheduled meeting of Council.  All officers of the municipality and members
of the public are urged to cooperate with the Clerk in making the agenda
complete and accurate.  Every effort shall be made to place matters before
Council for discussion in a Work Session prior to placing them on the agenda
for a regular meeting of Council.  While nothing in this section will
prevent the introduction of new business not listed on the agenda, Council
may require additional time to study any matter not included on the agenda.










      All matters under the consent agenda are considered by the City
Council to be routine and will be enacted by one motion. Any City Council
member may remove an item from consent by request. No second is required for
removal of an item. Items removed for separate discussion will be considered
after the motion to approve the consent agenda.










   (C)   COMMITTEES - Council shall have the following standing
committees appointed annually by the majority of Council:  Coordinating
Committee; Special Studies Committee; and Operations Review Committee. 
Special committees for limited purposes may be appointed by the Mayor to
exist only for the length of time required to complete their purpose.










   (D)   COMMITTEE MEETINGS - Committee meetings will be called by the
Chairman of such committee.  The Chair shall give notice of the meeting to
all members of the committee.










   Each committee may adopt its own rules of order.  In the absence of
written rules, the ordinary parliamentary rules will prevail, as outlined by
Robert's Rules of Order.










   (E)   COMMITTEE REPORTS - Each standing and special committee shall
make a final report, in writing, of its recommendations to Council including
minority reports, if any.  Interim reports may be given orally or in writing.










   (F)   COMMITTEE RECORDS - The Clerk of Council shall maintain a
record of all recommendations including minority reports presented to Council
by a committee.










   When an ordinance or resolution is reported on by a committee for the
purpose of being introduced to Council, such prepared legislation must be
approved by the Municipal Attorney as to form, consistency with existing
ordinances, the Charter and constitutional provisions.










   (G)   TRAVEL BY MAYOR AND MEMBERS OF COUNCIL - Mayor and Council
members are to follow same per diem/day for meals rules as outlined for city
employees.  COUNCIL MEMBERS/MAYOR WHO ARE RETIRING OR NOT RE-ELECTED MAY NOT
TRAVEL AT CITY'S EXPENSE TO CONFERENCES UNLESS APPROVED BY MAJORITY OF
COUNCIL.  ALL OVERNIGHT TRAVEL SHALL BE APPROVED IN ADVANCE BY A MAJORITY OF
COUNCIL.










   (H)   PUBLIC HEARINGS - Public hearings shall be held in conformance
with provisions of the City Charter, Municipal Code, the Ohio Revised Code,
Ohio Sunshine Laws, and when in the opinion of the Council, the public
interest is served by such a hearing.





   The presiding officer shall conduct such public hearings as may be
held, and shall set forth rules of procedure and conduct for the hearing.





   Notwithstanding the above, the following general rules shall be in
force during any public hearing:





      (1)   The purpose of a public hearing is to hear both sides of
an issue, unruly outbursts will not be tolerated; courtesy shall be extended
to all speakers on the question.





      (2)   Speakers shall limit their remarks to the question at
hand; in order to help insure that as many views as possible be recognized.





      (3)   All questions and comments shall be addressed to the
presiding officer.





      (4)   No more than 10 minutes shall be given to any speaker,
unless waived by the Chair.





      (5)   Unless waived by a majority of Councilmembers present, a
public hearing shall be limited to one (1) hour, with as near as possible,
half the time given to persons representing each view.










   (I)   CONDUCT OF AUDIENCE -  The following procedure should be
followed by members of the audience who wish to speak at any public meeting
or public hearing and who are granted the opportunity to do so.





      (1)   Please wait to be recognized by the Mayor before
speaking.





      (2)   Upon being recognized, please rise.





      (3)   If there is a podium or other location at which persons
addressing the Council are to speak, the person who has been recognized
should leave his or her seat and proceed to that speaking location.





      (4)   Before speaking, a member of the audience should
identify himself or herself by name and address, and should disclose if that
address is within the City of West Carrollton.





      (5)   Customarily, proponents will be recognized first,
followed by persons who oppose the matter or issue, with a subsequent
opportunity for rebuttal.





      (6)   Except when leave is granted by the Mayor, there is a
time limit of five minutes for each speaker in the audience.  This does not
apply to the person or organization who or which has filed the application,
variance request or other matter being heard by the Council.





      (7)   Please avoid repeating points made by earlier
speakers.  The Mayor has the right to terminate comments that are redundant.





      (8)   Comments from persons in the audience should be
addressed to the Mayor, not to proponents or opponents of the issue, not to
city staff, and not to other members of the audience.





      (9)   A public meeting or a public hearing is an opportunity
for Council to receive input from citizens of the community.  It is not the
place for a debate between persons in the audience and the applicant, city
staff or members of Council.  Debating tactics such as demanding answers to
questions framed in favor of the speaker are frowned upon and may be
prohibited.  Since the meetings are for input, not an instant dialogue or
debate, questions to which Council chooses to respond may well be answered at
a subsequent meeting.





      (10)   Customarily, everyone will be given an opportunity to
speak before any other person is allowed to speak twice.  This does not
apply to the applicant's or proponent's right to rebuttal.





      (11)   The Council reserves the right to put an end to that
portion of any meeting or hearing in which comments from the audience are
allowed, so as to leave adequate time for Council to proceed with its other
business.





         (Ord. 3389.  Passed 8-26-08.)









36.08  INTRODUCTION OF LEGISLATION.




   All proposed ordinances and formal resolutions shall be sponsored by a
member of Council.  All such proposed legislation shall be presented in
writing and shall bear the name of the sponsor.  The presiding officer may,
and shall upon motion from the floor, refer proposed legislation to a
committee for study and recommendation.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, upon
vote of Council present and voting, proposed legislation may be brought
directly to the floor for council action.





(Ord. 3389.  Passed 8-26-08.)









36.09  VOTING.




   Voting on all proposed legislation and motions shall be oral and in
open meetings of Council.  Voting need not be by roll call unless
specifically requested by a member of Council.  DISCUSSION OF THE ISSUE
SHALL BE REQUESTED BY THE PRESIDING OFFICER AND TAKE PLACE BEFORE THE ROLL IS
CALLED.  ROLL SHOULD NOT BE INTERRUPTED UNLESS A PROCEDURAL QUESTION IS
RAISED.  If by roll call the Clerk shall call the roll and each present
Councilmember shall respond "yes", "no" or "abstain."  No other comment
shall be considered proper during the voting.  The order of voting by the
Council members shall rotate with each successive meeting, however, the Mayor
shall always vote last.  After the voting is completed, the presiding
officer shall announce the result.





   Except as otherwise provided in these rules, the Charter, the Municipal
Code or the Ohio Revised Code, a simple majority of members present shall
carry any motion, ordinance or resolution.  A member who abstains shall be
counted for the purpose of determining a quorum, but no vote shall be
recorded for that member on the issue from which the member abstained.





   The vote of any member of Council shall not be questioned. 





(Ord. 3389.  Passed 8-26-08.)









36.10  DEBATE.




   The presiding officer may control debate according to the following
rules:





   (A)   No Councilmember shall be permitted to speak longer than ten
minutes on any motion.





   (B)   While members of Council may yield to other members, the
limitation outlined in subsection (A)  still prevails.





   (C)   The presiding officer may refuse the floor to any person when
the tactics are obviously dilatory and not in the best interest of Council.





   (D)   The above rules may be waived in the normal manner of
challenge to the chair.





      (Ord. 3389.  Passed 8-26-08.)









36.11  MOTIONS.




   (A)   When a question is before Council or under discussion, or a
motion has been made, no motion shall be proper except the following:





      (1)   Motion to adjourn.





      (2)   Motion to table until stated future time.





      (3)   Request that discussion end and vote be called.





      (4)   Motion to refer to standing or special committee.





      (5)   Motion to amend motion under discussion.





      (6)   Motion to postpone action for an indefinite time.  A
motion to postpone indefinitely shall not be entertained by the presiding
officer when in conflict with provisions of the Municipal Code or the Ohio
Revised Code. 










   (B)   Vote without Discussion.  Relative to the motions listed
under subsection (A), motions will go immediately to a vote without
discussion, except for a brief explanation by the person making such motion.










   (C)   A motion requesting that the discussion end and a vote be
taken will not be proper until all members have had the opportunity to be
heard on the motion in main.  Once this has been accomplished, the motion
will go to a vote without discussion, except for a brief explanation by the
person requesting the motion.










   (D)   A motion to amend is susceptible to one amendment.  An
amendment, once rejected, may not be moved again in the same form.










   (E)   If a motion to postpone action for an indefinite time is
carried, the principal question shall be declared lost.










   (F)   Motion to reconsider.  A motion to reconsider may be made
only by a member who had voted with the prevailing side.










   (G)   A motion to remove any matter from the table, or to remove any
matter from committee, shall be in order at any succeeding meeting.










   Such motion shall go to a vote without discussion except for a brief
explanation by the members so moving.










   (H)   All motions shall require a second.





(Ord. 3389.  Passed 8-26-08.)









36.12  AMENDMENTS.




   These rules may be amended or altered or new rules adopted by a vote of
the majority of all members elected at any meeting of the Council to which
the subject has been referred at a previous meeting.





(Ord. 3389.  Passed 8-26-08.)









36.13  ROBERT’S RULES OF ORDER.




   In the absence of any rule upon the matter of business, the Council
shall be governed by "Robert's Rules of Order."





(Ord. 3389.  Passed 8-26-08.)



















CHAPTER 37: GENERAL FEE SCHEDULE









   EDITOR’S NOTE:  Ordinance 3437, passed December 22, 2009, provides
for the following:  By virtue of the authority vested in the City Council by
the Charter for the City of West Carrollton, all of the rates and fees set
forth in Chapter 37, the General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of
the City of West Carrollton shall be subject to an automatic annual increase
equal to the percentage obtained by averaging the national inflation rate
from the United States Labor Department, Bureau of Labor Statistics, for the
previous three years.  All rates and fees $10.00 or less shall be rounded to
the nearest $0.10 and all rates and fees greater than $10.00 shall be rounded
to the nearest dollar.  This increase shall be implemented by the City of
West Carrollton City Manager each year without further action by this
Council.  The first such increase shall take effect December 31, 2009 and
each increase thereafter shall take place no later than March 31 of each
year, commencing with March 31, 2010.





   Ordinance 3443, passed February 23, 2009 provides that Ordinance 3437
shall not be applied to Section37.03 of Chapter 37 of the Codified Ordinances
during calendar years 2010, 2011 and 2012, the increased rates set forth in
Section 37.03 shall be the only increases applicable to Section 37.03 of
Chapter 37 in 2010.





   Ordinance 3445, passed March 9, 2010 provides that Ordinance 3437 shall
not be applied to Section 37.14 of Chapter 37 of the Codified Ordinances
during calendar years 2010, 2011 or 2012, the increased rates set forth in
Section 37.14 shall be the only increases applicable to Section 37.14 of
Chapter 37 in 2010.





   Ordinance 3437 providing for annual increases to the fee schedule shall
not be applied to Sections 37.03, 37.04, 37.06, 37.07, 37.12, 37.13, and
37.14 of Chapter 37 of the Codified Ordinances during calendar year 2013.









37.01   General provisions - when check not honored by bank (§10.08).



37.02   General provisions - general penalty (§10.99).



37.03   Water rates within the City.  (§50.02).



37.04   Sewer rates within the City (§50.03).




37.05   Water and sewer service charges - additional fees included in
water and sewer bills (§50.07).





37.06   Water and sewer service charges - schedule of fire line services
(§50.12).





37.07   Water and sewer service charges - purchase and installation of
water meters from the City (§50.28).





37.08   Water and sewer service charges - penalty (§50.99).





37.09   Water and sewer tap fees; regulations - water tap fees (§51.02).





37.10   Water and sewer tap fees; regulations - sewer tap fees (§51.03).





37.11   Water and sewer tap fees; regulations - permit for construction
water (§51.11).





37.12   Garbage and trash removal - on-call refuse collection service
(§53.09).





37.13   Garbage and trash removal - grass and lawn debris collection and
disposal (§53.10).




37.14   Garbage and trash removal - waste disposal fee (§53.12).



37.15   Wastewater pretreatment - fees (§56.04).




37.16   Administration; enforcement - leaving junk and other vehicles on
private or public property without permission or notification (§70.13).





37.17   Wild and dangerous exotic animals - registration of wild or
dangerous exotic animals (§90.15 - §90.18)





37.18   Street and sidewalk excavations and obstructions - permit fees
(§92.03).





37.19   Emergency services - fees; policies (§98.01).





37.20   Solicitors - application information;  card, issuance and term
(§110.02).





37.21   Taxicabs - taxicab license fee (§112.06).





37.22   Alarm systems - penalty (§115.99).





37.23   Plan review fee schedule for construction under the Ohio Building
Code (§150.05).





37.24   Building Code - plan review schedule under the Residential Code of
Ohio (§150.06).




37.25   Building Code - permit fee schedules (§150.07).



37.251   Sign Code Administrative Fees (153.14(g)(3) and 153.14(h)).



37.26   Building Code - moving building - fee required (§150.25).



37.27   Building Code - fences and walls - permit, plan and inspection
(§150.61).



37.28   Engineering review - site grading and drainage (§156.39(B)).



37.29   Fees for land usage applications - fees for applications
(§157.01).



37.30   Emergency measures - costs of emergency repairs (§158.09(E)).



37.31   Property maintenance re-inspection fee (§158.13).



37.32   Trees, weeds and grasses - assessment of costs by City
(§158.16(D)(5)).



37.33   Rubbish and garbage (§158.21(D)).



37.34   Vacation of streets, alleys, and utility easements (Resolution No.
9-91).



37.35   Mobile Food Vendor Fees (§154.16.11).



37.36   Late Fee - Residential Rental Registration and Education Program
Fees (§158.50(A))



37.37   Hookah bar license fee (§154.16.12).



37.38   Massage services establishment permit fees.








37.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS - WHEN CHECK NOT HONORED BY BANK (§10.08).




   The City shall assess a handling charge of ($29) to any person,
corporation, association, or other entity for any check submitted to the City
which is not honored by the bank for any reason and the account for which
such check was submitted for payment will revert to the same status as though
no payment was received.  (Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.02  GENERAL PROVISIONS - GENERAL PENALTY (§10.99).



   The fine for violation of any municipal ordinance without a specific
fee or fine shall be ($118) per violation.




(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.03  WATER RATES WITHIN THE CITY (§50.02).




   Effective at the beginning of the first quarter water billing of 2016,
water rates shall be:










   (A)   The quarterly rates for metered water furnished and supplied
within the City within its corporate limits shall be as follows:









 


0 through 10,000 gallons

 
Minimum Charge


10,001 through 750,000 gallons
 
($6.58) per 1,000 gallons


Over 750,000 gallons
 
($4.95) per 1,000 gallons



 




      (1)   These rates apply to residential, commercial,
industrial, and all other kinds of usage.










      (2)   Regardless of the meter reading, however, the quarterly
charge for water service, including 0 through 10,000 gallons, shall not be
less than the following minimum rates based on meter size:




 



 




Meter Size

 
Cost


5/8" - 3/4"
 
($59.96)


1"
 
($158.83)


1 1/4"
 
($237.72)


1 ½"
 
($316.61)


2"
 
($507.00)


3"
 
($950.89)


4"
 
(1,585.16)


6"
 
($3,170.32)


8"
 
($5,073.15)


10"
 
($7,292.58)




 




   (B)   Water services furnished to premises not under individual
water meters shall be charged as follows:










      (1)    ($59.96) minimum per living unit per quarter for
multiple-family structures.










      (2)    ($59.96) minimum per structure for community buildings,
swimming pools, accessory buildings, and all other buildings associated with
multiple-family developments.










      (3)   ($59.96) minimum per mobile home in a mobile home park.










      (4)   The above minimum rates apply where the total metered
usage divided by the total number of living units and structures is less than
10,000 gallons per quarter. All usage in excess of the aggregate minimum
shall be billed based on the total usage.




(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)








37.04 SEWER RATES WITH THE CITY (§50.03).




   Effective at the beginning of the first quarter sewer billing period of
2018, the quarterly rates for sewer provided by the City within its corporate
limits shall be as follows:










(water usage not tributary to sanitary sewer may be separately metered at
owner's expense to avoid billing for sewer)










   (A)   Sewer rates shall be based on water usage as follows:









 


Water Usage

 
 


0 through 10,000 gallons
 
($53.65) minimum


Over 10,000 gallons
 
($3.88) per 1,000 gallons



 




   (B)   Commercial or industrial sewer users not under the City or
Montgomery Counter meter control shall have sanitary sewage flow estimated at
the ratio of 35 gallons per day per employee. The number of employees shall
be updated periodically by the City. Nothing herein stated shall constitute
approval to discharge industrial or commercial wastes into the municipal
sewer system.










   (C)   Total water usage during the third quarter bill shall be
discounted by twenty-five percent (25%) of the total meter reading for those
periods in determining the sewer change for that quarter, except as follows:










      (1)   If a water has a separate meter to avoid billing for
sewer and water usage not tributary to the sanitary sewer as provided in this
section, then the 25% discount shall not apply and such water user's sewer
charge shall be based on all water that it tributary to the sanitary sewer.










      (2)   The 25% discount provided for herein shall apply only to
residential water users.









   (D)   Multi-family, commercial, and industrial units not under City
meter control may have sanitary sewage flow estimated which will be based on
similar multi-family, commercial, or industrial units under City meter
control whenever the City determines it would be possible or impracticable to
actually read such meter.  (Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)








37.05 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES - ADDITIONAL FEES INCLUDED IN WATER AND
SEWER BILLS (§50.07).




   The following special services shall be charged to a customer's water
or sewer bill with the fees indicated:










   (A)   Posting Fee. ($49)










   (B)   Fee for Testing Meter Accuracy. ($55)










   (C)   Emergency Water Shut Off Fee. ($99) per occurrence.





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.06  WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES - SCHEDULE OF FIRE LINE SERVICES
(§50.12).




   (A)   Unmetered fire line services installed on private property
shall be subject to the following charges:









 




Size

 
Rate/Quarter


2"
 
($21)


3"
 
($28)


4"
 
($35)


6"
 
($60)


8"
 
($99)


10"
 
($147)


12"
 
($188)




 




   (B)   A charge of ($5.88) per quarter shall be applied to each
unmetered fire hydrant located on private property which is connected to the
city water supply.  (Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.07  WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES - PURCHASE AND INSTALLATION OF WATER
METERS FROM THE CITY (§50.28).




   There is established the following fees for the purchase and
installation of water meters acquired from the city:



















 


Meter Size

 
Meter Cost
 
Installation
 
Total


3/4"
 
($244)
 
($48)
 
($292)


1"
 
($324)
 
($48)
 
($372)


1 ½"
 
($625)
 
($48)
 
($673)


2"
 
($824)
 
($68)
 
($892)


3" Turbo and larger
 
 
 
 
 
(See Note Below)



 




NOTE:   METERS FOR SERVICES OF 3 INCHES OR LARGER WILL BE TURBO TYPE, AND
THE INSTALLATION WILL INCLUDE A STRAINER IN ADVANCE OF THE METER. THE METER
AND STRAINER FEE TO BE PAID WILL BE THE CITY'S ACTUAL COST PLUS 5%. (THE CITY
WILL ACQUIRE THE METER AND STRAINER FROM THE REGULAR SUPPLIER.) INSTALLATION
WILL BE BY THE OWNER IN CONFORMANCE WITH CITY REQUIREMENTS.





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.08  WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES - PENALTY (§50.99).



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more
than ($61) for each offense.




(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.09  WATER AND SEWER TAP FEES; REGULATIONS - WATER TAP FEES (§51.02).




   (A)   The fee for a water tap into the city water system shall be as
follows:









 




3/4" Meter

 
($597)


1" Meter
 
($802)


1 ½" Meter
 
($1,217)


2" Meter
 
($2,029)


3" Meter
 
($3,523)


4" Meter
 
($5,795)


6" Meter
 
($10,605)


8" Meter
 
($16,937)




 




   (B)   Anything not covered by these provisions shall be subject to
the control and fee fixed by the legislative body.










   (C)   Existing taps that are reused shall be charged a ($61)
inspection fee.





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.10 WATER AND SEWER TAP FEES; REGULATIONS - SEWER TAP FEES (§51.03).




   (A)   The fee for a sewer tap into the city sewer system shall be
based on meter size and such fee shall be as follows:









 




3/4" Meter

 
($561)


1" Meter
 
($955)


1 ½" Meter
 
($1,852)


2" Meter
 
($2,806)


3" Meter
 
($3,942)


4" Meter
 
($6,527)


6" Meter
 
($12,994)


8" Meter
 
($20,756)




 




   (B)   Anything not covered by the provisions herein shall be subject
to the control and fee fixed by Council.










   (C)    Existing taps that are reused shall be charged a ($61)
inspection fee.





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.11  WATER AND SEWER TAP FEES; REGULATIONS - PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION WATER
(§51.11).




   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation constructing a building or
buildings for which a water tap into the municipal system is required shall
secure from the city a permit for construction water, the fee for which shall
be based upon the total estimated construction cost of the building or
buildings according to the following schedule.









 


Construction Costs

 
Permit Fee


Up to and including $80,000
 
The current minimum charge in effect for a 5/8 inch to 3/4 inch.  (See
§50.02)


$80,001 and above
 
The current minimum charge as above plus ($.24) per $1,000 of cost or
fraction thereof in excess of $80,000



 




   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation requesting temporary water
usage for an existing building construction or maintenance project shall
submit a fire hydrant meter deposit of ($955) (refundable). Water usage shall
be the current minimum charge in effect for a 5/8" - 3/4" meter, plus the
current additional charge per 1,000 gallons used over the minimum 10,000
gallons.





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.12  GARBAGE AND TRASH REMOVAL - ON-CALL REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICE
(§53.09).




   (A)     The charge for on-call refuse collection service shall be
($21) for items that can be handled by a maximum of two employees without the
need of motorized equipment.










   (B)     Unscheduled pickups that are invoiced due to nonpayment
shall also be assessed an administrative fee of ($28).





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.13  GARBAGE AND TRASH REMOVAL - GRASS AND LAWN DEBRIS COLLECTION AND
DISPOSAL (§53.10).




   The charge for each lawn bag will be ($1.35).





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.14 GARBAGE AND TRASH REMOVAL - WASTE DISPOSAL FEE (§53.12).




   Effective at the beginning of the first quarter billing of 2016, the
fee for refuse collection service shall be ($52.22) per quarter.





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.15 WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT - FEES (§56.04).




   The cost of engineering review for site grading and development plans
shall be the actual cost which the City paid engineering consultants to
review the plans and specifications.





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.16  ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT - LEAVING JUNK AND OTHER VEHICLES ON
PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY WITHOUT PERMISSION OR NOTIFICATION (§70.13).




   Fees for abandoned junk motor vehicles shall be the actual costs
incurred by the Municipality in disposing of an abandoned junk motor vehicle,
less any money accruing to the Municipality from the disposal of the
vehicle.  (Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.17  WILD AND DANGEROUS EXOTIC ANIMALS - REGISTRATION OF WILD OR DANGEROUS
EXOTIC ANIMALS (§90.15 - 90.18)




   No longer permitted in the city limits per Section 90.15-90.18 of the
Codified Ordinances (2013).  (Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.18  STREET AND SIDEWALK EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS - PERMIT FEES
(§92.03).



 



 


(A)  Excavation for downspout drain, gas, electric, steam, water, sewer or
other connections in a street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or places not
specifically mentioned;

 
($29)



 



 


(B)  For construction, reconstruction, or relocation of any public  utility
conduit, line, or main per 500 lineal feet or fraction thereof, including any
manholes constructed with the above mentioned line or main and being an
integral part thereof.


A manhole being defined as an underground chamber of less than 72 square feet;

 
 
($29)


(C)  For temporarily storing any building material or personal property in a
street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or place during building operation. For
blockading a street, alley, public way, or place (per day);
 
($29)


(D)  For constructing or reconstructing sidewalks;
 
($29)


(E)  For constructing or reconstructing curbs and gutter;
 
($29)


(F)  For a new permanent driveway approach or reconstructing an existing
driveway approach;
 
($29)


(G)  For a temporary driveway approach over curbs 

        and sidewalks;

 
 
($29)


Double Fee When Work is Started Before Obtaining a Permit
 
 



 




   




(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)








37.19 EMERGENCY SERVICES - FEES; POLICIES (§98.01).




   The following fees are hereby established to be charged for the
provision of public safety services at the scenes of motor vehicle accidents
and other emergency services provided by the City:









 


Level of Service:

 
Fee:


Scene safety and investigation
 
($521)


Scene safety, extinguishment, investigation, lighting, clean-up, and material
 
($592)


Scene safety, extrication, investigation, lighting, clean-up and material
 
($2,149)


Scene safety, extrication, use of Care Flight, investigation, clean-up and
material
 
($2,509)



 




(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.20  SOLICITORS - APPLICATION INFORMATION; CARD, ISSUANCE AND TERM
(§110.02).




   Identification card application fee is ($61).





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.21  TAXICABS - TAXICAB LICENSE FEE (§112.06).




   Taxicab license application fee is ($11) for each taxicab.  (Ord.
3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.22  ALARM SYSTEMS - PENALTY (§115.99).




   (A)   Fee for fourth false alarm in any twelve-month period is ($29).










   (B)   Fee for fifth false alarm in any twelve-month period is ($61).










   (C)   Fee for sixth false alarm in any twelve-month period is ($89).










   (D)   Fee for seventh false alarm in any twelve-month period is
($118).










   (E)   Fee for eighth or more false alarm in any twelve-month period
($149).




(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)








37.23  PLAN REVIEW FEE SCHEDULE FOR CONSTRUCTION UNDER THE OHIO BUILDING
CODE (§150.05).




   (A)   The fee for a plan review shall be at the current hourly rate
of the city's designated plans examiner for each hour or part thereof.










   (B)   The plan review fee is designed to reflect costs incurred for
this service, and the fee is nonrefundable. 










   (C)   The applicant for any Zoning Certificate for new construction
of, addition to, or demolition of a principal structure within the Heritage
District and the Conservation District shall pay the City a plan review fee
for the cost of architectural review of the proposal as required by Sections
154.10.481 through 154.10.502 and 154.15.01 through 154.15.10.










This cost shall be the actual cost which the City paid the architectural
consultant to review the proposal and shall be paid at the time the permit is
approved by the City.    (Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.24  BUILDING CODE - PLAN REVIEW SCHEDULE UNDER THE RESIDENTIAL CODE OF
OHIO (§150.06).




   (A)   The fee for a plan examination of one, two, and three family
structures shall be ($43) per plan. Once plans are reviewed and approved, as
a model for plat construction, future applications for permits of this same
model (with no changes) will not require additional review fees.










   (B)   The applicant for any Zoning Certificate for new construction
of, addition to, or demolition of a principal structure within the Heritage
District and the Conservation District shall pay the City a plan review fee
for the cost of architectural review of the proposal as required by Sections
154.10.492 and 154.15.  This cost shall be the actual cost which the City
paid the architectural consultant to review the proposal and shall be paid at
the time the permit is approved by the City.





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.25 BUILDING CODE - PERMIT FEE SCHEDULES (§150.07).




   The following permit fees shall apply:










   (A)     Building Permit Fees.









 


Processing Fee

 
($29)(except: fence, temporary sign, and excavation permits)


3% State Fee   
 
Applied for All Commercial Use Groups


1% State Fee
 
Applied for All Residential Use Groups


Double Fee
 
When work is started before obtaining a permit


Costs of Work to be Done*
 
FEE


Accessory structures (200 sq ft or less)
 
($36)



 



 




Antenna and Tower (4 feet or more in diameter)

 
($36)


$0.00 - $1,000.00
 
($43)


$1,001.00 - $5,000.00
 
($43) plus ($7.24) for each $1,000.00 cost or fraction thereof in excess of
$1,001.00


$5,001.00 - $100,000.00
 
($81) plus ($6.20) for each $1,000.00 cost or fraction thereof in excess of
$5,001.00


$100,001.00 - $500,000.00
 
($760) plus ($3.37) for each $1,000.00 cost or fraction thereof in excess of
$100,001.00


$500,001.00 and over
 
($2,425) plus ($2.43) for each $1,000.00 cost or fraction thereof in excess
of $500,001.00


Building Occupancy Permit - Residential
 
($21) (when required)


Zoning Occupancy Permit - Residential
 
($21) (Does Not Apply When Building Occupancy Permit is Required)


Building Occupancy Permit - Commercial
 
($43)


Zoning Occupancy Permit - Commercial
 
($43) (Does Not Apply When Building Occupancy Permit is Required)


Micro-filming blueprints
 
($2.43) per sheet


Re-inspection Fee
 
($36)


Special Inspection Fee
 
($61) hr./or fraction thereof


*Construction costs shall be verified by documented bids or contracts for
construction of proposed structures. When these are not available, the city
will estimate the cost of using current construction costs from local
engineers and architects.




 









   (B)   Miscellaneous Permit Fees.









 


Processing Fee

 
($29) (all permits)


3% State Fee
 
Applied for All Commercial Use Groups


1% State Fee
 
Applied for All Residential Use Groups


Double Fee
 
When work is started before obtaining a permit



 




      (1)   Wrecking Permits -  Minimum Fee ($89) 





   ($7.24) for each 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof of the total
floor area of the building or projected gross area of a structure, using
outside dimensions. Total floor areas of all floors, except basement, shall
be added together to compute the fee.










      (2)       Swimming pool permit fees.









 




Costs of Work to Be Done*

 
FEE


$0.00 - $1,000.00
 
($36)


$1,001.00 - $5,000.00
 
($43)


$5,001.00 - $100,000.00
 
($43) plus ($4.21) for each $1,000.00 cost or fraction thereof in excess of
$5,001.00


$100,001.00 - $500,000.00
 
($473) plus ($1.39) for each $1,000.00 cost or fraction thereof in excess of
$100,001.00


$500,001.00 and over
 
($1,189) plus ($.69) for each $1,000.00 cost or fraction thereof in excess of
$500,001.00


Re-inspection Fee
 
($37)


Special Inspection Fee
 
($97) hr./or fraction thereof




 









   *Construction costs shall be verified by documented bids or contracts
for construction of proposed structures. When these are not available, the
city will estimate the cost of using current construction costs from local
engineers and architects.










   (C)  Heating and Air Conditioning Permit Fees.









 


Processing Fee

 
($29) (all permits)


3% State Fee
 
Applied for All Commercial Use Groups


1% State Fee
 
Applied for All Residential Use Groups


Double Fee
 
When work is started before obtaining a permit



 













 




Rate of Input Capacity, BTU Per Hour




Type of Heating

 
Under 200,000
 
200,000 to 499,999
 
500,000 to 999,999*


All types of heating systems**
 
($49)
 
($61)
 
($71)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
One-Ton
 
Two-Tons
 
Over Two-Tons


Air conditioning
 
($49)
 
($61)
 
($71)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


* For 1,000,000 BTU and over, add ($7.20) for each additional 1,000,000 BTU
or fraction thereof.


** When air conditioning is combined with heating installation, increase the
heating fee by 50% in lieu of the separate air conditioning fee. No permit
shall be required for window or casement type air-conditioning units.




 








 




Gas Line Test




Gas piping (each meter bar or tenant space)

 
($49)


Each gas piping opening
 
($6.03)


Addition of warm or cold air ducts
 
($29)/unit


Approved prefabricated fireplaces and space heaters
 
($49)


Incinerators (AGA) approved residential prefabricated
 
($49)


Incinerators (Apartments, commercial and industrial)
 
($49)


Electronic air cleaners (when combined with heating installation, increase
the heating fee by 50% in lieu of this separate fee)
 
($29)/unit


Re-inspection fee
 
($49)


Special inspection fee
 
($93) hr./or fraction thereof




 









   (D)   Electrical Permit Fees.









 


Processing Fee

 
($29) (all permits)


3% State Fee
 
Applied for All Commercial Use Groups


1% State Fee
 
Applied for All Residential Use Groups


Double Fee
 
When work is started before obtaining a permit



      








 




Type of Installation

 
FEE


Minimum Fee
 
($61)


Service (power and light drop)
 
($61)


Additional meter from same drop
 
($21)


Rough Inspection
 
($61)


2-wire circuits
 
($4.76)


3-wire circuits
 
($4.76)


Furnace circuit
 
($61)


Each additional circuit
 
($21)


HVAC Disconnect (new, central)
 
($61) (not replacement)


Each additional circuit
 
($21)


Change of Service
 
($61)


Siding permit
 
($61)


Reconnection inspection
 
($61)


Final inspection
 
($61)


Temporary service
 
($61)


Pre-heat permit
 
($61)


Pool (pump, lights, bonding, etc. - 3 trips minimum)
 
($61) per trip


Cable heat permit
 
($61)


Sign circuit
 
($61)


Re-inspection Fee
 
($61)


Special Inspection
 
($180)/hr. or fraction thereof




 




   (E)   Sign Permit Fees.









 


Processing Fee

 
($29) (all permits excluding temporary sign)


3% State Fee
 
Applied to all Commercial Use Groups



 



 


Type of Installation

 
FEE


Sign
 
($1.16) for each square foot of message area (minimum of ($36), whichever is
greater)


Sign Already in Place at Application
 
($2.43) for each square foot of message area (minimum of ($36), whichever is
greater)


Temporary Sign
 
($21) plus a ($61) deposit



 



(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)








37.251 SIGN CODE ADMINISTRATIVE FEES (153.14(g)(3) AND 153.14(h)).




   The property owner and current occupant shall be jointly and severally
obligated to reimburse the City immediately for all third party and
administrative expenses incurred in removing any sign, including but not
limited to costs to the City for the time of City employees. The
administrative fee for city inspection and administrative costs shall be
($167).





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.26  BUILDING CODE - MOVING BUILDING - FEE REQUIRED (§150.25).




   No building moving permit shall be granted until a fee of ($61) is paid
to the City by the applicant therefore.  (Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.27 BUILDING CODE - FENCES AND WALLS - PERMIT, PLAN AND INSPECTION
(§150.61).




   The permit fees for fence permits shall be ($36) for each installation.





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.28  ENGINEERING REVIEW - SITE GRADING AND DRAINAGE (§150.39(B)).




   The costs of engineering review for site grading and drainage
development plans shall be the actual costs which the city paid engineering
consultants to review the plans and specifications or the rate of ($71) per
hour (1 hour minimum) for the time City staff spends reviewing the plans.





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.29  FEES FOR LAND USAGE APPLICATIONS - FEES FOR APPLICATIONS (§157.01).




   (A)   The following fees for applications presented to the City are
hereby established:










      (1)   Preliminary Subdivision Plan or Minor Change to PUD
Plan.  ($117) per plus, plus ($29) per acre computed to the nearest tenth of
an acre.  In addition, the applicant shall pay the City a plan review fee
for the cost of engineering review of the preliminary subdivision plan. 
This plan review fee shall be the actual cost which the City paid the
engineering consultant(s) to review the plan and shall be paid at the time
the preliminary subdivision plan has been approved by the City or the rate of
($70) per hour (1 hour minimum) for the time City staff spends reviewing the
plans. 










      (2)   Preliminary PUD Plan:  ($180) per plan, plus ($29) per
acre computed to the nearest tenth of an acre. In addition, the applicant
shall pay the City a plan review fee for the cost of engineering review of
the preliminary PUD plan. This plan review fee shall be the actual cost which
the City paid the engineering consultant(s) to review the plan and shall be
paid at the time the preliminary PUD plan has been approved by the City.










      (3)   Record plan, final PUD plan, major change to PUD plan,
site plan, and public improvement construction inspection.










         (a)   ($180) per plan, plus ($29) per acre computed to
the nearest tenth of an acre and 4% of the performance bond if required by
law, adjusted to the actual inspection cost if less than 4%. However, if the
public improvements are constructed as part of any development not requiring
a performance bond, a fee of 4% of the approved estimated cost of
construction shall be payable before City approval of the construction
drawings. This fee shall be adjusted to the actual inspection cost if less
than 4%.










          (b)   The applicant shall also pay the City a plan
review fee for the cost of engineering and/or landscaping review. This plan
review fee shall be the actual cost which the City paid engineering and/or
landscaping consultants to review the plans and shall be paid at the time the
plan has been approved by the City.










      (4)   City Center District Site Development Plan:










         (a)   New construction, additions greater than 50
percent of the area of the principal structure, and site improvements: 
($180) per site development plan, plus ($29) per acre computed to the nearest
tenth of an acre and 4% of the performance bond if required by law, adjusted
to the actual inspection cost if less than 4%. However, if the public
improvements are constructed as part of any development not requiring a
performance bond, a fee of 4% of the approved estimated cost of construction
shall be payable before City approval of the construction drawings. This fee
shall be adjusted to the actual inspection cost if less than 4%.










         (b)   Additions less than 50 percent of the area of the
principal structure, signage and landscaping/screening: ($118) per site
development plan and 4% of the performance bond if required by law, adjusted
to the actual inspection cost if less than 4%. However, if the public
improvements are constructed as part of any development not requiring a
performance bond, a fee of 4% of the approved estimated cost of construction
shall be payable before city approval of the construction drawings. This fee
shall be adjusted to the actual inspection cost if less than 4%.










         (c)   The applicant shall also pay the City a plan
review fee for the cost of engineering and/or landscaping review of site
development plans. This plan review fee shall be the actual cost which the
City paid engineering and/or landscaping consultants to review the plans and
shall be paid at the time the plan has been approved by the City.










      (5)   Approval without a plat (lot splits, five or less lots):
($29) for the first lot and ($11) for each lot thereafter, not to exceed a
maximum fee of ($89).










      (6)   Performance bond and subdivider contract preparation:
($29) for each performance bond and subdivider contract combination.










      (7)   Zoning map or text amendment:  ($180), plus ($29) per
acre computed to the nearest tenth of an acre. If an applicant applies for
both a zoning map and a zoning text change at the same time for the same
property, the fee for both applications shall be a total of ($358). In
addition, the applicant shall pay the city a plan review fee for the cost of
engineering review of the zoning map amendment. This plan review fee shall be
the actual cost which the City paid the engineering consultants to review the
plan and shall be paid at the time the application has been approved by the
City.










      (8)   Conditional use permit: ($118). In addition, the
applicant shall pay the City a plan review fee for the cost of engineering
and/or landscaping review of the conditional use permit application, if such
review is determined necessary. This plan review fee shall be the actual cost
which the City paid the engineering and/or landscaping consultants to review
the plan and shall be paid at the time the application has been approved by
the City.










      (9)   Variance application:  ($89). In addition, the
applicant shall pay the City a plan review fee for the cost of engineering
and/or landscaping review of the variance application, if such review is
determined necessary. This plan review fee shall be the actual cost which the
City paid the engineering and/or landscaping consultants to review the plan
and shall be paid at the time the application has been approved by the City.










      (10)   Appeal to Board of Zoning Appeals:  ($89). In
addition, the applicant shall pay the City a plan review fee for the cost of
engineering and/or landscaping review of the appeal, if such review is
determined necessary. This plan review fee shall be the actual cost which the
City paid the engineering and/or landscaping consultants to review the plan
and shall be paid at the time the application has been approved by the City.










   (B)   The fees as established shall be used by the City to defray
the costs of processing such applications and shall, unless otherwise
indicated, be paid by the applicant to the City at the time of filing the
application with the City.





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.30 EMERGENCY MEASURES - COSTS OF EMERGENCY REPAIRS (§158.09(E)).




   Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by
the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute
appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe
structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs, including an
administrative fee of ($180).  (Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.31  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE RE-INSPECTION FEE (§158.13).




   A fee of ($89) per hour or any portion thereof for each re-inspection
subsequent to the first inspection shall be paid by the owner, tenant or
person responsible for correction of violations of this chapter.





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.32  TREES, WEEDS, AND GRASSES - ASSESSMENT OF COSTS BY CITY
(§158.16(D)(5)).




   Fee for trimming or removing any tree, plant, or shrubbery, or part
thereof, or weeds and grass are growing in any street, public place, or upon
private property contiguous to a street or sidewalk or public place, shall be
the actual cost incurred, plus a ($180) Administrative Fee. 





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.33 RUBBISH AND GARBAGE (§158.21(D)).




   Fee for rubbish or garbage removal is the cost incurred by the City in
having such rubbish or garbage removed plus a ($180) Administrative Fee.





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.34 VACATION OF STREETS, ALLEYS, AND UTILITY EASEMENTS (RESOLUTION NO.
9-91).




   The fee for vacation of streets, alleys, and utility easements shall be:










   (A)   ($36) when the petition has been signed by all adjacent
property owners.





   





   (B)   ($149) when the petition has not been signed by all the
adjacent property owners.





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.35  MOBILE FOOD VENDOR FEES (§154.16.11).




   (A)   Mobile Food Vendor Application Fee.   All applicants for a
Mobile Food Vendor License shall pay a one-time non-refundable application
fee of ($27), due upon submission of the application.










   (B)   Mobile Food Vendor License Fee. All Mobile Food Vendors
licensed under Section 154.16.11 shall pay a non-refundable annual license
fee. A fee of ($559) shall be due upon approval of the initial six-month
license term. Thereafter, a fee of ($559) shall be due for a six-month
renewal, or a fee of ($836) shall be due for a twelve-month renewal. These
license fees shall be in addition to the Mobile Food Vendor Application Fee.










   (C)   Fee for Mobile Food Vendor Location on City Property. All
Mobile Food Vendors seeking to locate upon City-owned property shall pay a
non-refundable fee of ($559) per license term, which shall be in addition to
the Mobile Food Vendor License Fee and Mobile Food Vendor Application Fee.





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)




 



37.36   LATE FEE - RESIDENTIAL RENTAL REGISTRATION AND EDUCATION PROGRAM
FEES (§158.50(A))



   A late fee of one hundred and fifty-two dollars ($152) shall be
instituted for failure to comply with the registration requirements of
Section 158.47 of the Property Maintenance Code, and shall be paid by the
Owner or Responsible Agent who is responsible for correcting the
violations.  Notice shall be accompanied by a statement of the amount of
cost incurred, and in the event the same is not paid within thirty (30) days
after the mailing of the notice, then such amount shall be certified to the
County Auditor for collection the same as other taxes and assessments are
collected.



(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)








37.37   HOOKAH BAR LICENSE FEE (§154.16.12).




   All Hookah Bars required to be licensed under Section 154.16.12 of the
Zoning Code shall pay a non- refundable annual license fee of one hundred
twenty-eight dollars ($128) upon approval of the license or license renewal
by the Chief of Police.  This license fee shall be in addition to other fees
which may be required in order to operate the Hookah Bar.





(Ord. 3628.  Passed 2-27-18.)









37.38  MASSAGE SERVICES ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT FEES.




   The initial application for a Massage Services Establishment permit
shall be accompanied by the payment of a fifty dollar ($50) fee.  A separate
permit application fee is not required for each individual who performs
massage services at a Massage Services Establishment which possesses a valid
permit.  Each subsequent annual renewal of a Massage Services Establishment
permit shall be accompanied by the payment of a twenty-five dollar ($25) fee.





   A permit to operate a Massage Services Establishment may be transferred
by submitting a request in writing to the City of West Carrollton and payment
of a twenty-five dollar ($25) transfer fee.





(Ord. 3631.  Passed 4-10-18.)
























CHAPTER 38:  GENERAL FEE SCHEDULE









   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  Former Chapter 38 was repealed by Ordinance 3434,
passed December 22, 2009.  See Chapter 37 for relevant legislation.)



















CHAPTER 39:  IDENTITY THEFT POLICY









39.01   Background.





39.02   Purpose.





39.03   Scope.





39.04   Policy.





39.05   Additional Identity Theft Prevention Program.





39.06   Responding to red flags.





39.07   Periodic updates to plan.





39.08   Program administration.














39.01  BACKGROUND.




   The risk to the Municipality, its employees and customers from data
loss and identity theft is of significant concern to the Municipality and can
be reduced only through the combined efforts of every employee and contractor.





(Res. 8-2009.  Passed 4-28-09.)









39.02  PURPOSE.




   (A)   The Municipality adopts this sensitive information policy to
help protect employees, customers, contractors and the Municipality from
damages related to the loss or misuse of sensitive information.





   This policy will:





      (1)   Define sensitive information;





      (2)   Describe the physical security of data when it is
printed on paper;





      (3)   Describe the electronic security of data when stored and
distributed; and





      (4)   Place the Municipality in compliance with state and
federal law regarding identity theft protection.










   (B)   This policy enables the Municipality to protect existing
customers, reducing risk from identity fraud, and minimize potential damage
to the Municipality from fraudulent new accounts. The program will help the
Municipality:





      (1)   Identify risks that signify potentially fraudulent
activity within new or existing covered accounts;





      (2)   Detect risks when they occur in covered accounts;





      (3)   Respond to risks to determine if fraudulent activity has
occurred and act if fraud has been attempted or committed; and





      (4)   Update the program periodically, including reviewing the
accounts that are covered and the identified risks that are part of the
program. 
(Res. 8-2009.  Passed 4-28-09.)









39.03  SCOPE.




   This policy and protection program applies to employees, contractors,
consultants, temporary workers, and other workers at the municipality,
including all personnel affiliated with third parties.





(Res. 8-2009.  Passed 4-28-09.)









39.04  POLICY.




   (A)   Sensitive Information Policy.





      (1)   Definition of Sensitive Information.  Sensitive
information includes the following items whether stored in electronic or
printed format:





         a.   Credit card information, including any of the
following:





            1.   Credit card number (in part or whole)





            2.   Credit card expiration date.





            3.   Cardholder name.





            4.   Cardholder address.





         b.   Tax identification numbers, including:





            1.   Social Security Number





            2.   Business identification number





            3.   Employer identification numbers





         c.   Payroll information, including, among other
information:





            1.   Paychecks





            2.   Pay stubs





         d.   Cafeteria plan check requests and associated
paperwork.





         e.   Medical information for any employee or customer,
including but not limited to:





            1.   Doctor names and claims





            2.   Insurance claims





            3.   Prescriptions





            4.   Any related personal medical information.





         f.   Other personal information belonging to any
customer, employee or contractor, examples of which include:





            1.   Date of birth





            2.   Address





            3.   Phone numbers





            4.   Maiden name





            5.   Names





            6.   Customer number.





         g.   Municipal personnel are encouraged to use common
sense judgment in securing confidential information to the proper extent.
Furthermore, this section should be read in conjunction with the Ohio Public
Records Act and the Municipality's open records policy. If an employee is
uncertain of the sensitivity of a particular piece of information, he/she
should contact their supervisor. In the event that the Municipality cannot
resolve a conflict between this policy and the Ohio Public Records Act, the
municipality will consult legal counsel.










   (B)   Hard Copy Distribution.  Each employee and contractor
performing work for the municipality will comply with the following policies:





      (1)   File cabinets, desk drawers, overhead cabinets, and any
other storage space containing documents with sensitive information will be
locked when not in use.





      (2)   Storage rooms containing documents with sensitive
information and record retention areas will be locked at the end of each
workday or when unsupervised.





      (3)   Desks, workstations, work areas, printers and fax
machines, and common shared work areas will be cleared of all documents
containing sensitive information when not in use.





      (4)   Whiteboards, dry-erase boards, writing tablets, etc. in
common shared work areas will be erased, removed, or shredded when not in use.





      (5)   When documents containing sensitive information are
discarded they will be placed inside a locked shred bin or immediately
shredded using a mechanical cross cut or Department of Defense (DOD)-approved
shredding device. Locked shred bins are labeled "Confidential paper shredding
and recycling." Municipal records, however, may only be destroyed in
accordance with the City's records retention policy.










   (C)   Electronic Distribution.  Each employee and contractor
performing work for the municipality will comply with the following policies:





      (1)   Internally, sensitive information may be transmitted
using approved municipal e-mail.  All sensitive information must be
encrypted when stored in an electronic format.





      (2)   Any sensitive information sent externally must be
encrypted and password protected and only to approved recipients.
Additionally, a statement such as this should be included in the e-mail:





   "This message may contain confidential and/or proprietary information
and is intended for the person/entity to whom it was originally addressed.
Any use by others is strictly prohibited. "





(Res. 8-2009.  Passed 4-28-09.)









39.05  ADDITIONAL IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM.




   If the Municipality maintains certain covered accounts pursuant to
federal legislation, the Municipality may include the additional program
details.





   (A)   Covered Accounts.  A covered account includes any account
that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions.
Every new and existing' customer account that meets the following criteria is
covered by this program:





      (1)   Business, personal and household accounts for which
there is a reasonably foreseeable risk of identity theft; or





      (2)   Business, personal and household accounts for which
there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to the safety or soundness of the
municipality from identity theft, including financial, operational,
compliance, reputation, or litigation risks.





   (B)   Red Flags.





      (1)   The following red flags are potential indicators of
fraud. Any time a red flag, or a situation closely resembling a red flag, is
apparent, it should be investigated for verification.





         a.   Alerts, notifications or warnings from a consumer
reporting agency;





         b.   A fraud or active duty alert included with a
consumer report;





         c.   A notice of credit freeze from a consumer reporting
agency in response to a request for a consumer report; or





         d.   A notice of address discrepancy from a consumer
reporting agency as defined in  334.82(b) of the Fairness and Accuracy in
Credit Transactions Act.





      (2)   Red flags also include consumer reports that indicate a
pattern of activity inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of
activity of an applicant or customer, such as:





         •   A recent and significant increase in the volume of
inquiries;





         •   An unusual number of recently established credit
relationships;





         •   A material change in the use of credit, especially
with respect to recently established credit relationships; or





         •   An account that was closed for cause or identified
for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor.





   (C)   Suspicious Documents.





      (1)   Documents provided for identification that appear to
have been altered or forged.





      (2)   The photograph or physical description on the
identification is not consistent with the appearance of the applicant or
customer presenting the identification.





      (3)   Other information on the identification is not
consistent with information provided by the person opening a new covered
account or customer presenting the identification.





      (4)   Other information on the identification is not
consistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the
municipality, such as a signature card or a recent check.





      (5)   An application appears to have been altered or forged,
or gives the appearance of having been destroyed and reassembled.





   (D)   Suspicious Personal Identifying Information.





      (1)   Personal identifying information provided is
inconsistent when compared against external information sources used by the
Municipality.  For example:





         •   The address does not match any address in the
consumer report;





         •   The Social Security number (SSN) has not been
issued or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master
File; or





         •   Personal identifying information provided by the
customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information
provided by the customer.  For example, there is a lack of correlation
between the SSN range and date of birth.





      (2)   Personal identifying information provided is associated
with known fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party
sources used by the Municipality.  For example, the address on an
application is the same as the address provided on a  fraudulent application.





      (3)   Personal identifying information provided is of a type
commonly associated with fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or
third-party sources used by the Municipality.  For example:





         •   The address on an application is fictitious, a
mail drop, or a prison; or





         •   The phone number is invalid or is associated with
a pager or answering service.





      (4)   The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other
persons opening an account or other customers.





      (5)   The address or telephone number provided is the same as
or similar to the address or telephone number submitted by an unusually large
number of other customers or other persons opening accounts.





      (6)    The customer or the person opening the covered account
fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an
application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete.





   (E)   Unusual Use of, or Suspicious Activity Related to, the Covered
Account.





      (1)   Shortly following the notice of a change of address for
a covered account, the Municipality receives a request for new, additional or
replacement goods or services, or for the addition of authorized users on the
account.





      (2)   A new revolving credit account is used in a manner
commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns.  For example, the
customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no
subsequent payments.





      (3)   A covered account is used in a manner that is not
consistent with established patterns of activity on the account.  There is,
for example:





         •   Nonpayment when there is no history of late or
missed payments;





         •   A material change in purchasing or usage patterns.





      (4)   A covered account that has been inactive for a
reasonably lengthy period of time is used (taking into consideration the type
of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors).





      (5)   Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as
undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection
with the customer's covered account.





      (6)   The Municipality is notified that the customer is not
receiving paper account statements.





      (7)   The Municipality is notified of unauthorized charges or
transactions in connection with a customer's covered account.





      (8)   The Municipality receives notice from customers, victims
of identity theft, law enforcement authorities, or other persons regarding
possible identity theft in connection with covered accounts held by the
Municipality.





      (9)   The Municipality is notified by a customer, a victim of
identity theft, a law enforcement authority, or any other person that it has
opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft.  (Res.
8- 2009.  Passed 4-28-09.)









39.06  RESPONDING TO RED FLAGS.




   (A)   Once potentially fraudulent activity is detected, an employee
must act quickly as a rapid appropriate response can protect customers and
the Municipality from damages and loss.





      (1)   Once potentially fraudulent activity is detected, gather
all related documentation and write a description of the situation.  Present
this information to the designated authority for determination.





      (2)   The designated authority will complete additional
authentication to determine whether the attempted transaction was fraudulent
or authentic.










   (B)   If a transaction is determined to be fraudulent, appropriate
actions must be taken immediately.  Actions may include:





      (1)   Canceling the transaction;





      (2)   Notifying and cooperating with appropriate law
enforcement;





      (3)   Determining the extent of liability of the Municipality;
and





      (4)   Notifying the actual customer that fraud has been
attempted.





         (Res. 8-2009.  Passed 4-28-09.)









39.07 PERIODIC UPDATES TO PLAN.




   (A)   At periodic intervals established in the program, or as
required, the program will be re-evaluated to determine whether all aspects
of the program are up to date and applicable in the current business
environment.










   (B)   Periodic reviews will include an assessment of which accounts
are covered by the program.










   (C)   As part of the review, red flags may be revised, replaced or
eliminated.  Defining new red flags may also be appropriate.










   (D)   Actions to take in the event that fraudulent activity is
discovered may also require revision to reduce damage to the Municipality and
its customers.  (Res. 8-2009.  Passed 4-28-09.)









39.08 PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION.




   (A)   Involvement of Management.





      (1)   The Identity Theft Prevention Program shall not be
operated as an extension to existing fraud prevention programs, and its
importance warrants the highest level of attention.





      (2)   The Identity Theft Prevention Program is the
responsibility of the governing body.  Approval of the initial plan must be
appropriately documented and maintained.





      (3)   Operational responsibility of the program is delegated
to the Finance Director or his/her designee.










   (B)   Staff Training.





      (1)   Staff training shall be conducted for all employees,
officials and contractors for whom it is reasonably foreseeable that they may
come into contact with accounts or personally identifiable information that
may constitute a risk to the Municipality or its customers.





      (2)   The Finance Director or his/her designee is responsible
for ensuring identity theft training for all requisite employees and
contractors.





      (3)   Employees must receive annual training in all elements
of this policy.





      (4)   To ensure maximum effectiveness, employees may continue
to receive additional training as changes to the program are made.










   (C)   Oversight of Service Provider Arrangements.





      (1)   It is the responsibility of the Municipality to ensure
that the activities of all service  providers are conducted in accordance
with reasonable policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent and
mitigate the risk of identity theft.





      (2)   A service provider that maintains its own identity theft
prevention program, consistent with the guidance of the red flag rules and
validated by appropriate due diligence, may be considered to be meeting these
requirements.





      (3)   Any specific requirements should be specifically
addressed in the appropriate contract arrangements.
(Res. 8-2009.  Passed 4-28-09.)





























TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS









Chapter










Chap. 50.   WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES










Chap. 51.   WATER AND SEWER TAP FEES; REGULATIONS










Chap. 52.   WATER AND SEWER SERVICE LINES










Chap. 53.   GARBAGE AND TRASH REMOVAL










Chap. 54.   PREVAILING WAGE LAW










Chap. 55.   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS










Chap. 56.   WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT





APPENDIX A:   TOXIC PRIORITY POLLUTANTS





APPENDIX B:   CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANTS





APPENDIX C:   INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES SUBJECT TO CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARDS





APPENDIX D:   LOCAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS







































CHAPTER 50
WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES









Section










50.01   Use of city water and sewer services





50.02   Water rates within the city





50.03   Sewer rates within the city





50.04   Service charges outside the city





50.05   Measurement of water and sewer usage





50.06   Determination of billing periods





50.07   Additional fees included in water or sewer bills





50.08   Payment of water and sewer bills; shut-off order





50.09   Shut-off order; no liability





50.10   Responsibility for payment of water and sewer charges; regulations
for collection of delinquent accounts





50.11   Shut-off requested; authority





50.12   Unmetered fire line services and hydrants; charges





50.13   Estimated bills; corrections





50.14   Sale of residences or buildings; report by seller





50.15   Responsibility for meters





50.16   Leaks; no rebate





50.17   False information





50.18   Authorized use of services





50.19   Unauthorized use of water; special charge





50.20   Authorization of employees to enter premises





50.21   Meter installation; nonresponsibility for deteriorated or inferior
plumbing





50.22   Right of city to discontinue service for repairs, maintenance or
construction





50.23   Right of city to limit use of water





50.24   Water services not to be resold





50.25   Accessibility of hydrants, meters  and stop boxes





50.26   Failure to repair leaks, etc.; shut-off





50.27   Installation and maintenance of customer owned water meters





50.28   Purchase and installation of water meters from city





50.29   Residential septage disposal service at wastewater treatment plant





50.30   Board of Water and Sewer Charge Adjustment





50.99   Penalty




 



50.01  USE OF CITY WATER AND SEWER SERVICES.




   City water and sewer services shall be furnished to the inhabitants of
the city in a manner determined by the ordinances of the city, and by written
regulations established by the service director and approved by the city
manager.  All persons using city water or sewer or permitting city water or
sewer to be used on premises owned by them shall thereby evidence their
acceptance of an agreement to be bound by the rules, conditions and charges
established within such ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. 1803, passed 9-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)









50.02  WATER RATES WITHIN THE CITY.




   (A)    Effective at the beginning of the first quarter water billing
period of 2007, this section shall read as follows:





      (1)    The quarterly rates for metered water furnished and
supplied by the City within its corporate limits shall be as set forth in
Section 37.03 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances
of the City of West Carrollton.





      (2)    Water services furnished to premises not under
individual water meters shall be charged as set forth in Section 37.03 of
Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
West Carrollton.





         (Ord. 3300.  Passed 6-14-05; Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)









50.03  SEWER RATES WITHIN THE CITY.




   (A)    Effective at the beginning of the third quarter sewer billing
period of 2008, the quarterly rates for sewer provided by the City within its
corporate limits shall be as set forth in Section 37.04 of Chapter 37,
General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West
Carrollton.





      (1)    Water usage not tributary to the sanitary sewer may be
separately metered at owner's expense to avoid billing for sewer.





      (2)    Commercial or industrial sewer users not under the City
or Montgomery County meter control shall have sanitary sewage flow estimated
at the ratio of 35 gallons per day per employee. The number of employees
shall be updated periodically by the City.  Nothing herein stated shall
constitute approval to discharge industrial or commercial wastes into the
municipal sewer system.





      (3)    Multi-family, commercial and industrial units not under
City meter control may have sanitary sewage flow estimated which will be
based on similar multi-family, commercial or industrial units under City
meter control whenever the City determines it would be impossible or
impracticable to actually read such meter.  (Ord. 3382.  Passed 4-8-08;
amend. Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)









50.04  SERVICE CHARGES OUTSIDE THE CITY.




   Charges for water and sewer services rendered outside the city
corporate limits shall be 20% over and above the standard charge for similar
service within the city, except that where different charges are authorized
by City Council and agreed upon by the consumer, the charges set forth in the
agreement shall apply.





(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)









50.05  MEASUREMENT OF WATER AND SEWER USAGE.




   On or about the fifteenth of December, March, June, and September, but
prior to the end of these months, the city shall read all meters and compute
the usage of each service customer for the  calendar quarters ending with
those months.  This measurement of usage shall constitute the basis for
computation of quarterly billings based on graduated





rates.
(Ord. 1986, passed 10-26-76)









50.06  DETERMINATION OF BILLING PERIODS.




   Customers shall be billed for water and sewer charges at regular
quarterly intervals.  However, extended or shortened billing periods may be
adopted by the Service Director on a temporary basis with the approval of the
City Manager when necessitated by a shortage of labor, breakdown of machinery
or temporary other circumstances under which quarterly billing would be
impractical.  When modified billing periods are necessary, minimum charges,
where applicable, shall be determined on a pro rata basis.  However, no
billing period shall be for less than 30 days.  If, for purposes of
efficiency, regular quarterly billing on other than a calendar quarter basis
is determined to be desirable, a revised quarterly meter reading and billing
schedule may be established by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)









50.07  ADDITIONAL FEES INCLUDED IN WATER OR SEWER BILLS.




   The following special services shall be charged to a customer's water
or sewer bill with the fees indicated:










   (A)   Posting Fee.  In all cases in which the account is posted on
the shut-off list for any violation of these regulations or failure to pay
charges, the owner or occupant of such premises shall pay a fee as set forth
in Section 37.05 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified
Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton.










   (B)   Fee for Testing Meter Accuracy.  The Water Division will test
any of its meters and will guarantee their accuracy against overcharge within
2%.  Proper refund shall be made for any overcharges resulting from an
inaccurate meter.  In order to protect the Water Division from unreasonable
demands for this service, a charge as set forth in Section 5 of Chapter 37,
General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West
Carrollton, shall be made if the test shows the meter to be registering
properly within 2%, plus or minus.










   (C)   Emergency Water Shut Off Fee.  Emergency water shut off fee
requested after hours by the customer, or plumber, which results in overtime
payments to water department employees shall be billed per occurrence at the
rate set forth in Section 37.05 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the
Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton.





(Ord. 3353.  Passed 8-14-07; amend. Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)









50.08  PAYMENT OF WATER AND SEWER BILLS; SHUT-OFF ORDER.




   On a regular quarterly basis as provided for herein, a statement of the
amount due for water consumed, sewer usage and all fees, charges and/or
penalties shall be sent to the owner or to the address where water or sewer
services are delivered.  If the bill is not paid on or before the fifteenth
day after mailing of such notice, a 10% penalty shall be posted to the
account.  If the account is not paid within 28 days after mailing such
notice, a 48 hour notice of water shut-off shall be mailed to the affected
address and to the owner if that address is not his place of residence.  If
more than one user is to be affected by such shut-off, notices shall be
mailed to all of the persons.  If the bill is not paid upon the expiration
of the 48 hour period, the account number will be posted on a shut-off list
and a special shut-off fee will be assessed to the account at that time, in
accordance with § 50.07 of this chapter.  The water shall be shut off as
soon as practical after the 48 hour period and shall not be turned on again
until all water and sewer bills, penalties and charges are paid. 
(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)  Penalty, see
§ 50.99










50.09  SHUT-OFF ORDER; NO LIABILITY.




   When one or more parties are supplied with water or sewer  from the
same service pipe and one or more of the parties so supplied fails to pay the
bills due or fails to comply with the rules of the water and sewer
departments, or a defect develops in any one of the systems connected, the
water shall be shut off from the service pipes without liability in damage to
any of the parties served.
(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)









50.10  RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT OF WATER AND SEWER CHARGES; REGULATIONS
FOR COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.




   (A)   The payment of all water and sewer charges, penalties and
fees, shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Delinquent water and
sewer bills shall be collected according to the rules and regulations adopted
by the Finance Director and approved by City Council and set forth in
division (B) below.










   (B)   The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted and
shall be used for the collection of all delinquent water and sewer bills
owing to the city.





      (1)   Delinquency owing at change of ownership of property.
Where an outstanding amount appears on an account that either has had, or
will have water services shut off, and where the city is aware of the
delinquency at the time the services are transferred to the new owner, the
water clerk shall:





         (a)   Inform the new property owner of the amount due on
the account.





         (b)   Maintain a service shut-off on the property until
the outstanding amount is paid in full.





      (2)   Delinquency owing on final bill; nonrental property.





         (a)   Where an outstanding amount appears on an account
as a result of a user's failure to remit payment on their final reading, and
where this delinquency is apparent after ownership of the property has been
transferred, the water clerk shall:





            1.   Send a balance due notice to the previous
owner stating that payment is due within 15 days.





            2.   Send a second notice to the previous owner
stating that if the amount due is not paid in full, the amount will be
forwarded to the city's legal counsel for collection through the courts, or
the amount will be turned over to a credit bureau for collection.





            3.   Depending on the amount involved, file for
judgment in the small claims court, or place amount for collection with the
credit bureau.





            4.   Write-off amounts not collectible after all
collection avenues have been exhausted.





         (b)   Where a property owner sells a property, leaving a
final bill due, and moves to another location within the city, the water
clerk shall:





            1.   Send a shut-off notice to the new location
stating that if the amount due is not paid within ten days, service to their
current residence will be shut off.





            2.   Shut off service until amount due is paid.





      (3)   Delinquency owing on final bill; rental property. The
property owner of rental property shall be ultimately responsible for the
payment of all water and sewer charges for such property and such
delinquencies shall be collected as follows:





         (a)   Where an outstanding amount appears on an account
as a result of a tenant moving out of a property and leaving a final bill
unpaid, the water clerk shall:





            1.   Send a shut-off notice to the property owner
stating that if the bill is not paid within ten days, service to the property
will be shut off.





            2.   Shut off service until amount due is paid.





         (b)   Where an outstanding amount appears on rental
property that does not use the city's water system or where the owner of the
property is not known, collection efforts shall follow the procedures set
forth in division (B)(2)(a) of this section.





            (Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed
10-9-73; amend. Ord. 2675, passed 10-11-88)









50.11  SHUT-OFF REQUESTED; AUTHORITY.




   Either a property owner or tenant may request a termination of water
service. In the event of conflicting requests from property owner and tenant
regarding termination, the decision of the property owner shall prevail. 
The property owner shall hold the city harmless from damages resulting from
any order to the water department regarding either termination or
reinstatement of water services.





(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)









50.12  UNMETERED FIRE LINE SERVICES AND HYDRANTS; CHARGES.




   (A)   Unmetered fire line services installed on private property
shall be subject to the charges set forth in Section 37.06 of Chapter 37,
General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West
Carrollton.










   (B)   These services must be protected by backflow devices approved
by the service director and by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. 
These services are for fire protection only and the use of water from them
for other purposes is prohibited.  Flow detectors approved by the service
department must be installed in these lines.










   (C)   A charge, as set forth in Section 37.06 of Chapter 37, General
Fee Schedule, of the City of West Carrollton, shall be applied to each
unmetered fire hydrant located on private property which is connected to the
city water supply. 





(Ord. 3350.  Passed 8-14-07; amend. Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)









50.13  ESTIMATED BILLS; CORRECTIONS.




   If a meter has failed to register the amount of water consumed or if
the meter has not been read, the bill shall be estimated. Estimated bills
will be corrected if the owner or consumer makes a request for correction
within 10 days after issuance of the bill and presents evidence satisfactory
to the water department that the correction is justified.





(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)









50.14  SALE OF RESIDENCES OR BUILDINGS;  REPORT BY SELLER.




   Any person, firm or corporation selling any residence or other building
within the city shall, immediately upon the sale, notify the water department
clerk, in writing, of the facts and shall furnish the name and address of the
purchaser and the address of the property.
(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)  Penalty, see
§ 50.99









50.15  RESPONSIBILITY FOR METERS.




   The property owner shall be responsible for protecting water meters
from physical abuse, freezing, vibration, or other adverse conditions, and
shall assume the cost of repair of meters damaged under such conditions. 
(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)  Penalty, see
§ 50.99









50.16  LEAKS; NO REBATE.




   No reduction in charges for water or sewer will be made due to leaks in
customer water lines, tanks, pipes, or other fixtures or appurtenances,
unless so ordered by the Board of Water and Sewer Charge Adjustment. 
(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73; Am. Ord. 2354,
passed 12-14-82)









50.17  FALSE INFORMATION.




   No person, firm, or corporation shall furnish any false information
concerning the use of water or sewer services or regarding the occupancy or
ownership  of premises in making application for the services, or in
responding to inquires by the water or sewer department regarding the current
status of the premises. 
(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)  Penalty, see
§ 50.99









50.18  AUTHORIZED USE OF SERVICES.




   No person, firm, or corporation shall connect to, or otherwise use the
water or sewer services of the city without first obtaining permission
therefor from the service director or his authorized agent.





(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)









50.19  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF WATER; SPECIAL CHARGE.




   In addition to the criminal penalties provided herein, a special charge
shall be made for water taken illegally.  The charge shall be determined by
obtaining 3 quotations from private water haulers of the cost of delivery of
the amount of water illegally taken and the city's charge shall be the
average of the 3 quotations. 
(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)  Penalty, see
§ 50.99









50.20  AUTHORIZATION OF EMPLOYEES TO ENTER PREMISES.




   All employees of the city, designated for the purpose, are authorized
to enter, at reasonable hours and with the knowledge of the owner or
occupant, into any house, building or plant supplied with city water or sewer
for the purpose of inspection or repair, or for any other reasonable purpose
necessary to the operation of the city water or sewer systems. 
(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)  Penalty, see
§ 50.99









50.21  METER INSTALLATION OR REPAIR; NONRESPONSIBILITY FOR DETERIORATED OR 
INFERIOR PLUMBING.




   The city shall have the right to repair or replace meters, if
necessary, and shall not be responsible for damage to deteriorated or
inferior plumbing in making the repairs or replacement.
(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)









50.22  RIGHT OF CITY TO DISCONTINUE SERVICE FOR REPAIRS, MAINTENANCE OR
CONSTRUCTION.




   The city shall have the right to shut off water service temporarily
when necessitated by repairs, maintenance or construction, and shall not be
responsible for accidents or damage which may result from such
discontinuances.  Persons owning or operating equipment or businesses
dependent on the city water supply should make adequate provision for storage
of water to be used in case of a temporary discontinuance of city water
service. 
(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)









50.23  RIGHT OF CITY TO LIMIT USE OF WATER.




   In case of a serious fire or water shortage, or when for any reason it
is necessary, in the judgment of the city manager, to conserve the water
supply by limiting the use thereof, the limitations shall be obeyed by all
users of water affected by the limitations and the city shall not be
responsible for any damages resulting from the limiting of use.





(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)  Penalty, see
§ 50.99









50.24  WATER SERVICES NOT TO BE RESOLD.




   Under no conditions shall water and water services as provided by the
city be resold by any consumer or furnished to any other living unit,
business, individual or property, except as herein provided.
(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)  Penalty, see
§ 50.99









50.25  ACCESSIBILITY OF HYDRANTS, METERS AND STOP BOXES.




   Hydrants, meters and stop boxes must be kept accessible and visible by
the owner and occupant. It shall be the duty of the property owner to assure
that no vegetation, structure, or other obstacle shall hinder the
accessibility of these fixtures. The property owner shall maintain all such
fixtures in accordance with regulations adopted by the city manager. 
(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)  Penalty, see
§ 50.99









50.26  FAILURE TO REPAIR LEAKS, ETC.; SHUT-OFF.




   Failure to repair leaks, remove obstructions preventing access to
meters or curb box, or to make payment of charges for work performed by the
city for these purposes, when notified to do so, will be sufficient cause for
termination of water service until the problem has been corrected by the
owner. 
(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)  Penalty, see
§ 50.99









50.27  INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF CUSTOMER OWNED WATER METERS.




   Only those water meters approved by the city service department may be
used and the city shall have the right to check the meters for accuracy at
any time and require that any necessary repairs to the meters be  made at
the property owner's expense.  The city shall also have the right to inspect
connecting plumbing to assure that the meter installation is consistent with
all applicable regulations.
(Ord. 1803, passed 8-28-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73)









50.28  PURCHASE AND INSTALLATION OF WATER METERS FROM CITY.




   (A)   (1)   There is established fees for the purchase and
installation of water meters acquired from the City, such fees shall be as
set forth in Section 37.07 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the
Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton.





      (2)   These fees are for the meter and the remote read-out
unit, plus labor to install the water meter in an opening plumbed by the
owner; also, the remote read-out is to be connected to wires provided and
installed by the owner.










   (B)   The fees, as established, shall be paid by the applicant to
the city at the time application is made for the meter installation; such fee
to be used by the city to defray the costs of the materials and labor
involved.










   (C)   The City Manager is authorized to increase the fees listed in
division (A) and set forth in Section 37.07 of Chapter 37, General Fee
Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton as he
deems necessary from time to time to ensure that the city receives
appropriate fees for this meter installation service.  (Ord. 2245, passed
3-10-81; amend. Ord. 3436, passed 12-22-09)









50.29  RESIDENTIAL SEPTAGE DISPOSAL SERVICE AT WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT.




   (A)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to implement a septage
disposal service for haulers of residential septage registered with the
County Health Department.










   (B)   The charge for this septage disposal service shall be $25 for
each 500 gallon or part thereof of septage dumped.










   (C)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to establish the
necessary procedure for implementing this septage disposal service.





(Res. 23-89, passed 8-8-89)









50.30  BOARD OF WATER AND SEWER CHARGE ADJUSTMENT.




   (A)   A Board of Water and Sewer Charge Adjustment is hereby
established, consisting of the Service Director, a citizen appointed by
Council and a council member designated by majority vote of Council.  The
citizen appointed by Council shall be appointed for a three-year term.










   (B)   The purpose of the Board of Water and Sewer Charge Adjustment
shall be to hear requests for adjustments in amounts of water and sewer
charges billed, when it is felt that the application of this chapter results
in an inequitable situation.










   (C)   An applicant may petition the Board and the Board may grant an
adjustment if the applicant proves to the Board's satisfaction that the
adjustment is justified.










   (D)   The members of the Board of Water and Sewer Charge Adjustment
may, from time to time, adopt and amend rules of procedure, to assist in
effecting the purpose of this section.  A copy of any such rules or
amendments shall be filed with the Clerk of Council prior to becoming
effective.










   (E)   Minutes of the hearings by the Board of Water and Sewer Charge
Adjustment will be kept and will also be filed with the Clerk of Council.





(Ord. 2354, passed 12-14-82)









50.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined as set
forth in Section 37.08 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified
Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton.





(Ord. 1803, passed 10-9-73; amend. Ord. 1809, passed 10-9-73; amend. Ord.
3436, passed 12-22-09.)
























CHAPTER 51
WATER AND SEWER TAP FEES; REGULATIONS









Section










51.01   Water and sewer connection permits required





51.02   Water tap fees





51.03   Sewer tap fees





51.04   Permit required; prior to construction





51.05   Deferment of tap payment





51.06   Service installation standards





51.07   Inspection required prior to backfilling





51.08   Failure to obtain inspection; stopping work





51.09   Stop work order





51.10   Water and sewer service lines; responsibility for maintenance





51.11   Permit for construction water





51.12   Commercial and industrial sewer waste controls





51.13   Fire hydrant use





51.14   Sanitary sewer lines and septic tanks near water wells





51.15   Public/private water interconnections





51.16   Clean water prohibited from sanitary sewer





51.17   Supplementary tap fee for enlargement or charge of use





51.18   Supplementary tap fee for connection to certain water mains or
sewer mains





51.19   Backflow prevention device





51.20   Private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply





51.21   Surveys and investigations of properties served by the public
water supply





51.22   Inspection of piping system





51.23   Discontinuance of water service





51.99   Penalty




 



51.01  WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION PERMITS REQUIRED.




   No person shall connect with the city water system or sanitary sewer
system without a permit therefor. 
(Ord. 1805, passed 9-25-73)









51.02  WATER TAP FEES.




   (A)    The fee for a water tap into the city water system shall be
as set forth in Section 37.09 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the
Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton.










   (B)    Anything not covered by the provisions in Section 37.09 of
Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
West Carrollton shall be subject to the control and fee fixed by the
legislative body.










   (C)   The fees to be paid prior to extension of service line beyond
curb valve.










   (D)   The Water Department will make the tap into the main for the
services from 3/4 inch to and including 2 inches.










   (E)   The city will install meter in opening provided by owner or
contractor.  Cost of meter, remote and installation charges will be paid by
the owner.










   (F)   Existing taps that are reused shall be charged an inspection
fee as set forth in Section 37.09 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the
Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton.





(Ord. 3354.  Passed 8-14-07; amend. Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)









51.03  SEWER TAP FEES.




   (A)    The fee for a sewer tap into the city sewer system shall be
based on meter size and such fee shall be as set forth in Section 37.10 of
Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
West Carrollton.










   (B)    Anything not covered by the provisions in Section 37.10 of
Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
West Carrollton shall be subject to the control and fee fixed by Council.










   (C)    Existing taps that are reused shall be charged an inspection
fee as set forth in Section 37.10 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the
Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton.





(Ord. 3355.  Passed 8-14-07; amend. Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)









51.04  PERMIT REQUIRED; PRIOR TO  CONSTRUCTION.




   Prior to the commencement of construction of water or sewer service in
any premises, a tap permit must be obtained at the office of the Water
Department. 
(Ord. 1805, passed 9-25-73)









51.05  DEFERMENT OF TAP PAYMENT.




   Normally, tap fees must be paid before the tap is made.  However, in
the case of new plats under construction where streets or thoroughfares have
not been paved or completed, if in the opinion of the City Manager the
completion of the services to the property line is warranted, taps will be
made, and service extended by contractor to the property line.  The tap fee
will be paid prior to the extension beyond the property line. 
(Ord. 1805, passed 9-25-73)









51.06  SERVICE INSTALLATION STANDARDS.




   All service installations and extensions shall be made in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the department governing plumbers, and in
conformance with the uniform building code.  Except in cases where written
permission by the Service Director is granted, each separate building will be
served through an individual meter installed in a manner acceptable to the
Service Director.





(Ord. 1805, passed 9-25-73)  Penalty, see § 51.99









51.07  INSPECTION REQUIRED PRIOR TO BACKFILLING.




   Any person, firm or corporation installing any water line, sanitary
sewer line or laterals in any street, or making any improvements thereto is
required to notify the respective city inspector and secure an inspection
thereof before the improvement is backfilled or in any manner covered up by
earth or other material.
(Ord. 1805, passed 9-25-73)









51.08  FAILURE TO OBTAIN INSPECTION;  STOPPING WORK.




   Any person, firm or corporation who shall backfill or in any other way
cover any water or sewer main or service line without first having obtained
an inspection thereof, as herein provided, shall, at their own expense,
re-excavate or uncover such improvement or installation in order that the 
same may be adequately inspected. Upon the refusal of any person, firm or
corporation to re-excavate or uncover, as required, no further work shall be
done on the improvement until the re-excavation or uncovering has been
completed, inspection made and approval granted. 
(Ord. 1805, passed 9-25-73)  Penalty, see § 51.99









51.09  STOP WORK ORDER.




   City inspectors are hereby authorized to stop any work, construction or
installation of any water or sanitary sewer improvements in the event of
violation of or deviation from the specifications governing the work,
construction, installation or improvement.





(Ord. 1805, passed 9-25-73)









51.10  WATER AND SEWER SERVICE LINES; RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.




   (A)   Water and sewer service lines are installed by the property
owner at his expense.  The property owner shall be responsible for any water
leakage which may occur between the curb valve and the point of consumption,
and shall be responsible for any blockage or leakage which may occur in the
sanitary sewer service lines.










   (B)   Repairs to service lines shall conform to all specifications,
procedures and inspections applicable to  installation  of  new  service
lines. However,  if repair or reconstruction of a service line does not
require a relocated or enlarged tap, the tap fee shall not apply. 
(Ord. 1805, passed 9-25-73)  Penalty, see § 51.99









51.11  PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION WATER.




   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation constructing a building or
buildings for which a water tap into the municipal system is required shall
secure from the city a permit for construction water, the fee for which shall
be based upon the total estimated construction cost of the building or
buildings according to the schedule set forth in Section 37.11 of Chapter 37,
General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West
Carrollton.










   This permit shall be obtained and paid for at the time the building
permit is secured.  This provision shall not apply to the construction of
garages, storage sheds, or additions to existing buildings, where water under
meter control is already being billed.










   (B)   The use of construction water includes the right to use water
for construction purposes, sanitation purposes, and for the testing of water
and sewer lines during the construction phase, but in no event shall the
right to use the water extend beyond the time of the final inspection, or the
cessation of normal building activities when the construction is complete or
purposely held incomplete, whichever is earliest.  (Ord. 1805, passed
9-25-73; amend. Ord. 2209, passed 6-10-80; amend. Ord. 2349, passed
10-12-82)  Penalty, see § 51.99










   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation requesting temporary water
usage for an existing building construction or maintenance project shall
submit a refundable fire hydrant meter deposit as set forth in Section 37.11
of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City
of West Carrollton.  Water usage shall be the current minimum charge in
effect for a 5/8" - 3/4" meter, plus the current additional charge per 1,000
gallons used over the minimum 10,000 gallons. 





(Ord. 3349.  Passed 8-14-07; amend. Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)









51.12  COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL SEWER WASTE CONTROLS.




   (A)   For businesses using oils, gasolines, greases, fats and other
problem substances, sumps which prevent entry of these products into
sanitary  sewer shall be required, and such sumps must be regularly
maintained to prevent accumulation and overflow of sludge and other
non-degradable products into the sanitary sewer.










   (B)   The city reserves the right to monitor wastes and to refuse to
accept those wastes which cannot be fully digested in the normal operation of
the wastewater treatment plant, or which adversely affect the operation of
the sewer system.  When approved by the city, industrial wastes must be
pretreated, then analyzed and charges assessed based on cost of additional
treatment provided by the city.










   (C)   Disposal of any toxic materials through the city sewer system
is expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. 1805, passed 9-25-73; amend. Ord. 2134, passed 6-12-79)  Penalty, see
§ 51.99









51.13  FIRE HYDRANT USE.




   No person shall open or use water from any fire hydrant without first
obtaining a permit therefor, and no person shall open or close a fire hydrant
except with a hydrant wrench provided by the city.
(Ord. 1805, passed 9-25-73)  Penalty, see § 51.99









51.14  SANITARY SEWER LINES AND SEPTIC TANKS NEAR WATER WELLS.




   No person shall construct or maintain any sanitary sewer line within
500 feet of any well used in connection with or constituting a part of the
water works system of the city, unless the construction of such line is
approved by the city and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in
writing.  Septic tanks and/or leaching fields may not be constructed or
maintained within 500 feet of any such well. 
(Ord. 1805, passed 9-25-73)  Penalty, see § 51.99









51.15  PUBLIC PRIVATE WATER  INTERCONNECTIONS.




   No consumer shall have a cross connection between his private water
supply and the city water system unless such cross connection has been
approved by the Ohio EPA and the Service Director. 
(Ord. 1805, passed 9-25-73)  Penalty, see § 51.99









51.16  CLEAN WATER PROHIBITED FROM  SANITARY SEWER.




   No person shall construct or maintain connections into the sanitary
sewer from roof drains, foundation drains or other sources of clean water
which should be carried away by storm sewers or drains.
(Ord. 1805, passed 9-25-73)  Penalty, see § 51.99









51.17  SUPPLEMENTARY TAP FEE FOR  ENLARGEMENT OR CHANGE OF USE.




   In the event that a structure is enlarged, or the use of a structure is
materially changed, the owner or occupant may be required to pay a
supplementary tap fee prior to the issuance of a building and/ or occupancy
permit.  A supplementary tap fee shall be charged if the tap fee for the
original use or structure, computed according to the current schedule of tap
fees, is less than the tap fee for the newly established use or enlarged
structure, computed according to the current schedule of tap fees.  The
supplementary tap fee to be charged shall be the difference between these 2
computations. 
(Ord. 1812, passed 11-13-73)









51.18  SUPPLEMENTARY TAP FEE FOR  CONNECTION TO CERTAIN WATER MAINS OR
SEWER MAINS.




   (A)   Should any sewer main or water main be installed by a private
party and run along a course which makes the water or sewer main available to
lands other than those of the installer of the water main or sewer main, the
city shall enter into an agreement with the installer whereby the city agrees
to prohibit any other properties from being connected thereto unless the
owner thereof has:





      (1)   Obtained a permit for such a connection from the Service
Director of the city.





      (2)   Paid to the city a supplementary tap fee (or
“protection”) in addition to the tap fees described in §§ 51.02 and
51.03.  The amount of protection established shall be based upon a
percentage of the front footage of the properties benefited by the water or
sewer main.  The city shall reimburse the amount of this supplementary tap
fee to the owner of the property for which the water or sewer main was
originally installed.










   (B)   A preliminary request for protection shall be submitted by the
installer with the cost estimate for the proposed improvement prior to
approval by the Service Director.










   (C)   A property owner installing water or sewer mains and
requesting protection shall be required to extend the water or sewer
improvements across the entire front of his property in cases where there is
additional property beyond the owner's property which can be served by water
or sewer service.










   (D)   A letter requesting protection shall be submitted to the
Service Director within 30 days after final city approval of the water or
sewer main improvement.  The Service Director shall verify the cost of
installation of the water or sewer mains before approving the protection
agreement.










   (E)   This protection agreement shall be in effect for 20 years
after the date of approval.










   (F)   The city accepts no liability for collection of protection
monies due to error or oversight by the city. 
(Ord. 2551, passed 5-27-86)  Penalty, see § 51.99









51.19  BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE.




   If, in the judgment of the Service Director, an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water system, the
Director will give notice to the water consumer to install such an approved
device.  The water consumer, at his own expense, shall install such an
approved device at a location and in a manner approved by the Director and
shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices as required by
the Director.





(Ord. 2581, passed 3-10-87)









51.20  PRIVATE, AUXILIARY, OR EMERGENCY  WATER SUPPLY.




   No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the city may enter the supply or distributing system of the
city, unless such private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply and the
method of connection and use  of  such supply  shall have been approved by
the Director and by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.





(Ord. 2581, passed 3-10-87)









51.21  SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS OF  PROPERTIES SERVED BY THE PUBLIC
WATER  SUPPLY.




   It shall be the duty of the Service Director to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the
public water supply where actual or potential hazards to the public water
supply may exist.  The surveys and investigations shall be repeated as often
as the Director shall deem necessary.





(Ord. 2581, passed 3-10-87)









51.22  INSPECTION OF PIPING SYSTEM.




   The Service Director or his duly authorized representative shall have
the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection
to the public water supply or distributing system of the city for the purpose
of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof.  On the demand the
owner, lessees, or occupants of any property so serviced shall furnish to the
Director any information which he may request regarding the piping system or
systems or water use on such property.  The refusal of such information,
when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the Director, be deemed
evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in §§ 51.19
through 51.23.





(Ord. 2581, passed 3-10-87)









51.23  DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE.




   The Service Director is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue,
after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any
property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of §§ 51.19
through 51.23 is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary
measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of
the public water supply distribution mains.  Water service to the property
shall not be restored until the conditions shall have been eliminated or
corrected in compliance with the provisions of §§ 51.19 through 51.23.





(Ord. 2581, passed 3-10-87)









51.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not more than $1,000 or
imprisoned for not more than 6 months, or both. 
(Ord. 1805, passed 9-25-73; amend. Ord. 2140, passed 6-26-79)
























CHAPTER 52
WATER AND SEWER SERVICE LINES









Section










52.01   Stop work order





52.02   Inspection required prior to backfilling





52.03   Failure to obtain inspection; stopping work





52.04   Drains near water wells





52.99   Penalty




 



52.01  STOP WORK ORDER.




   City inspectors are hereby authorized to stop any work, construction or
installation of any water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer lines and
improvements thereto in the event the same is found to be in violation of or
in deviation from the specifications governing the work, construction,
installation or improvement. 
('70 Code, § 915.01)









52.02  INSPECTION REQUIRED PRIOR TO  BACKFILLING.




   Any person, firm or corporation installing any water line, storm sewer
line, sanitary sewer line or laterals or any street, or making any
improvements thereto, is required to notify the respective city inspector and
secure an inspection thereof before the improvement is backfilled or in any
manner covered up by earth or other substance.
('70 Code, § 915.02)  Penalty, see § 52.99









52.03  FAILURE TO OBTAIN INSPECTION;  STOPPING WORK.




   Any person, firm or corporation who shall backfill or in any other way
cover any improvement without first having obtained an inspection thereof, as
herein provided, shall, at their own expense, re-excavate or uncover such
improvement or installation in order that the same way be adequately
inspected.  Upon refusal of any person, firm or corporation to so
re-excavate or uncover, as required, no further work shall be done on the
improvement until the re-excavation or uncovering has been completed,
inspection made and approval thereof secured. 
('70 Code, § 915.03)  Penalty, see § 52.99









52.04  DRAINS NEAR WATER WELLS.




   No person shall construct or maintain any drain within 500 feet of
any  well used in connection with or constituting a part of the water works
system of the city. 
('70 Code, § 915.04)  Penalty, see § 52.99









52.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more
than $50.  Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate
offense. 
('70 Code, § 915.99)
























CHAPTER 53
GARBAGE AND TRASH REMOVAL









Section










53.01   Definitions





53.02   Container requirements





53.03   Contents of containers





53.04   Supervision of waste collection and removal





53.05   Placement of containers for collection





53.06   Special collections





53.07   Dumpster and other private hauler containers





53.08   Burying or burning garbage prohibited





53.09   On-call refuse collection service





53.10   Grass and lawn debris collection and disposal





53.11   Exclusive rights to collect





53.12   Waste disposal fee





53.13   Delinquency; collection





53.99   Penalty




 



53.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.





   (A)   GARBAGE.  Putrescible wastes, and includes every refuse
accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter, used or intended for food,
or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat,
fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables.










   (B)   TRASH.  All waste capable of being burned, such as wooden or
cardboard boxes, crates and cartons, wooden barrels, lumber scraps or
shavings, rags or discarded wearing apparel and bedding, excelsior, straw,
grass, leaves, lawn, flower,  shrubbery or tree trimmings, paper and
magazines or any other material capable of being burned.  The term TRASH
also includes ashes, glass, tin cans, crockery, metal, junk or other
nonburnable waste.










   (C)   WASTE.  All trash, rubbish, garbage and other refuse or
discarded material required to be removed from private and public places,
exclusive of recognized industrial by-products; or any highly explosive
materials;  or  any  poisonous  substance whatsoever.  For the purpose
of this chapter, the materials shall be classified as garbage and trash. 










   (D)   GRASS. Plant life waste which accumulates through the yard
mowing process.










   (E)   LAWN DEBRIS.  Plant life waste which includes leaves, thatch,
light brush, shrubbery trimmings, weeds and crop residue.










   (F)   PRIVATE WASTE COLLECTOR.  “Private waste collector” shall
mean any person, firm or corporation engaged in the practice of operating
their own trucks for the removal of their own waste, and not in the
commercial waste collection business.





(Ord. 3587.  Passed 6-28-16.)









53.02  CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS.



   The City shall collect and dispose of waste from containers provided or
approved, by the City.  It shall be the duty of every resident, retailer,
wholesaler, dealer in food stuff, and every person, firm, or corporation to
provide or cause to be provided a portable container or containers for
storage of waste materials approved by the City.



 



   (A)   Mobile Containers (Toters).  These containers shall be
provided by or acquired from the city.  The City will provide one toter per
customer.  Expected lifespan of this toter is typically 10-12 years. 
Replacement of this toter due to damage or neglect by the customer will be
the responsibility of the customer.  Additional toters, shall be purchased
from the city at the current cost shown in the General Fee Schedule. 
Effective the first quarter of 2016, the cost per toter is $81.00.



 



   (B)   Residential garbage containers.  These containers shall be
galvanized iron, plastic, or other nonrusting material of substantial
construction.  They shall hold not less than 10, nor more than 32 gallons;
but in no case will the combined weight of the container and contents exceed
50 pounds.  Containers shall have handles on the outside by which they may
be lifted and emptied; they shall be water-tight and provided with
tight-fitting lids to keep out water and animals.  The lids shall be
equipped with a handle and shall be kept in place except when removed to
empty or load the container.  Plastic refuse can liners, not to exceed 32
gallons capacity or 50 pounds in weight, may be used if littering and animals
are not a problem.



 




   (C)   Trash containers.  Trash containers may be baskets, crates or
containers of such size (50 pounds maximum) as may be easily handled by one
man and substantial enough not to be broken in handling.  Cardboard cartons
should not be used when there is danger of precipitation.  Wet cardboard
containers will be refused. Containers will be maintained in a sanitary
condition at all times. These containers are to be covered to prevent
littering at all times.  (Ord. 3587.  Passed 6-28-16.)









53.03 CONTENTS OF CONTAINERS.



   Each resident using the municipal refuse collection system shall place
or cause to be placed in containers as hereinbefore described, all waste
created or accumulated on his premises or the premises under his control; and
no person or persons shall throw, place, or deposit any waste materials on
any public or private property.  All garbage shall be drained of excess
liquids or fluids and wrapped in paper before depositing in containers, in
order that the material may be easily removed.  All grass shall be handled
as described in §53.10.  Shrubbery or tree trimmings are not required to be
placed in containers but must first be cut into lengths of not more than four
feet and tied into bundles not more than 18 inches in diameter, before the
material will be removed by the municipal trash collection service.  No
person shall place in any container any industrial or commercial waste, any
explosive, or any poisonous substance whatsoever.




(Ord. 3587.  Passed 6-28-16.)









53.04  SUPERVISION OF WASTE COLLECTION AND REMOVAL.



   It shall be the duty of the Service Director to supervise the
collection and removal of residential waste within the city.  That subject
to the approval of the City Manager, the Service Director shall establish and
update when necessary the refuse policies governing the city waste collection
services.




(Ord. 3587.  Passed 6-28-16.)









53.05  PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS FOR  COLLECTION.




   Containers of waste material shall be placed in a readily accessible
location at curb side or in alley at each premise before 6:00 a.m. on  the 
day  scheduled for pickup.  Due to littering problems, in no case shall the
material be placed at curb side earlier than 5:00 p.m. of the day preceding
the scheduled collection day.  All containers shall be removed from the
collection area by 4:30 p.m. of the day following collection day.  Other
than described herein, no containers shall be kept in the area in front of
the house or garage.  In no event will refuse be removed by city crews from
garages, buildings, or any location other than dedicated and improved city
streets or alleys.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner or his agent
to clean up in the refuse collection area any materials spilled by reason
of  improper  containers,  overloading of containers, or littering by
animals, or severe weather.  (Ord. 3587.  Passed 6-28- 16.)









53.06  SPECIAL COLLECTIONS.




   The City may provide additional waste collection and disposal services
as needed.  Collection of materials that will not fit in a standard
container or that pose special collection difficulties will be made once
quarterly during the months of January, May, July, and October.  At that
time materials such as appliances, furniture, tree and shrubbery trimmings,
automotive and other metal parts, and materials from home alterations (when
work performed by the home owner or occupant) will be collected.  These
materials will be collected from the same location at curbside or alley as
the regular refuse pickup.  When weather conditions, labor or mechanical
problems occur, the City reserves the right to cancel or reschedule these
collections.  If any mattress, furniture, or other item is found to contain
Bed Bugs, those items will be tagged with a hanger and will not be picked
up.  Those items containing Bed Bugs shall be removed from the collection
area by the customer, wrapped in plastic, and sealed with tape and then
placed out for the next available pick up.  (Ord. 3587.  Passed 6-28-16.)









53.07  DUMPSTER AND OTHER PRIVATE HAULER CONTAINERS.




   It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant to maintain
these in a sanitary and nuisance-free condition.  They shall be rodent-proof
and emptied at such intervals as to prevent fly and litter problems.  The
areas around these containers shall be kept free of litter and rodents at all
times.  (Ord. 3587.  Passed 6-28-16.)









53.08  BURYING OR BURNING GARBAGE  PROHIBITED.




   No person shall bury or burn any garbage, as defined in § 53.01, or
throw or leave the same in or upon any street, court, lane, alley, public
square, public enclosure, vacant lot or in any pond, stream or body of water
or branch thereof within the limits of the city. However, on the days
scheduled by council for the collection of the waste, the vessel, vessels or
containers containing the same may be placed on the premises in obedience to
and in compliance with § 53.05.  (Ord. 3587.  Passed 6-28-16.)









53.09  ON-CALL REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICE.



   (A)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to continue the on-call
special refuse collection service to those properties normally served by the
weekly and quarterly refuse collection service.



 



   (B)   The current cost for on-call refuse collection is as shown in
the General Fee Schedule.  Effective the first quarter of 2016, the on-call
refuse collection cost is $21.00 per occurrence.  The charge for this
service shall be for items that can be handled by a maximum of two employees
without the need of motorized equipment.  Should a pickup require motorized
equipment to assist in lifting, or be extensive enough to exceed one-half
hour in duration, additional fees will be assessed at the current rates for
dumping, manpower and equipment necessary to accomplish the pickup.  In such
case, an estimate of probable additional costs will be given to the property
owner prior to the pickup.



 



   (C)   During the quarterly pick up periods in January, May, July and
October, pickups requiring motorized equipment to assist in lifting, or to be
extended enough to exceed one-half hour in duration, will also have
additional fees assessed at the current rates for dumping, manpower and
equipment necessary to accomplish the pickup.  In such case, an estimate of
probable additional costs will be given to the property owner prior to the
pickup.



 



   (D)   Items as described in §53.06 and subject to special
collection service that are placed for collection but unscheduled shall have
the customer notified by hanger or letter or certified mail or personal
contact to remedy the pickup themselves or remove said items from the
collection area within 48 hours.  After 48 hours, the city will enact the
special collection and assess a fee for this service.  The current cost of
this unscheduled collection is as shown in the General Fee Schedule. 
Effective the date of passing this Ordinance, the unscheduled collection fee
is $21.00 (on call collection service) plus $28.00 (administrative fee) for a
total of $49.00.  Fee for this service shall be for items that can be
handled by a maximum of two employees without the need of motorized
equipment.  Should a pickup require motorized equipment to assist in
lifting, or be extensive enough to exceed one-half hour in duration,
additional fees will be assessed at the current rates for dumping, manpower
and equipment necessary to accomplish the pickup.  In such case, an estimate
of probable additional costs will be given to the property owner prior to the
pickup.



 



   (E)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to establish the
necessary procedures for this special refuse collection service.




(Ord. 3587.  Passed 6-28-16.)









53.10  GRASS AND LAWN DEBRIS COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of each resident to separate
grass from other trash bagged and set out for collection by city refuse crews
and this grass shall be contained in special bags identified for the purpose
of yard waste disposal in the city.  Brush tied in bundles, bagged lawn
debris other than grass,  and leaves raked to the curb for the annual fall
collection can be set out with regular refuse for collection.



 



   (B)   The special bags to be used for the purpose of grass disposal
shall be available from the city and may be made available at those retail
outlets within the city that wish to offer the bags for sale.  The current
cost for special bags is as shown in the General Fee Schedule.  Effective
for the first quarter of 2016, the cost is $1.35 per bag.



 



   (C)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to establish the
necessary procedure for implementing this program for the collection and
disposal of grass.




(Ord. 3587.  Passed 6-28-16.)









53.11  EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS TO COLLECT.



   To provide for residential garbage, refuse and/or recyclable
collection, and to control truck traffic in its residential areas, the City
shall hold exclusive rights to collect and dispose of garbage and refuse from
residential households.  No other person  or agency shall be permitted to
collect such material for hire in the City.  Private waste collectors are
permitted to collect refuse for residential apartments, and commercial and
industrial establishments not serviced by the City.




(Ord. 3587.  Passed 6-28-16.)









53.12  WASTE DISPOSAL FEE.



   The City may charge the owner, or assess the property, or both, for the
cost of collecting and disposing of waste from property located within the
City.  The current cost for refuse collection is as shown in the General Fee
Schedule.  Effective with the first quarter of 2016, the fee for refuse
collection service shall be $51.09 per quarter.



 



   The fee is for the weekly collection and disposal of waste by the City
from a waste container provided by the City, or a like quantity of waste in a
container approved by the City.  Each residence and business serviced by the
City shall have its own waste container or containers.  For purposes of this
section, a residence is each unit in an apartment or housing complex and each
part of a house or residential structure providing separate living quarters,
including a bath, kitchen, and sleeping room, for an individual or group of
individuals, related or otherwise.  For purposes of this section, a business
is each unit in a commercial building or strip center for an individual or
group of individuals.  The fee is also for the quarterly pickup of large
items as set forth in Section 53.06, leaf collection, and also for the
recyclables collection service.



 



   The City shall include the fee on the property owner’s utility bill,
or as a separate bill, and the property owner shall pay the fee in the manner
and amount specified on the bill.  A property owner may, by agreement,
require a tenant or lawful occupant of the property to pay to the City the
fee; however, in the event of nonpayment, the property owner remains
responsible for paying the fee.




(Ord. 3587.  Passed 6-28-16.)









53.13  DELINQUENCY; COLLECTION.




   All fees for refuse collection are due and payable upon receipt.  If
the bill is not paid on or before the fifteenth day after mailing such
notice, a penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be posted to the account.  If
the account is not paid within 28 days after mailing such notice, a 48-hour
notice of service shut-off shall be mailed to the affected address and to the
owner if that address is not his place of residence.  If more than one user
is to be affected by such shut-off, notices shall be mailed to all persons. 
If the bill is not paid upon the expiration of the 48-hour period, the
Finance Director may certify such charges to the County Auditor, who shall
place the same on the tax duplicate and collect the charges thereon and
penalties therefor in the same manner as other taxes are collected.  (Ord.
3587.  Passed 6-28- 16.)









53.99  PENALTY.




   Any person, firm or corporation doing anything declared by this chapter
to be unlawful or failing or refusing to perform any duty set forth in this
chapter shall be fined not more than $50 for each day of violation.  (Ord.
3587.  Passed 6-28-16.)
























CHAPTER 54
PREVAILING WAGE LAW









Section










54.01   Wages and hours on public works




 



54.01  WAGES AND HOURS ON PUBLIC WORKS.




   (A)   R.C. §§ 4115.01 through 4115.16, as amended from time to
time, sometimes referred to as the prevailing wage laws, are hereby expressly
declared not to be incorporated into the ordinances of the city.










   (B)   Neither the city council nor any city officers or employees
shall be bound by any of the provisions of the state statutes known as the
prevailing wage laws, nor shall they designate a prevailing wage coordinator
to perform any responsibilities set forth in those statutes.










   (C)   Contracts entered into by the city shall not comply with the
prevailing wage statutes except to the extent any subsequent legislation
specifically provides to the contrary or except to the extent the city is
required to comply with the statutes as a condition of obtaining funds. 
(Ord. 2233, passed 12-23-80)
























CHAPTER 55
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS









Section










55.01   Definitions





55.02   Discharge of hazardous materials; cleanup or abatement; liability
for costs





55.03   Billing responsible persons; payment to the city; appeal




 



Off-Site Infectious Waste Treatment Facility or Treatment Facility



 




55.15   Fee





55.16   Definitions





55.17   Return; remittance of fee





55.18   Disposition of fee





55.99   Penalty




 



55.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.










   COST INCURRED BY CITY.  Includes all costs and expenses of the city in
connection with the cleanup or abatement of the discharge of hazardous
materials or the extinguishing of a fire involving hazardous materials and
shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to the following: actual
labor costs of city personnel involved in cleanup or abatement of the
discharge (including workers compensation benefits, fringe benefit and
administrative overhead); cost of equipment operation, damage or loss as
published and updated by the Finance Department of the city; cost of
materials obtained by the city; and cost of any contract labor and materials.










   DISCHARGE.  To leak, seep, spill or otherwise release.










   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL.  Any substance or material which, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is
determined by the Fire Chief or his authorized representatives, to pose an
unreasonable and imminent risk to life, health or safety of persons or
property or to the ecological balance of the environment including, but not
limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum
products or gases, poisons, etiologic (biological) agents, flammables,
corrosives, or any substance determined  to  be  hazardous  or  toxic 
under  any federal or state law, statute or regulations.










   THIRD PARTY.  Any person, company or business entity other than the
city and its officers and employees.





(Ord. 2802, passed 5-28-91)









55.02  DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS; CLEANUP OR ABATEMENT; LIABILITY FOR
COSTS.




   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge any hazardous materials in
the city without first obtaining a permit from all appropriate federal and
state authorities as well as the Fire Chief.










   (B)   The Fire Department is authorized to clean up, or abate the
effects of, any hazardous material discharged upon or into any property or
facilities within the city where such discharge creates a hazard to
individuals, property or the environment.  The Fire Department may be
assisted in such cleanup or abatement by any other fire department or any
third parties as necessary to protect against or eliminate such hazard.










   (C)   Any person who discharges, or otherwise causes a discharge of,
hazardous material and any person who owns or controls the hazardous
materials container at the time of discharge shall be jointly and severally
liable to the city for the payment of all costs incurred by the city as a
result of such cleanup or abatement by the city, regardless of fault.










   (D)   For purposes of this chapter, the person who discharges or
causes the discharge of hazardous materials, or who owns or controls the
container at the time of discharge, if an individual, shall include that
individual's employer and any related entity of the employer; if a
corporation or partnership, that person shall include any entity legally
related to such corporation or partnership.










   (E)   The authority to recover costs incurred by the city shall not
include costs for fire suppressing services which are normally or customarily
provided by the Fire Department unless the fire involves hazardous materials
or services not normally or customarily provided by the Fire Department.










   (F)   The remedies provided by this chapter shall be in addition to
any other remedies provided by law.





(Ord. 2802, passed 5-28-91)









55.03  BILLING RESPONSIBLE PERSONS; PAYMENT TO THE CITY; APPEAL.




   (A)   The city shall within 60 days of completion of the cleanup or
abatement of any hazardous material discharge, send an invoice for the costs
incurred by the city in connection with such discharge to the person
determined by the city to be responsible for such discharge pursuant to this
chapter.










   (B)   The person responsible for such hazardous material discharge
shall submit payment for the invoice to the city within 30 days of receipt of
the invoice.










   (C)   Any person determined by the city to be responsible for a
hazardous material discharge may appeal to the City Manager any invoice sent
pursuant to this section by sending a written notice of appeal to the City
Manager within 15 days of receipt of the invoice.  The appeal shall be heard
by the City Manager and his decision shall be final.










   (D)   The city may institute an action for the recovery of costs
billed, or take any other action provided by law.





(Ord. 2802, passed 5-28-91)










OFF-SITE INFECTIOUS WASTE





TREATMENT FACILITY OR TREATMENT FACILITY









55.15  FEE.




   A fee of $5 per ton is levied upon all off-site infectious waste
treatment facilities and/or treatment facilities located within the city, for
the treatment of infectious waste at the treatment facility.





(Res. 34-93, passed  -  -)









55.16  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.










   INFECTIOUS WASTE.  Has the same meaning as provided in R.C. § 3734.01.










   OFF-SITE INFECTIOUS WASTE TREATMENT FACILITY and TREATMENT FACILITY. 
Have the same meaning as provided in R.C. § 3734.023.





(Res. 34-93, passed  -  -)









55.17  RETURN; REMITTANCE OF FEE.




   (A)   The owner or operator of an off-site infectious waste
treatment facility shall pay the fees levied herein monthly to the City
Finance Director in accordance with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of
Environmental Protection under R.C. § 3734.026.  The remittance of such fee
shall be accompanied by a return indicating the total amount of infectious
waste received at the facility for treatment during the month to which the
return applies.










   (B)   If the monthly return and remittance of the fees are not
submitted to the Finance Director within 60 days after the last day of the
month to which the return and the remittance apply or within 60 days after
the date otherwise established by the Ohio Director of Environmental
Protection, the owner or operation shall pay a penalty of an additional 50%
of the amount of the remittance for each month it is late.





(Res. 34-93, passed  -  -)









55.18  DISPOSITION OF FEE.




   The money received by the Finance Director shall be paid into the
general fund of the city for the purpose of providing funding or conducting
environmental monitoring programs in connection with the off-site infectious
waste treatment facilities located within the city; providing local emergency
response services in connection with such a facility and transportation of
infectious waste to such a facility; and providing financial assistance to
the Montgomery County Board of Health for the enforcement of the infectious
waste provisions of the Ohio Revised Code and rules, orders, terms and
conditions of permits and licenses adopted or issued under such provisions.





(Res. 34-93, passed  -  -)









55.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates § 55.17 shall be fined not more than $10,000.  Each
day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.





(Res. 34-93, passed  -  -)
























CHAPTER 56
WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT









Section










56.01   General provisions





56.02   Definitions





56.03   Regulations





56.031   General discharge prohibitions





56.032   Limitation on waste water strength





56.033   Accidental discharges





56.04   Fees





56.041   Purpose





56.042   Charges and fees





56.05   Administration





56.051   Wastewater discharges





56.052   Wastewater discharge permits





56.053   Reporting requirements for permittee





56.054   Monitoring facilities





56.055   Inspection and sampling





56.056   Confidential information





56.057   Changed discharges





56.058   Bypasses





56.06   Enforcement





56.061   Emergency suspension of service and discharge permit





56.062   Revocation of permit





56.063   Notification of violation; administration adjustment





56.064   Show cause hearing





56.065   Judicial proceedings





56.066   Enforcement action-annual publications





56.067   Right of appeal





56.068   Operating upsets





56.07   Penalties





56.071   Recovery of costs incurred by the authority





56.072   Falsifying information





56.08   Records retention





56.09   Miscellaneous





56.091   Removal credits





56.092   Net/gross calculations





56.10   Severability





56.11   Conflict





Appendix A:   Toxic Priority Pollutants





Appendix B:   Conventional Pollutants





Appendix C:   Industrial discharges subject to categorical pretreatment
standards





Appendix D:   Local pretreatment standards




 



56.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.




   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for discharges
into the POTW authority wastewater collection and  treatment systems, and
enables the authority to protect public health in conformity with all
applicable local, state, and federal laws relating thereto.










   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:





      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
authority wastewater system which will interfere with the normal operation of
the system or contaminate the resulting municipal sludge.





      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
authority wastewater system which do not receive adequate treatment in the
POTW, and which will pass through the system into receiving waters or the
atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system.





      (3)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim
wastewater and sludge from the system.










   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of discharges into
the authority wastewater system through the issuance of permits.  This
chapter does not provide for the recovery of operations, maintenance, or
replacement costs of the POTW or the costs associated with the construction
of collection and treatment systems used by industrial discharges, in
proportion to their use of the POTW, which are the subject of separate
enactments.





(Ord. 2466, passed 9-25-84; amend. Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.02  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.










   ACT.  The Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), as amended.










   ADMINISTRATIVE (AO'S)  Enforcement documents which direct industrial
users to undertake or to cease specified activities.










   APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR PRETREATMENT STANDARD.  Any
pretreatment limit or prohibitive standard (federal or local) contained in
this chapter deemed to be the most restrictive with which nondomestic users
will be required to comply.










   AUTHORITY.  The state or local governmental entity enacting and
enforcing this chapter.










   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER.  An authorized
representative of an industrial user may be the following.





      (1)   A principal executive officer of at least the level of
vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation.





      (2)   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user
is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively.





      (3)   A duly authorized representative of the individual
designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.










   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) (of sewage, sewage effluent, polluted
waters, or industrial wastes). The quantity of dissolved oxygen in milligrams
per liter required during stabilization of the decomposable organic matter by
aerobic biochemical action under standard laboratory procedures for five days
at 20°C.  The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in STANDARD METHODS.










   BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of
an industrial user's treatment facility.










   CFR.  Code of Federal Regulations.










   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.  National pretreatment standards
specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties
which may be discharged or introduced into a POTW by specific industrial
dischargers.










   INDIRECT DISCHARGE.  The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic
pollutants from a source regulated under Section 307 (b),  (c) or (d) of the
Act, into a POTW.










   INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGER.  A source of indirect discharge.










   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Solid, liquid, or gaseous waste resulting from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade, or business process or from the
development, recovery, or processing of natural resources.










   INTERFERENCE.  A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or
disposal, and therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits
issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405
of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title
II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation Recovery Act
(RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research
and Sanctuaries Act.










   NEW SOURCE.  Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under
Section 307 (c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:





      (1)   The building, structure, facility or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located;





      (2)   The building, structure, facility or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or





      (3)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent
of an existing source at the same site.










   NPDES.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program
as administered by the USEPA or state.










   O & M.  Operation and maintenance.










   OTHER WASTES.  Decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse,
ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar, chemicals, and all other substances except
sewage and industrial wastes.










   PASS THROUGH.  A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).










   POTW.  Any sewage treatment works and the sewers and conveyance
appurtenances discharging thereto, owned and operated by the authority.










   POLLUTANT.  Any substance discharged into a POTW or its collection
system, listed in Appendices A and B of this chapter, or any substance which
upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause adverse effects
such as cancer, genetic mutation, or physiological manifestations as defined
in standards issued pursuant to Section 307 (a) of the Act.










   PRETREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants'
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW.










   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE.  Substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the treatment facilities which  causes  them  to  become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass.  Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.










   SEWAGE.  Water-carried human wastes or a combination of water-carried
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial
establishments, together with such ground, surface, storm, or other waters as
may be present.










   SEWER.  Any pipe, conduit, ditch, or other device used to collect and
transport sewage or storm water from the generating source.










   SHALL.  Is mandatory.










   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGER. 





      (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this definition,
the term Significant Discharger includes:





         (1)   All industrial dischargers subject to categorical
pretreatment standards; and





         (2)   Any other industrial discharger that: discharges
an average of 25,000 gallon per day or more of process wastewater to the
POTW; contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plants or has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the Authority, to
adversely affect the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement.





      (B)   The authority may at any time, on its own initiative or
in response to a petition received from an industrial discharger, determine
that a noncategorical industrial discharger is not a Significant Industrial
Discharger if the industrial discharger has no reasonable potential to
adversely affect the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement.










   SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.  An industrial user is in significant
noncompliance if its violations meet one or more of the following criteria:





      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements  taken
during  a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit
or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;





      (2)   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here
as those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the
daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC
(TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants
except pH);





      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit
(daily maximum or longer term average) that the authority determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public);





      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment of human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted
in the POTW's exercise of emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;





      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date,
a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;





      (6)   Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date,
required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90 day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;





      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and





      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations which the
Authority determines will or has adversely affected the operation or
implementation of the city's pretreatment program.










   SLUDGE.  Any solid, semi-solid, or liquid waste generated from the
municipal wastewater treatment plant, or any other waste having similar
characteristics and effects as defined in standards issued under Section 402,
405 of the Federal Act and in the applicable requirements under Sections,
3001, 3004 and 4004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act.










   SLUGLOAD.  Any substance released in a discharge at a rate or
concentration which causes interference to a POTW.










   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC).  A classification pursuant
to the “Standard Industrial Classification” manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.










   STANDARD METHODS.  The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest
edition, at the time of analysis, of STANDARD METHODS FOR THE EXAMINATION OF
WATER AND WASTEWATER prepared and published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water
Pollution Control Federation.










   TOXIC POLLUTANTS.  Those substances listed in Appendix A in this
chapter. 










   UNPOLLUTED WATER.  Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to
sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.










   UPSET.  An exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally
and  temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the standards set forth
in Appendices A through D of this chapter due to factors beyond the
reasonable control of the discharger, and excluding noncompliance to the
extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless
or improper operation thereof.










   VIOLATION.  An occasion of noncompliance with any term or condition of
federal, state, or local pretreatment regulations, including, without
limitation, numerical discharge limitations and other conditions contained in
a user's discharge permit.










   WASTEWATER.  Industrial waste, or sewage, or any other waste including
that which may be combined with any ground water, surface water, or storm
water, that may be discharged to the POTW.





(Ord. 2466, passed 9-25-84; Am. Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.03  REGULATIONS.




   The provisions regarding general discharge prohibitions, limitations on
wastewater strength and accidental discharges can be found in §§ 56.031
through 56.033.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.031 GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.




   No discharger shall contribute or cause to be discharged,  directly or
indirectly, any of the following described substances into the wastewater
disposal system or otherwise to the authority.










   (A)   Any pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the
POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup
flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using
the test method specified in 40 CFR 261.21 or pollutants which may be
injurious in any way to the operation of the POTW.










   (B)   Solid or viscous substances which will or may cause
obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation
of the wastewater system.










   (C)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or higher than 10 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, or personnel of the system.










   (D)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction, to injure or interfere with any
wastewater treatment process, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals.










   (E)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which
either singly or by interaction are capable of creating a public nuisance or
hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their
maintenance and repair.










   (F)   Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or treatment
residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to
interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance
discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use
or disposal criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed under Section 405
of the Act; any criteria, guide-lines, or regulations affecting sludge use
or  disposal developed





pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, or state standards applicable to the sludge
management method being used.










   (G)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES
or other disposal system permits.










   (H)   Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions.










   (I)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference;
but in no case, wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the
POTW which exceeds 40°C (104°F).










   (J)   Any slugload, which shall mean any pollutant, including oxygen
demanding pollutants (BOD), released in a single extraordinary discharge
episode of such volume or strength as to cause interference to the POTW.










   (K)   Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, noncontact
cooling water.










   (L)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
of such halflife or concentration as exceed limits established by the
authority in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.










   (M)   Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life,  creates
a public nuisance or which results in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems.










   (N)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of
mineral oil origin if discharged in amounts that can pass through or cause
interference.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)  Penalty, see § 56.07









56.032 LIMITATIONS ON WASTEWATER  STRENGTH.




   (A)   National categorical pretreatment standards.  National
categorical pretreatment standards as promulgated by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Act and as adopted as Appendix C of
this chapter shall be met by all dischargers of the regulated categories. 
An application for modification of the national categorical pretreatment
standards may be considered for submittal to the regional administrator by
the authority, when the authority's wastewater treatment system achieves
consistent removal of the pollutants as defined by 40 CFR § 403.7.










   (B)   State requirements.  State requirements and limitations on
dischargers to the POTW shall be met by all dischargers which are subject to
such standards in any instance in which they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those in this or any other applicable chapter.










   (C)   Right of revision.  The authority reserves the right to amend
this chapter to provide for more stringent limitations or requirements on
discharges to the POTW where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives
set forth in § 56.01.










   (D)   Dilution.  No discharger shall increase the use of potable or
process water in any way, nor mix separate waste streams for the purpose of
diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substance for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter.










   (E)   Supplementary limitations.  No discharger shall discharge
wastewater containing concentrations or mass limitations of the enumerated
materials, exceeding the values listed in Appendix D. The authority may
impose mass limitations on dischargers which are using dilution to meet the
pretreatment standards or requirements of this chapter, or in other cases
where the imposition of mass limitations is deemed appropriate by the
authority.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)  Penalty, see § 56.07









56.033 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.




   (A)   Each discharger shall provide protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited or regulated material or substance established by
this chapter.  Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge
of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the discharger's
cost and expense.  Detailed plans showing facilities and operating
procedures  to  provide this protection shall be submitted to the authority
for review, and shall be approved by the authority before construction of the
facility.  Each existing discharger shall complete its plan and submit same
to the authority by January 1, 1985.  No discharger who discharges to the
POTW after the aforesaid date shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into
the system until accidental discharge protection procedures have been
approved by the authority.  Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures by the authority shall not relieve the discharger from the
responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements
of this chapter.










   (B)   Dischargers shall notify the authority immediately upon the
occurrence of a slugload, or accidental discharge of substance prohibited by
this chapter. The notification shall include location of discharge, date and
time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective
actions.  Any discharger who discharges a slugload of prohibited materials
shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damages to the POTW, in addition to
the amount of any fines imposed on the authority on account thereof under
state or federal law.










   (C)   Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on
discharger's premises, advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug
or accidental discharge.  Employers shall instruct all employees who may
cause or discover such a discharge with respect to emergency notification
procedure.





(Ord. 2466, passed 9-25-84; Am. Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)  Penalty, see §
56.07









56.04  FEES.




   Provisions regarding charges and fees for this chapter can be found in
Section 37.15 of Chapter 37.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91; amend. Ord. 3436.  passed 12-22-09)









56.041 PURPOSE.




   It is the purpose of this section to provide for the payment of fees
from dischargers to the authority for the cost of administration of the
pretreatment program established in this chapter.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.042 CHARGES AND FEES.




   The city shall adopt charges and fees which may include the following.





   (A)   Fees for monitoring, inspections, and surveillance procedures.










   (B)   Fees for permit applications.










   (C)   Fees for filing appeals.










   (D)   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction.





(Ord. 2466, passed 9-25-84; Am. Ord. 2469, passed 10-23-84; Am. Ord. 2794,
passed 4-23-91)









56.05  ADMINISTRATION.




   Provisions regarding the following can be found in §§ 56.051 through
56.058: wastewater dischargers; wastewater discharge permits; reporting
requirements for permittee; monitoring facilities; inspection and sampling;
confidential information; changed discharges; and bypasses.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.051 WASTEWATER DISCHARGERS.




   It shall be unlawful to discharge industrial wastes or other wastes
without a permit issued by the authority to any sewer within the jurisdiction
of the authority, or to the POTW.  No person shall access the sewer system
or POTW for any activity including discharge of hauled septic or industrial
wastes except at locations and at times as designated by the authority.  Any
removal of manhole lids, or other access to the sewer system for the purpose
of discharging wastes at times and/or locations other than those designated
by the authority, or without the expressed permission of the authority, shall
be considered a violation and shall be subject to enforcement action,
including fines and penalties allowed under this chapter.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)  Penalty, see § 56.07









56.052 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.




   (A)   General permits.  All industrial dischargers proposing to
connect to or to discharge industrial wastes and other wastes to the POTW
shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or
discharging to the POTW.  All existing industrial dischargers connected to
or discharging to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater permit within 90 days
after the effective date of this chapter.










   (B)   Permit application.  Industrial dischargers shall complete
and file with the authority, a permit application therefor in the form
prescribed by the authority, and accompanied by the appropriate fee. 
Existing industrial dischargers shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit
within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, and proposed new
dischargers shall apply at least 90 days prior to discharging into the
POTW.  No discharge permit shall be issued unless and until the following
conditions have been met.





      (1)   Disclosure of name, address, and location of the
discharger.





      (2)   Disclosure of Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)
number to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the
Budget, 1972, as amended.





      (3)   Disclosure of wastewater constituents and
characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in this chapter
including Appendices A and B, and C as appropriate, as determined by bona
fide chemical and biological analyses.  Sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the U.S. EPA and
contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended.





      (4)   Disclosure of time and duration of discharges.





      (5)   Disclosure of average daily and instantaneous peak
wastewater flow rates, in gallons per day, including daily, monthly, and
seasonal variations, if any.  All flows shall be measured unless other
verifiable techniques are approved by the authority due to cost or
nonfeasibility.





      (6)   Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and
plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection
manholes, sampling chambers, and appurtenances by size, location, and
elevation.





      (7)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant
processes on the premises including all materials which are  or  may  be
discharged  to  the sewers or works of the authority.





      (8)   Disclosure of the nature and concentration of any
pollutants or materials prohibited by this chapter in the discharge, together
with a statement regarding whether or not compliance is being achieved with
this chapter on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance activities or additional pretreatment is required for the
discharger to comply with this chapter.





      (9)   Where additional pretreatment or operation and
maintenance activities will be required to comply with this chapter, the
discharger shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the
discharger will provide such additional pretreatment or implementation of
additional operational and maintenance activities.





         (a)   The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the discharger to comply
with the requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to, dates
relating to hiring an engineer, hiring other appropriate personnel,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for
major components, commencing construction, completing construction,  and all
other acts necessary to achieve compliance with this chapter.





         (b)   Under no circumstance shall the authority permit a
time increment for any single step directed toward compliance which exceeds
nine months.  New sources shall install and have in operating condition and
shall “start-up” all pollution control equipment required to meet
applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge and achieve
compliance within the shortest feasible time, not to exceed 90 days.





         (c)   Not later than 14 days following each milestone
date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the discharger shall
submit a progress report to the authority, including no less than a statement
as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented
by that milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply
with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being
taken by the discharger  to  return  the  construction  to  the
approved schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between
such progress reports to the authority.





      (10)   Disclosure of each product produced by type, amount,
process or processes, and rate of production.





      (11)   Disclosure of the type and amount of raw materials
utilized (average and maximum per day).





      (12)   All permit applications for new modified permits shall
be signed by a principal executive officer of the discharger, and a qualified
engineer, and all renewal applications for existing permits shall be signed
by a principal executive officer of the discharger.





      (13)   All sewers shall have an inspection and sampling
manhole or structure with an opening of no less than 24 inches in diameter
and an internal diameter of no less than 48 inches containing flow measuring,
recording, and sampling equipment as required by the authority to assure
compliance with this chapter.





      (14)   The authority will evaluate the complete application
and data furnished by the discharger and may require additional information.
Within 30 days after full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished,
the authority shall issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and
conditions provided in this section.










   (C)   Permit modifications.  The authority reserves the right to
amend any wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder in order to assure
compliance by the authority with applicable laws and regulations. Within nine
months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard,
the wastewater discharge permit of each discharger subject to such standards
shall be revised to require compliance with such standards within the time
frame prescribed by such standards.  All national categorical pretreatment
standards adopted after the promulgation of this chapter shall be adopted by
the authority as part of this chapter. Where an industrial discharger,
subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit from the authority
within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical
pretreatment standard by the U.S. EPA.  In addition, the discharger with an
existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the authority within 180
days after the promulgation of an applicable national categorical
pretreatment standard, the information required by subdivisions (8) and (9)
of § 56.052.  The discharger shall be informed of any proposed changes in
his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change.  Any
changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time
schedule for compliance. A baseline monitoring report form, to be furnished
by the authority, will be completed by all industrial dischargers subject to
a national categorical pretreatment standard.










   (D)   Permit conditions.  Wastewater discharge permits shall
specify no less than the following.





      (1)   Fees and charges to be paid upon initial permit issuance.





      (2)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater
constituents and characteristics regulated thereby.





      (3)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge
or requirements for flow regulations and equalization.





      (4)   Special conditions as the authority may reasonably
require under particular circumstances of a given discharge including
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for
tests and reporting schedule.





      (5)   Compliance schedules.





      (6)   Requirements for submission of special technical reports
or discharge reports where same differ from those prescribed by this chapter.










   (E)    Permit duration. All wastewater discharge permits shall be
issued for perpetual duration, subject to amendment or revocation as provided
in this chapter.  Under extraordinary circumstances, a permit may be issued
for a stated period or may be stated to expire on a specific date.










   (F)   Limitations on permit transfer.  Wastewater discharge permits
are issued to a specific discharger for a specific operation and are not
assigned to another discharger without the prior written approval of the
authority, or transferable to any other location.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)  Penalty, see § 56.07









56.053 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEE.




   (A)   Compliance date report. 





      (1)   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance
by the discharger with applicable pretreatment standards set forth in this
chapter or 90 days following commencement of the introduction of wastewater
into the POTW by a new discharger, any discharger subject to this chapter
shall submit to the authority a report indicating the nature and
concentration of all prohibited or regulated substance contained in its
discharge,  and the average and maximum daily flow in gallons. 





      (2)   The report shall state whether the applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis
and, if not, what additional O & M or pretreatment is necessary to bring the
discharger into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements.  This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the discharger, and certified to by a qualified engineer.










   (B)   Periodic compliance reports.





      (1)   Any discharger subject to a pretreatment set forth in
this chapter, after the compliance date of the pretreatment standard, or, in
the case of a new discharger, after commencement of the discharge to the
authority, shall submit to the authority during the months of June and
December, unless required more frequently by the authority, a report
indicating the nature of prohibited or regulated substances in the effluent
which are limited by the pretreatment standards of this section.  In
addition, this report shall include a record of all measured or estimated
average and maximum daily flows during the reporting period in this section.
Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement, provided however,
where cost or feasibility considerations justify, the authority may accept
reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques. 
The authority, for good cause shown considering such factors as local high or
low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, or other extenuating factors may
authorize the submission of the reports on months other than those specified
above.





      (2)   Reports of permittees shall contain all results of
sampling  and  analysis  of  the discharge, including the flow and the
nature and concentration, or production and mass where required by the
authority.  The frequency of monitoring by the discharger shall be as
prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard of this chapter. All
analyses shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR, Part 136 and
amendments thereto.  Where 40 CFR, Part 136 does not include a sampling or
analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis
shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA
publication, “Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial
Effluents for Priority Pollutants,” April, 1977, and amendments thereto, or
with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the
Administrator of the U.S. EPA.





      (3)   If sampling performed by a discharger indicates a
violation of discharge limitations, whether or not the sampling was required
of the discharger by the authority, the discharger shall notify the authority
within 24 hours after becoming aware of the violation.  The discharger shall
also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the result of the repeat
analysis to the authority within 30 days after becoming aware of the
violation.  The user is not required to resample if the authority performs
sampling at the discharger between the time when the discharger performs its
initial sampling and the time when the discharger received the result of this
sampling.





      (4)   The reports required of industrial dischargers by this
chapter, by applicable pretreatment regulations, by applicable discharge
permits issued by the authority, or by enforcement actions against an
industrial discharger pursuant to this chapter, shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the discharger.





         (Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)  Penalty, see § 56.07









56.054 MONITORING FACILITIES.




   (A)   Each discharger shall provide and operate at the discharger's
own expense, a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling, and flow
measurement of each sewer discharge to the authority.  Each monitoring
facility shall be situated on the discharger's premises, except where such a
location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the discharger, the
authority may concur with the facility being constructed in the public street
or sidewalk area providing that the facility is located so  that  it will
not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.










   (B)   There shall be ample room in or near the sampling facility to
allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.  The
facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times
in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the discharger.










   (C)   All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained
in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and
specifications.










   (D)   Construction shall be completed within 120 days or receipt of
permit by discharger or within the extension period granted by the authority.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)  Penalty, see § 56.07









56.055 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.




   The authority may inspect the monitoring facilities of any discharger
to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter.  The
discharger shall allow the authority or its representatives, upon
presentation of credentials of identification, to enter upon the premises of
the discharger for the purposes of inspection, sampling, or examine and/or
copy records.  The authority shall have the right to set up on the
discharger's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring, or metering operations.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)  Penalty, see § 56.07









56.056 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.




   (A)   Information and data furnished to the authority with respect
to the nature and frequency of discharge shall be available to the public or
other governmental agency without restriction unless the discharger
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
authority that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
or proprietary information of the discharger.










   (B)   When requested by a discharger furnishing a report, the
portions of a report which may disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by  the  public  but shall  be
made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related
to this chapter, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit, state disposal system permit, or the pretreatment programs; provided,
however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the
state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the discharger furnishing the report.  Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.










   (C)   Information accepted by the authority as confidential shall
not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the
authority until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the discharger.





(Ord. 2466, passed 9-25-84; Am. Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)  Penalty, see §
56.07









56.057 CHANGED DISCHARGES.




   All industrial dischargers shall promptly notify the authority in
advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in
their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for
which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR
403.12(p).





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)  Penalty, see § 56.07









56.058 BYPASSES.




   A bypass of any pretreatment process is prohibited unless:





   (A)   The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;










   (B)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as,
but not limited to: the use of auxiliary treatment units, retention of
untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment down time;
and










   (C)    The industrial discharger submitted notice to the authority.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)  Penalty, see § 56.07









56.06  ENFORCEMENT.




   Provisions regarding enforcement of this chapter can be found in §§
56.061 through 56.068.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.061 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF SERVICE AND DISCHARGE PERMITS.




   The authority may for good cause shown suspend the wastewater treatment
service and the wastewater discharge permit of a discharger when it appears
to the authority that an actual or threatened discharge presents or threatens
an imminent or substantial danger or to the health or welfare of persons,
substantial danger to the environment, interferes with the operation of the
POTW, violates any pretreatment limits imposed by this chapter or any
wastewater discharge permit  issued pursuant to this chapter.  Any
discharger notified of the suspension of the authority's wastewater treatment
service or the discharger's wastewater discharge permit, shall within a
reasonable period of time, as determined by the authority, cease all
discharges. In the event of failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily
with the suspension order within the specified time, the authority shall
commence judicial proceedings immediately thereafter to compel the
discharger's compliance with the order.  The authority shall reinstate the
wastewater discharge permit or the wastewater treatment service and terminate
judicial proceedings pending proof by the discharger of the elimination of
the noncomplying discharge or conditions creating the threat of imminent or
substantial danger as set forth above. 





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.062 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.




   The authority may revoke the permit of any discharger which fails to do
the following.





   (A)   Factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge.










   (B)   Report significant changes in wastewater constituents or
characteristics.










   (C)   Refuses reasonable access to the discharger's premises by
representatives of the authority for the purpose of inspection or monitoring.










   (D)   Violates the conditions of its permit, or this chapter, or any
final judicial order entered with respect thereto.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)  Penalty, see § 56.07









56.063 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION;  ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENT.




   Whenever the authority finds that any discharger has engaged in conduct
which justifies revocation of a wastewater discharge permit, pursuant to §
56.062, the authority shall serve or cause to be served upon the discharger a
written notice either personally or by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, stating the nature of the alleged violation.  Within 30
days of the date of receipt of the notice, the discharger shall respond
personally or in writing to the authority, advising of its position with
respect to the allegations.  Thereafter, the parties shall meet to ascertain
the veracity of the allegations and where necessary, establish a plan for the
satisfactory correction thereof.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)  Penalty, see § 56.07









56.064 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.




   (A)   Where the violation of § 56.062 is not corrected by timely
compliance by means of administrative adjustment, the authority may order any
discharger which causes or allows conduct prohibited by § 56.062, to show
cause before the authority or its duly authorized representative, why the
proposed permit revocation action should not be taken.  A written notice
shall be served on the discharger by personal service, certified or
registered, return receipt requested, specifying the time and place of a
hearing to be held by the authority or its designee regarding the violation,
the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, the proposed
enforcement action, and directing the discharger to show cause before the
authority or its designee why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken.  The notice of the hearing shall be served no less than ten days
before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, officer, or authorized
representative of a discharger.










   (B)   The proceeding at the hearing shall be considered by the
authority which shall then enter appropriate orders with respect to the
alleged improper activities of the discharger.  Appeal of such orders may be
taken by the discharger in accordance with applicable provisions of the Ohio
Revised Code.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.065 JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS.




   Following the entry of any order by the authority with respect to the
conduct of a discharger contrary to the provisions of § 56.062, the attorney
for the authority may, following the authorization of such action by the
authority, commence an action for appropriate legal or equitable relief in
the Montgomery County Ohio Common Pleas Court.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.066 ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS; ANNUAL  PUBLICATIONS.




   A list of all significant dischargers which were the subject of
enforcement proceedings pursuant to §§ 56.06 through 56.068 of this chapter
during the 12 previous months, shall be annually published by the authority
in the newspaper of general circulation in the municipality in which the
authority is located, summarizing the enforcement actions taken against the
dischargers during the same 12 months whose violations remained uncorrected
45 days after notification of noncompliance; or which have exhibited a
pattern of noncompliance over that 12-month period, or which involve failure
to accurately report noncompliance.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.067 RIGHT OF APPEAL.




   Any discharger, other user of the POTW, or governmental agency, shall
have the right to request in writing an interpretation or ruling by the
authority on any matter covered by this chapter and shall be entitled to a
prompt written reply.  In the event that such inquiry is by a discharger and
deals with matters of performance or compliance with this chapter or deals
with a wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant hereto for which
enforcement activity relating to an alleged violation is the subject, receipt
of a discharger's request shall stay all enforcement proceedings pending
receipt of the aforesaid written reply.  Appeal of any final judicial order
entered pursuant to this chapter may be taken in accordance with applicable
provisions of the Ohio Revised Code.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.068 OPERATING UPSETS.




   (A)   Any discharger which experiences an upset in operations which
places the discharger in a temporary state of noncompliance with this chapter
or a wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant hereto shall inform the
authority thereof within 24 hours of first awareness of the commencement of
the upset.  Where such information is given orally, a written follow-up
report thereof shall be filed by the discharger with the authority within
five days.  The report shall specify the following.





      (1)   A description of the upset, the cause thereof, and the
upset's impact on a discharger's compliance status.





      (2)   The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and
times of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which
compliance is reasonably expected to occur.





      (3)   All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance.










   (B)   A documented and verified bona fide operating upset shall be
an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the authority
against a discharger for any noncompliance with the chapter or any wastewater
discharge permit issued pursuant hereto, which arises out of violations
alleged to have occurred during the period of the upset.





(Ord. 2466, passed 9-25-84; Am. Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)  Penalty, see §
56.07









56.07  PENALTIES.




   Any discharger who is found to have violated an order of the authority
or who has failed to comply with any provisions of the chapter, and the
regulations, or rules of the authority, or orders of any court of competent
jurisdiction or permits issued hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense
and the penalty for each violation may be up to $1,000 per day per violation.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)





Statutory reference:





   Penalties for misdemeanors, see R.C. § 2929.21









56.071 RECOVERY OF COSTS INCURRED BY THE AUTHORITY.




   (A)   Any discharger violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, or who discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or
obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the authority's wastewater
disposal system, shall be liable to the authority for any expense, loss, or
damage caused by the violation or discharge.










   (B)   The authority shall bill the discharger for the costs incurred
by the authority for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the
violation or discharge.  The minimum amount of cost assessed for each
violation may be up to $1,000 per day per violation.  Refusal to pay the
assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this chapter enforceable under
the provisions of §§ 56.06 through 56.068.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.072 FALSIFYING INFORMATION.




   Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, or
certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or wastewater
discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Each day's violation shall
constitute a separate offense and the minimum penalty for each violation
shall be $1,000 per day per violation.





(Ord. 2466, passed 9-25-84; Am. Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.08  RECORDS RETENTION.




   All dischargers subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for
no less than three years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports,
correspondence, and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring,
sampling, and chemical analyses made by or in behalf of a discharger in
connection with its discharge.  All records which pertain to matters which
are the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or
litigation activities brought by the authority pursuant hereto shall be
retained and preserved by the discharger until all  enforcement 
activities  have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any
and all appeals have expired.





(Ord. 2466, passed 9-25-84; Am. Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.09  MISCELLANEOUS.




   Provisions regarding removal credits and net/gross calculations can be
found in §§ 56.091 and 56.092.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.091 REMOVAL CREDITS.




   Where applicable, the authority may elect to initiate a program of
removal credits as part of this chapter to reflect the POTW's ability to
remove pollutants in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.7.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.092 NET/GROSS CALCULATIONS.




   The authority may elect to adjust categorical pretreatment standards to
reflect the presence of pollutants in the discharger's intake water, in
accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.15.





(Ord. 2466, passed 9-25-84; Am. Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.10  SEVERABILITY.




   If any provision, paragraph, word, section or chapter of this chapter
is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions, paragraphs, words, sections and chapters shall not be affected
and shall continue in full force and effect.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)









56.11  CONFLICT.




   All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or
conflicting with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency or conflict.





(Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)










APPENDIX A:  TOXIC PRIORITY POLLUTANTS




 


Acenaphthene               Bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate



Acrolein               Butyl benzyl phthalate



Acrylonitrile               Di-n-butyl phthalate



Benzene               Di-n-octyl phthalate



Benzidine               Diethyl phthalate



Carbon tetrachloride



  (tetrachloromethane)         Dimethyl phthalate



Chlorobenzene            Benzo (a) anathracene



1, 2, 4-Trichlorobenzene           (1,2-benzanthracene) 



Hexachlorobenzene            Benzo (a) pryene



1, 2 Dichloroethane              (3, 4-benzopyrene)



1, 1, 1-Trichloroethane         3, 4-Benzofluoranthene



Hexachloroethane            Benzo (k) fluoranthane



1, 1-Dichloroethane              (11, 12-benzofluoranthene)



1, 1, 2-Trichloroethane         Chrysene



1, 1, 2, 2-Tetrachloroethane         Acenaphthylene



Chloroethane               Anthracene



                  Benzo (ghi) perylene



                    (1, 12-benzoperylene)



2-Chloroethyl vinyl ether (mixed)      Fluorene



2-Chloronaphthalene            Phenanthrene



2, 4, 6-Trichlorophenol         Dibenzo (a, h) anthracene



Parachlorometacresol            Indeno (1, 2, 3,-cd) pyrene



Chloroform (trichloromethane)      Pyrene



2-Chlorophenol            Tetrachloroethylene



1, 2-Dechlorobenzene            Toluene



1, 3-Dichlorobenzene            Trichloroethylene



1, 4-Dichlorobenzene            Vinyl chloride (chloroethylene)



3, 3'-Dichlorobenzidine         Aldrin



1, 1-Dichloroethylene            Dieldrin



1, 2-Trans-dichloroethylene         Chlordane (tech. mixture &



2, 4-Dichlorophenol              metabolites)



1, 2-Dichloropropane            4,4'-DDT



1, 3-Dichloropropylene         4,4'-DDE (p,p'DDX)



2, 4-Dimethylphenol            4,4'-DDD(p,p'-TDE)



2, 4-Dinitrotoluene            Alpha-endosulfan



2, 6-Dinitrotoluene            Beta-endosulfan



1, 2-Diphenylhydrazine         Endosulfan sulfate









 


Ethlbenzene               Endrin



Fluoranthene               Endrin aldehyde



4-Chlorophenyl phenyl ether         Heptachlor



4-Bromophenyl phenyl ether         Heptachlor expoxide



Bis (2-chloroisopropyl) ether         Alpha-BHC



Bis (2-chloroethoxy) methane      Beta-BHC



Methylene chloride            Gamma-BHC (lindane)



  (dichloromethane)



Methyl bromide            Delta-BHC



Bromoform (tribromomethane)      PCB-1242 (Aroclor 1242)



Dichlorobromomethane         PC8-1254 (Aroclor 1254)



                  PCB-1221 (Aroclor 1221)



                  PC8-1232 (Aroclor 1232)



Chlorodibromomethane         PC8-1248 (Aroclor 1248)



Hexachlorobutadiene            PCB-126O (Aroclor 1260)



Isophorone               PCB-1016 (Aroclor 1016)



Naphthalene               Toxaphene



Nitrobenzene               Antimony (Total)



2-Nitrophenol               Arsenic (Total)



4-Nitrophenol               Asbestos (Fibrous)



2, 4-Dinitrophenol            Beryllium (Total)



4, 6-Dinitro-o-cresol            Cadmium (Total)



N-nitrosodimethylamine         Chromium (Total)



N-nitrosodiphenylamine         Copper (Total)



N-nitrosoli-n-propylamine         Cyanide (Total)



Pentachlorophenol            Lead (Total)



Phenol (4APP method)         Mercury (Total)



Nickel (Total)               Selenium (Total)



Silver (Total)               Thallium (Total)



Zinc (Total)               2, 3, 7, 8- Tetrachlorodibenzo-
p-dioxin (TCDD)










(Ord. 2466, passed 9-25-84; Am. Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)















APPENDIX B:  CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANTS









 


Dissolved solids



Suspended Solids



Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)



Total organic carbon (TOC)



Chemical oxygen demand (COD)



Nitrogen



Phosphorus



Chlorides



pH



Oil and grease










(Ord. 2466, passed 9-25-84; Am. Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)















APPENDIX C:  INDUSTRIAL CATEGORIES SUBJECT TO CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARDS









 


Adhesives               Pulp and paper



Leather tanning             Textile mills



    and finishing            Timber



Soaps and detergents            Coal mining



Aluminum forming            Ore mining



Battery manufacturing         Petroleum refining



Coil coating               Steam electric



Copper forming            Organic chemicals



Electroplating               Pesticides



Foundries               Pharmaceuticals



Iron and steel               Pesticide materials



Nonferrous metals            Rubber



Photographic supplies           Auto and other



Plastics processing            Laundries



Porcelain enamel            Mechanical products



Gum and wood chemicals         Electric and electronic



Paint and ink               Components



Printing and publishing         Explosives Manufacturing



Inorganic chemicals










1.  Effective Standard identified in 40 CFR.





(Ord. 2466, passed 9-25-84; Am. Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)















APPENDIX D:  LOCAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS










PRIORITY POLLUTANTS










   Limits for priority pollutants will be displayed in each industrial
discharger's permit.










CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANTS WITH MAXIMUM DISCHARGE LIMITS









 


Pollutant               Maximum Discharge Limit



Oil and grease (Freon Extractable)      100 mg/l



pH                  5.0 to 10.0 Standard Units










CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANT LIMITS FOR USER





CHARGE SUBCHARGE CALCULATIONS









 


Pollutant                  Limit



Total Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)      300 mg/l



Suspended Solids (SS)            300 mg/l










(Ord. 2466, passed 9-25-84; Am. Ord. 2794, passed 4-23-91)






























TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE









Chapter










Chap. 70.   ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT










Chap. 71.   STREETS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES










Chap. 72.   VEHICLES










Chap. 73.   PARKING










Chap. 74.   PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES, AND MOTORCYCLES










Chap. 75.   RAILROADS










Chap. 76.   MOPED REGULATIONS










Chap. 77.   MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX










Chap. 79.   COMMERCIAL DRIVERS





























CHAPTER 70
ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT









Section










70.01   Definitions





70.02   Enforcement and Education Fund





70.03   Motor vehicle theft prevention program




 



Enforcement; Impounding, Penalty



 




70.05   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing





70.06   Traffic direction in emergencies; obedience to school crossing
guard





70.065   Resisting an enforcing official





70.07   Officer may remove ignition key





70.08   Road workers, motor vehicles and equipment excepted





70.09   Application to persons riding, driving animals upon roadway





70.10   Freeway use prohibited by pedestrians, bicycles and animals





70.11   Application to drivers of government vehicles





70.12   Impounding of vehicles; redemption





70.13   Leaving junk and other vehicles on private or public property
without permission or notification




 



Traffic Control



 




70.20   Division of traffic engineering and safety created





70.21   Authority and considerations for placement of devices





70.22   Conformity with state manual





70.23   Powers of safety director





70.24   Posting of signs and signals required





70.25   Director's powers not limited





70.26   Records of director





70.27   Reservation of power to council





70.28   Violations subject to misdemeanor classification





70.99   Penalty




 



70.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.










   AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR.  Every self-propelling vehicle designed or used
for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery but having no provision for
carrying loads independently of the other vehicles, and used principally for
agricultural purposes.










   ALLEY.  A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or
side of lots or buildings in urban districts and not intended for the purpose
of through vehicular traffic, and includes any street or highway that has
been declared an ALLEY by council.










   ALL PURPOSE VEHICLE.  Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily
for cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of
terrain, and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination
thereof, including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles
commonly known as all-terrain vehicles, all-season vehicles, mini-bikes, and
trail bikes, but excluding any self-propelled vehicle not principally used
for purposes of personal transportation, any vehicle principally used in
playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft required to be registered under
R.C. Chapter 4503 or 4561, and any vehicle excepted from the definition of
MOTOR VEHICLE as set forth in this section.










   "BEACON" means a highway traffic signal with one or more signal
sections that operate in a flashing mode. 










   "MOTORIZED BICYCLE" or "MOPED" means any vehicle having either two
tandem wheels or one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may
be pedaled and that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than fifty
cubic centimeters piston displacement which produces no more than one brake
horsepower and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of no greater
than twenty miles per hour on a level surface.  (ORC 4511.01(H))










   BUS.  Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than 9 passengers
and used for the transportation of persons, other than in a ridesharing
arrangement and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire or funeral car,
other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement,
designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.










   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  The territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
city where 50% or more of the frontage between the successive intersections
is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within the city where 50% or
more of the frontage for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by
buildings in use for business, and the character of the territory is
indicated by official traffic control devices.










   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE.  A motor vehicle designed to carry fewer than
nine passengers and operated for hire on an hourly basis pursuant to a
prearranged contract for the transportation of passengers on public roads and
highways along a route under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and
not over a defined and regular route. PREARRANGED CONTRACT means an
agreement, made in advance of boarding, to provide transportation from a
specific location in a chauffeured limousine at a fixed rate per hour or
trip.  CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE does not include any vehicle used exclusively
in the business of funeral directing.










   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR.  Every motor vehicle having motive power designed
or used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any
load thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.










   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.  Every street or highway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right or access to or from the same except at the points only and in the
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
the street or highway.










   CROSSWALK.





      (1)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily
included within the real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb
lines or, in the absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;





      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere, distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface;





      (3)   Notwithstanding divisions (1) and (2) of this section,
there shall not be a crosswalk where authorized signs have been placed
indicating no crossing.










   DRIVER OR OPERATOR.  Every person who drives or is in actual physical
control of a vehicle.










   EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  Emergency vehicles of municipal or county
departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as
required by law, the director of public safety, or local authorities, and
motor vehicles when commandeered by a police officer.










   EXPLOSIVES.  Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion that  contains any
oxidizing and combustible units or other ingredients in proportions,
quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion,
by percussion; or by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may
cause a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects,
or of destroying life or limb.  Manufactured articles shall not be held to
be explosives when the individual units contain explosives in limited
quantities, of such nature or in packing, that it is impossible to procure a
simultaneous or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life,
limb, or property by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or by a
detonator, such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, or safety
fuse matches.










   EXPRESSWAY.  A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full
or partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads
separated in grade.










   FLAMMABLE LIQUID.  Any liquid which has a flash point of 70° F., or
less, as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.










   FREEWAY.  A divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with all
crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access.










   GROSS WEIGHT.  The weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load
thereon.









   HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle used in snow and ice removal or
road surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road
sweeper, mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle
designed for use in specific highway maintenance activities.  (ORC
4511.01(QQQ))








   "HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL"means a power-operated traffic control device
by which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. 
"Highway traffic signal" does not include a power-operated sign, steadily
illuminated pavement markers, warning light, or steady burning electric
lamp. 



 



   INTERSECTION.



   (A)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles,
or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join
at any other angle might come into conflict.  The junction of an alley or
driveway with a roadway or highway does not constitute an intersection unless
the roadway or highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic control
device.



 



   (B)   If a highway includes two roadways that are thirty feet or
more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway constitutes a separate intersection.  If both
intersecting highways include two roadways thirty feet or more apart, then
every crossing of any two roadways of such highways constitutes a separate
intersection.



 



   (C)   At a location controlled by a traffic control signal,
regardless of the distance between the separate intersections as described in
subsection (b) of this section:



 



      (1)   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been
designated on the roadway within the median between the separate
intersections, the two intersections and the roadway and median constitute
one intersection.



 



      (2)   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line is
designated on the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the
crosswalk and any area beyond the designated stop line or yield line
constitute part of the intersection.



 




      (3)   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the
departure from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that
extends to the far side of the crosswalk.  (ORC 4511.01(KK))










   LANED STREET OR HIGHWAY.  A street or highway the roadway of which is
divided into 2 or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.










   "MEDIAN".  The area between two roadways of a divided highway,
measured from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding
turn lanes.  The width of a median may be different between intersections,
between interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection. 
(ORC 4511.01(NNN))










   MOTORCYCLE.  Every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat
or saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including but not limited to, motor
vehicles known as "motor-driven cycle," "motor scooter,"
"autocycle,","cab-enclosed motorcycle" or "motorcycle" without regard to
weight or brake horsepower.  (ORC 4511.01(C))










   MOTOR VEHICLE.










   "Motor vehicle" means every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other
than muscular power, except motorized bicycles, road rollers, traction
engines, power shovels, power cranes and other equipment used in construction
work and not designed for or employed in general highway transportation,
hole-digging machinery, well-drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery,
farm machinery, and trailers designed and used exclusively to transport a
boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when
drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more than ten
miles and at a speed of twenty-five miles per hour or less.





(ORC 4511.01(B))










   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR.  Any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and
used by, a handicapped person and that is incapable of a speed in excess of
eight miles per hour.










   OPERATE. “Operate” means to cause or have caused movement of a
vehicle.





(ORC 4511.01(HHH))










   PARKING (when prohibited).  When prohibited, means the standing of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose
of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading, or receiving or
discharging passengers.










   PEDESTRIAN.  Any natural person afoot.










   POLE TRAILER.  Every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing
vehicle by means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to
the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular
shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally,
of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.










   POLICE OFFICER.  Every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic, or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.










   PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE.  Any of the following:





      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12,
4511.132, 4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22,
4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31,
4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39,
4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441,
4511.451, 4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50,
4511.511, 4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701,
4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771,
4511.78 or 4511.84;





      (2)   A violation of division (A)(2) of Ohio R.C. 4511.17,
divisions (A) to (D) of Ohio R.C. 4511.51, or division (A) of Ohio R.C.
4511.74;





      (3)   A violation of any provision of Ohio R.C. 4511.01 to
4511.76 for which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that
contains the provision violated;





      (4)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is
substantially similar to any section or provision set forth or described in
subsection (1) to (3) of this section.









   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.



   (A)   "Private road or driveway" means every way or place in private
ownership used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner but not by other persons.
(ORC 4511.01(DD))



 




   (B)   "Private road open to public travel" means a private toll road
or road, including any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the
road, within a shopping center, airport, sports arena, or other similar
business or recreation facility that is privately owned but where the public
is allowed to travel without access restrictions.  "Private road open to
public travel" includes a gated toll road but does not include a road within
a private gated property where access is restricted at all times, a parking
area, a driving aisle within a parking area, or a private grade crossing. 
(ORC 4511.01(OOO))










   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.  Any of the following:





      (1)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under
contract  to  a  municipal corporation,  township,  or  county  and 
private ambulances and non-transport vehicles bearing license plates issued
under R.C. § 4503.49.





      (2)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers
or other persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state.





      (3)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required
by the director of public safety, when used in response to fire emergency
calls or to provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and
when operated by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer
rescue service or a volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to
the rules or directives of that service.  The state fire marshal shall be
designated by the director of public safety as the certifying agency for all
public safety vehicles described in division (3) above.





      (4)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor
vehicles when used by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in
the fire department service when identified as required by the director of
public safety.





      (5)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency
medical service to an ill or injured person, when certified as a public
safety vehicle, shall be considered a public safety vehicle when transporting
an ill or injured person to a hospital regardless of whether the vehicle has
already passed a hospital.





      (6)   Vehicles used by the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety
Enforcement Unit for the enforcement of orders and rules of the Public
Utilities Commission as specified in R.C. § 5503.34.










   RAILROAD.  A carrier of persons or property operating upon rails
placed principally on a private right-of-way.





   





   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL.  Any sign, signal or device erected by
authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give
notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.










   RAILROAD TRAIN.  A steam engine, or an electric or other motor, with
or without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.










   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  Shall mean and include the following:





      (1)   A travel trailer, which is a vehicular, portable
structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for
travel, recreational, and vacation uses, and which is permanently identified
“travel trailer” by the manufacturer;





      (2)   A pick-up camper, which is a structure designed
primarily to be mounted on a pick-up chassis and with sufficient equipment to
render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational,
and vacation uses;





      (3)   A motorized home, which is a portable dwelling designed
and constructed as an integral part of a self-mounted vehicle on wheels and
designed for travel and vacation use;





      (4)   Boats and boat trailers including boats, floats, and
rafts, plus the normal equipment to transport the same on the highway;





      (5)   Fold-out tent trailers;





      (6)   Utility trailers; and/or





      (7)   Any combination of the above.  (Ord. 2640, passed
1-26-88)










   RESIDENCE DISTRICT.  The territory, not comprising a business
district, fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway,
where, for a distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with
residences or residences and buildings in use for business.










   RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT.  The transportation of persons in a motor
vehicle where such transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver and includes ridesharing arrangements known as carpools,
vanpools, and buspools.










   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Either of the following, as the context requires:





      (1)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed
uninterruptedly in a lawful manner in the direction in which it or the
individual is moving in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian
approaching from a different direction into its or the individual's path.





      (2)   A general term denoting land, property, or the interest
therein, usually in the configuration of a  strip,  acquired  for  or 
devoted  to  transportation purposes. When used in this context,
RIGHT-OF-WAY includes the roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes
extending to the right-of-way limits under the control of the state or local
authority.










   ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE.  Wreckers, utility repair vehicles, and state,
county, and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means
of flashing, rotating, or oscillating lights.










   ROADWAY.  That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder.  If a
street or highway includes 2 or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY
means any roadway separately but not all the roadways collectively.










   SAFETY ZONE.  The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusiveuse of pedestrians and protected or marked or indicated by
adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times.










   SCHOOL BUS.  Every bus designed for carrying more than 9 passengers
which is owned by a public, private or governmental agency or institution of
learning and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session
or a school function; provided SCHOOL BUS does not include a bus operated by
a municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating
exclusively within the territorial limits of the municipality, or within the
limits and the territorial limits of municipal corporations immediately
contiguous to the municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by
the public utilities commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function.










   SEMITRAILER.  Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part
of its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by
another vehicle.










   SIDEWALK.  That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the
use of pedestrians.










   SNOWMOBILE.  Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on
snow or ice, and steered by skis, runners, or caterpillar treads. 





(R.C. § 4519.01)










   STATE ROUTE.  Every highway which is designated with an official state
route number and so marked.










   STOPPING (when required).  A complete cessation of movement.










   STOPPING OR STANDING (when prohibited).  Any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic control device.










   STOP INTERSECTION.  Any intersection at one or more entrances of which
stop signs are erected.










   STREET OR HIGHWAY; ARTERIAL STREET.





      (1)   STREET or HIGHWAY means the entire width between the
boundary lines of every way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare
for purposes of vehicular travel.





      (2)   ARTERIAL STREET  Any United States or state numbered
route, controlled access highway or other major radial or circumferential
street or highway or other major radial or circumferential street or highway
designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part
of a major arterial system of streets or highways.










   THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY.  Every street or highway as provided in §
71.06.










   THRUWAY.  A through highway whose entire roadway is reserved for
through traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.









   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of travel any
street or highway or private road open to public travel. 
(ORC 4511.01(TT))



 



   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.  A flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other
device used to regulate, warn or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent
to a street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian
facility, or shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official
having jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel,
by authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.



(ORC 4511.01(QQ))



 



   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any highway traffic signal by which traffic is
alternately



directed to stop and permitted to proceed.




(ORC 4511.01(RR))










   TRAILER.  Every vehicle  designed  or  used  for carrying persons
or property wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle, including any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of
a SEMITRAILER and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as
a TRAILER DOLLY, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials between a local place of storage or supply
and the farm when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater
than 25 m.p.h. and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a
boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when
drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles
or at a speed of more than 25 m.p.h.










   TRUCK.  Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property.










   URBAN DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including any street
or highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
1/4 of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is indicated by
official traffic control devices.










   VEHICLE. Every device, including a motorized bicycle, in, upon or by
which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a street or
highway, except that “vehicle” does not include any motorized wheelchair,
electric personal assistive mobility device, or any device, other than a
bicycle, that is moved by human power.
(R.C. § 4511.01)









70.02  ENFORCEMENT AND EDUCATION FUND.




   (A)   An Enforcement and Education Fund shall be, and hereby is,
established, and appropriate deposits as required by § 70.99(A)(3)(a) or
R.C. § 4511.99(A)(1), shall be made therein.










   (B)   The monies in this fund shall be used only to pay those costs
the city incurs in enforcing § 72.45(A) or (C) of this code or R.C. §
4511.99, and informing the public of the laws governing the operation of a
motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, the dangers of operating
a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, and other 
information  relating  to  the  operation  of  a motor vehicle and the
consumption of alcoholic beverages.





(Res. 17-91, passed 5-28-91)









70.03  MOTOR VEHICLE THEFT PREVENTION  PROGRAM.




   (A)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to
establish a motor vehicle theft prevention program within the department
which shall have trained motor vehicle investigators and police officers
participating in it.










   (B)   The Police Chief may establish a motor vehicle theft
prevention program which may include the issuance of official decals to
identify motor vehicles that are not normally operated between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.  Participation in the program shall be voluntary in
nature and shall involve the following:





      (1)   In the presence of a duly authorized police officer in
any municipality participating in such program, the registered owner of a
motor vehicle shall sign an informed consent statement indicating that the
motor vehicle registered to such owner is not normally operated between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. and releasing the city from liability if
said vehicle is stopped by police during those hours.





      (2)   (a)   Upon signing such informed consent statement,
the registered owner may be issued a decal approved by the police department
and such decal may be affixed to the owner's vehicle in a conspicuous place
as prescribed by the police department.  The decal shall be issued and
affixed only by a duly authorized police officer.





         (b)   The police officer issuing the decal shall make a
record of the issuance of decals to the registered owner.  Such records
shall be maintained by the police department and shall be available to the
commissioner of motor vehicles, to the superintendent of state police and to
law enforcement agencies.





         (c)   The display of such an official decal, as
described in this section on any motor vehicle being operated between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., shall constitute probable cause upon which
any police officer may stop said vehicle for the purpose of investigating
whether the vehicle is stolen.





(Ord. 2825, passed 10-8-91)










ENFORCEMENT; IMPOUNDING, PENALTY









70.05  COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING.




   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer invested with authority to direct, control,
or regulate traffic.










   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to
elude or flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal
from a police officer to bring his motor vehicle to a stop.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer. A violation of division (A) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. A violation of division
(B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree, except that a
violation of division (B) of this section is a felony of the fourth degree if
the jury or judge as trier of fact finds any one of the following by proof
beyond a reasonable doubt:





      (1)   In committing the offense, the offender was fleeing
immediately after the commission of a felony;





      (2)   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property;





      (3)   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender
caused a substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property;










   (D)   As used in this section, POLICE OFFICER has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 4511.01.










   (E)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of
subsection (a) of this section or a misdemeanor violation of subsection (b)
of this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the
range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(5).  If the offender previously has
been found guilty of an offense under this section, in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one
suspension as described in division (A)(1) of that section.  The court may
grant limited driving privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for
a misdemeanor violation of this section as set forth in Ohio R.C. 4510.021. 
No judge shall suspend the first three years of suspension under a class two
suspension of an offender's license, permit or privilege required by this
division on any portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an
offender's license, permit, or privilege required by this subsection.  (ORC
2921.331)









70.06  TRAFFIC DIRECTION IN EMERGENCIES; OBEDIENCE TO SCHOOL CROSSING GUARD.




   (A)   Police officers shall direct or regulate traffic in accordance
with the provisions of this title, provided that, in the event of fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, they are
authorized to direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of this title.  Firemen, when at the scene of a fire, may direct
or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.  The direction of traffic may be by word or audible signal, by
gesture or visible signal, or by any combination thereof.  No person shall
fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or
fireman issued pursuant to this section.










   (B)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any school crossing guard invested with authority to direct,
control, or regulate traffic in the vicinity of the school to which the guard
may be assigned.  Penalty, see § 70.99









70.065 RESISTING AN ENFORCING OFFICIAL.




   (A)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct, or abuse any
sheriff, constable, or other official while such official is attempting to
arrest offenders under provisions of this traffic code.  No person shall
interfere with any person charged under such sections with the enforcement of
the law relative to public highways.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.





(R.C. § 4513.36)









70.07  OFFICER MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.




   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the
ignition switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a
street or highway, or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.  The officer removing the key
shall place notification upon the vehicle detailing his name and badge
number, the place where the key may be reclaimed, and the procedure for
reclaiming the key.  The key shall be returned to the owner of the motor
vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.





(R.C. § 4549.05)









70.08  ROAD WORKERS, MOTOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT EXCEPTED.




   (A)   The provisions of this title do not apply to persons, teams,
motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the
surface of a street or highway within an area designated by traffic control
devices, but shall apply to persons and vehicles when traveling to or from
such work.










   (B)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this
state or any political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged
in the performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the
highway maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other
markings as are required by law, and such lights are in operation when the
driver and vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution
for violations of Sections 72.01 to 72.04,72.06 to 72.08, 72.31, 72.48, 73.12
and Ohio R.C. 4511.66 and 5577.01 to 5577.09.










   (C)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway
maintenance vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of Sections
72.01 to 72.04, 72.06 to 72.08, 72.31, 72.48, 73.12 or Ohio R.C. 4511.66 or
5577.01 to 5577.09.










      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who
is not a state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway
maintenance equipment from criminal liability for a violation of Ohio R.C.
5577.01 to 5577.09.










   (D)   As used in this section, "engaged in the performance of
official duties" includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from
the manufacturer or vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway
maintenance vehicle, equipment, or materials to and from a work location. 
(ORC 4511.04)









70.09  APPLICATION OF PERSONS RIDING,  DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAY.




   Every person riding, driving or leading an animal upon a roadway shall
be subject to the provisions of this title applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except those provisions of sections which by their nature are
inapplicable. 
(R.C. § 4511.05)









70.10  FREEWAY USE PROHIBITED BY  PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND ANIMALS.




   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:










   (A)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the
right-of-way of a freeway, except:  in a rest area; on a facility that is
separated from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and
appropriately marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works
or official duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or
breakdown of a motor vehicle, or to obtain assistance;










   (B)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a
freeway, with:  an animal-drawn vehicle; a ridden or led animal; herded
animals; a pushcart; a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from
the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked per bicycle use; a bicycle with motor attached; a motor-driven cycle
with a motor which produces not to exceed 5 brake horsepower; an agricultural
tractor; farm machinery; except in the performance of public works or
official duties. 
(R.C. § 4511.051) Penalty, see § 70.99









70.11  APPLICATION TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.




   The provisions of this title applicable to the drivers of vehicles
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United 
States, any state or any political subdivision thereof, including this
municipality, except as may be otherwise provided by law and subject to
specific exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency
and public safety vehicles.









70.12  IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES; REDEMPTION.




   (A)   Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal and
impounding of a vehicle under the following circumstances:





      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street,
bridge or causeway and is so illegally parked so as to constitute a hazard or
obstruction to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to unreasonably
interfere with street cleaning or snow removal operations.





      (2)   When any vehicle or abandoned junk motor vehicle as
defined in R.C. § 4513.63 is left on private property for more than 48
consecutive hours without the permission of the person having the right to
the possession of the property, or on a public street or other property open
to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking, or upon or within
the right-of-way of any road or highway, for 48 consecutive hours or longer,
without notification to the police chief of the reasons for leaving the
vehicle in such place.  Prior to removal of an ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE
as defined in R.C. § 4513.63, it shall be photographed by a law enforcement
officer in the place where abandoned.





      (3)   When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the
consent of the owner.





      (4)   When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or
fails to display the current lawfully required license plates.





      (5)   When any vehicle has been used in or connected with the
commission of felony.





      (6)   When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be
inoperable or violates equipment provisions of this traffic code whereby its
continued operation would constitute a condition hazardous to life, limb, or
property.





      (7)   When any vehicle is left unattended due to the removal
of an ill, injured, or arrested operator.





      (8)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who has
failed to stop in case of an accident or collision.





      (9)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is
driving without a lawful license or while his license has been suspended or
revoked.





      (10)   When any vehicle is found for which 2 or more citation
tags for violations of this title have been issued and the owner or operator
thereof has failed to respond to the citation tags as lawfully required.










   (B)   The police department shall forthwith notify the registered
vehicle owner of the fact of the removal and impounding, reasons therefor,
and the place of storage.  Any person desiring to redeem an impounded
vehicle shall appear at the police department to furnish satisfactory
evidence of identity and ownership or right to possession.  Prior to
issuance of a release form, the claimant, owner, or operator shall either pay
the amount due for any fines for violations on account of which the vehicle
was impounded or, as the court may require, post a bond in an amount set by
the court, to appear to answer to such violations.  The pound operator shall
release each vehicle upon receipt of the release form and payment of all
towage and storage charges.










   (C)   No owner or operator shall remove an impounded vehicle from
the place of storage without complying with the above procedure. Possession
of a vehicle which has been impounded and unlawfully taken from the place of
storage, by the owner or operator, shall constitute prima facie evidence that
it was so removed by the owner or operator. Penalty, see § 70.99









70.13  LEAVING JUNK AND OTHER VEHICLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY
WITHOUT  PERMISSION OR NOTIFICATION.




   (A)   Fees for abandoned junk motor vehicles shall be as set forth
in Section 37.16 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified
Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton.





(Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)










   (B)   For purposes of this section, the fact that a vehicle has been
so left without permission or notification is prima facie evidence of
abandonment.  Nothing contained in this section shall invalidate the
provisions of other ordinances regulating or prohibiting the abandonment of
motor vehicles on streets, highways, public property, or private property
within the municipality.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the Municipality in
disposing of an abandoned junk motor vehicle that is the basis of the
violation, less any money accruing to the Municipality from this disposal of
the vehicle. 
(ORC 4513.64)










TRAFFIC CONTROL









70.20  DIVISION OF TRAFFIC ENGINEERING AND SAFETY CREATED.




   Pursuant to R.C. § 737.021 and 737.022, a division of traffic
engineering and safety is created, and the director of safety shall be the
executive head of the division.









70.21  AUTHORITY AND CONSIDERATIONS FOR PLACEMENT OF DEVICES.




   The director of safety is authorized to place and maintain traffic
control devices upon any street or highway under his jurisdiction as are
necessary to effectuate the provisions of this title, or to regulate, warn,
or guide traffic, and any other traffic control devices as he shall deem
necessary for the proper control of traffic.  The director of safety shall
determine the location, timing, and coordination of the traffic control
devices upon the basis of an applicable engineering or traffic investigation
and shall consider the following:





   (A)   The maximum safety and protection of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic from physical injury or property damage.










   (B)   The existing and potential traffic movement, volume, and
conditions.










   (C)   The location and frequency of accidents, including studies of
remedial measures.










   (D)   The recommendations of the police and fire chiefs.










   (E)   The acceleration of transportation of persons and property by
vehicles so as to expedite travel and promote public safety.










   (F)   The convenience and welfare of the general public in parking,
standing, loading, and unloading, and the use of the streets as affecting
business concerns and places of assembly.










   (G)   Economy in the expenditure of money.









70.22  CONFORMITY WITH STATE MANUAL.




   All traffic control devices placed pursuant to the provisions of this
title shall conform to the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways, as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09.









70.23  POWERS OF SAFETY DIRECTOR.




   The director of safety is empowered to:





   (A)   Designate any street or highway as a through street or highway
and require that all vehicles stop or yield the right-of-way as may be
required before entering the same.










   (B)   Designate any intersection as a stop intersection and require
all vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to the intersection.










   (C)   Designate any intersection as a yield intersection and require
all vehicles to yield the right-of-way as required.










   (D)   Designate any street as a one-way street and require that all
vehicles thereon be moved in one specific direction.










   (E)   Designate and mark lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center line of the roadway.










   (F)   Erect signs directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated
lane or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction.










   (G)   Designate those portions of any street, where overtaking and
passing other traffic or driving to the left of the center or center line of
the roadway would be especially hazardous, by appropriate signs or markings
on the street to indicate the beginning and end of the zones.  The zones may
be marked by an auxiliary yellow line placed parallel and to the right of the
normal center line or offset marked lane line.










   (H)   Place markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to
intersections and require that a specific course of direction be traveled by
vehicles proceeding in lanes by either permitting, prohibiting, or requiring
turns at the intersections.










   (I)   Install traffic control devices, signals, and signs at any
location to regulate traffic.










   (J)   Establish safety zones, crosswalks, zones of quiet, and play
streets.










   (K)   Close any street or portion thereof to vehicular traffic which
is in the process of construction, reconstruction, or repair.










   (L)   Determine the location of any necessary bus stops and taxicab
stands.










   (M)   Determine the location and limiting hours of truck loading
zones.










   (N)   Designate dangerous railroad crossings and erect stop signs
thereat.










   (O)   Erect “No U Turn” signs at any location to prohibit a
vehicle from being turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction.










   (P)   Regulate or prohibit the stopping, standing, and parking of
vehicles on streets, alleys, or public property by erecting signs plainly
indicating the prohibitions, restrictions, or limitations.










   (Q)   Designate individual parking spaces by markings, which may
either by parallel or at a prescribed angle to the curb or edge of the
roadway.










   (R)   Designate local streets as truck routes permitting heavy
vehicles to travel thereon.










   (S)   Control parking meters as provided in § 73.20.










   (T)   Determine which intersections within the city, if any, require
the prohibiting of a right turn against the steady red signal and to prohibit
turns at those intersections providing that the prohibitions shall only be
effective when signs giving notice thereof are posted at the intersection.









70.24  POSTING OF SIGNS AND SIGNALS  REQUIRED.




   No provision of this chapter shall be effective until signs, signals,
markings, or other devices giving notice of the local traffic regulations are
posted upon or at the entrance to the street or part thereof affected, as may
be most appropriate, so that in a proper position they are sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.









70.25  DIRECTOR'S POWERS NOT LIMITED.




   The powers of the director of safety shall not be limited by the
specific enumeration of subjects contained in this chapter.









70.26  RECORDS OF DIRECTOR.




   The director of safety shall keep a record of all rules, regulations,
and proceedings promulgated in connection with this chapter.









70.27  RESERVATION OF POWER TO COUNCIL.




   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, council may override
any decision of the director of safety and may assume any of the powers
delegated to the director, by a resolution adopted by a vote of a majority of
the members duly elected thereto.  Upon the adoption of any resolution, the
same may be changed only by an amending or repealing resolution adopted by
council.









70.28  VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO MISDEMEANOR CLASSIFICATION.




   Except as otherwise provided, any person violating the rules and
regulations promulgated in connection with this title is guilty of a
misdemeanor which shall be classified as provided in § 70.99.









70.99  PENALTY.




   (a)   General Misdemeanor Classifications.





      (1)   Predicate Motor Vehicle or Traffic Offenses.  Except as
otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates any provision of the
Traffic Code which is a predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense and for
which no other penalty is provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.





      (2)   Non-Predicate Motor Vehicle or Traffic Offense. 
Whoever violates any provision of this Traffic Code which is not a predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offense and for which no other penalty is provided
is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense
within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year
after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.










   (b)   Penalties.  Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this Traffic Code shall be imprisoned for a definite term or
fined, or both, which term of imprisonment and fine shall be fixed by the
court as provided in this section.









 


Classification of



Misdemeanor

 

Maximum Term



of Imprisonment

 




Maximum Fine




First degree

 

180 days

 

$1,000.00




Second degree

 

90 days

 

    750.00




Third degree

 

60 days

 

    500.00




Fourth degree

 

30 days

 

    250.00




Minor

 

No imprisonment

 

    150.00










(ORC 2929.24; 2929.28)

























CHAPTER 71
STREETS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES









Section










Street Obstructions and Special Uses










71.01   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street





71.02   Street meetings and parades




 



Traffic Control Devices



 




71.05   Obedience to traffic control devices





71.06   Through streets; stop and yield right-of-way signs





71.07   Traffic signal indications





71.08   Lane-use control signal indications





71.09   Special pedestrian control signals





71.10   Flashing traffic signals (Repealed)





71.11   Unauthorized signs and signals, hiding from view, advertising





71.12   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic control devices





71.13   Signals not clearly assigning the right-of-way





71.14   Portable signal preemption devices prohibited




 




STREET OBSTRUCTIONS AND SPECIAL USES




 



71.01  PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL OR  OBSTRUCTION IN STREET.




   (A)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
street, highway, or alley or public right-of-way, any tacks, bottles, wire,
glass, nails, or other articles which may damage or injure any person,
vehicle, or animal traveling along or upon the street, highway, alley, or
public right-of-way, except such substances that may be placed upon the
street, highway, alley, or public right-of-way by proper authority for the
repair or construction thereof.










   (B)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped  or thrown 
upon any street, highway,  alley, or public right-of-way any destructive or
injurious material shall immediately remove the same.










   (C)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle
from a street, highway, alley, or public right-of-way, shall remove any glass
or other injurious substance dropped upon the street from such vehicle.










   (D)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a street,
highway, alley, or public right-of-way, without proper authority.










   (E)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane,
road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails, or other
articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, streetcar, trackless
trolley, or animal traveling along or upon such highway, except such
substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper authority for the
repair or construction thereof.










   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of divisions (A), (B),
(C), or (D) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree for a first offense, and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree for any subsequent offense.  In addition to all other penalties which
may be imposed, the court shall require any person convicted of this section
to remove, or to pay the cost of removing, any injurious material deposited
on such street, highway, alley, or public right-of-way.





(R.C. § 4511.74)  (Ord. 2477, passed 11-27-84)





      (2)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4511.99(J)) Penalty, see § 70.99









71.02  STREET MEETINGS AND PARADES.




   (A)   No person shall hold any public meeting in any street, alley,
or other public place in the city  for any lecturing purpose, any religious
purpose, or for any other purpose not named herein whereby a number of people
are or are likely to be gathered together so as to interfere with the free
and uninterrupted use of the street, alley, or other public place, without
first obtaining a permit to do so from the director of safety.










   (B)   No person shall use the city streets for the purpose of
staging a street parade for any purpose without first obtaining a permit to
do so from the director of safety.










   (C)   Any person desiring a permit either for a public street
meeting or for a street parade shall apply to the director of safety for a
permit as required.  The application shall be in writing and shall state the
nature of the object for which the permit is desired, the location of the
meeting or the route of the parade, the dates and the hours when it is
desired to hold the meeting or parade, and the purpose thereof.  If in the
opinion of the director of safety the public meeting or street parade will
not unnecessarily interfere with traffic upon the public streets and will not
be detrimental to the public health, morals, welfare or safety, the director
shall issue a permit in writing to an applicant granting permission for the
holding of the public meeting or street parade as the case may be, according
to the terms of the application or with modifications as to time, place, and
purpose as may seem necessary to the director in order to conserve the public
morals, health, welfare, or safety, or to facilitate the movement of traffic.










   (D)   The director may, in his discretion, at any time revoke any
permit issued hereunder upon satisfactory evidence that the provisions of
this section are about to be or have been violated.  Penalty, see § 70.99










TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES









71.05  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL  DEVICES.




   (A)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
instructions of any traffic control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this title, unless at the time otherwise directed by a police
officer.










   (B)   No provisions of this title for which signs are required shall
be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the
alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section does not state that signs are required, that section shall be
effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(R.C. § 4511.12)  Penalty, see § 70.99









71.06  THROUGH STREETS; STOP AND YIELD  RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.




   (A)   (1)   All state routes are hereby designated as through
highways, provided that stop signs, yield signs, or traffic control signals
shall be erected at all intersections with such through highways by the
department of transportation as to highways under its jurisdiction and by
local authorities as to highways under their jurisdiction, except as
otherwise provided in this section. Where two or more state routes that are
through highways intersect and no traffic-control signal is in operation,
stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at one or more entrances thereto
by the Department, except as otherwise provided in this section.





      (2)   Whenever the Director of Transportation determines on
the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are
necessary to stop traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient
operation, nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent such
installations. When circumstances warrant, the Director also may omit stop
signs on roadways intersecting through highways under his jurisdiction.
Before the Director either installs or removes a stop sign under this
division, he shall give notice, in writing, of that proposed action to the
City at least 30 days before installing or removing the stop sign.










   (B)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby
designated through highways if they are within the city, if they have a
continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or traffic
control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of the street or highway
or portion thereof shall be the city corporation line, the physical terminus
of the street or highway, or any point on the street or highway at which
vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to
traffic on the intersecting street. However, in residence districts the city
may by ordinance designate said street or highway or portion thereof, not to
be a through highway and thereafter the affected resident district shall be
indicated by official traffic-control devices. Where two or more through
highways designated under this division intersect and no traffic control
signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at one or
more entrances thereto by the city with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section, or R.C. §
4511.65.










   (C)   The city with reference to highways under their jurisdiction
need not erect stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as
to permit traffic to safely enter a through highway without coming to a
stop.  Signs shall be erected at such intersections indicating that the
operator of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to or merge with all
traffic proceeding on the through highway.










   (D)   The city with reference to highways under their jurisdiction
may designate additional through highways and shall erect stop signs, yield
signs, or traffic control signals at all streets and highways intersecting
the through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop or yield
intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to the
intersection.





(See R.C. § 4511.65)  Penalty, see § 70.99









71.07  TRAFFIC SIGNAL INDICATIONS.




   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles, and pedestrians shall
have the following meanings:










   (A)   Steady Green Signal Indication:





      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green
signal indication is permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or
left, or make a u-turn movement except as such movement is modified by a
lane-use sign, turn prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate
turn signal indication, or other traffic control device.  Such vehicular
traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn
movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:





            1.    Pedestrians lawfully within an associated
crosswalk;





            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the
intersection.





         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or
making a u-turn movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute
an immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving
across or within the intersection.





      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal
indication, displayed alone or in combination with another signal indication,
is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement
indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other
indications displayed at the same time.  Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:





         (a)   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated
crosswalk.





         (b)   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.





      (3)   (a)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian
signal indication, as provided in Section 71.09, pedestrians facing a
circular green signal indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk.  The pedestrian shall
yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so
close as to create an immediate hazard at the time  that the green signal
indication is first displayed.





         (b)   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, shall not cross the roadway.










   (B)   Steady Yellow Signal Indication:





      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal
indication is thereby warned that the related green movement or the related
flashing arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal
indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic
shall not enter the intersection.  The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while
the steady circular yellow signal indication is displayed.





      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal
indication is thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the
related flashing arrow movement is being terminated.  The provisions
governing vehicular operation under the movement being terminated shall
continue to apply while the steady yellow arrow signal indication is
displayed.





      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow
arrow signal indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal
indication as provided in Section 71.09 or other traffic control device,
shall not start to cross the roadway.










   (C)   Steady Red Signal Indication:





      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red
signal indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement
permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk,
before then before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until
a signal indication to proceed is displayed except as provided in subsections
(C)(1), (2) and (3) of this section.





         (b)   Except when a traffic control device is in place
prohibiting a turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is
displayed, vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication
is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to
turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street.  The right to proceed
with the turn shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign.





      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
signal indication shall not enter the intersection to make the movement
indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection to make another
movement permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk
on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then
before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal
indication or other traffic control device permitting the movement indicated
by such red arrow is displayed.





         (b)   When a traffic control device is in place
permitting a turn on a steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic
facing a steady red arrow indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter
the intersection to turn right or to turn left from a one-way street into a
one-way street.  The right to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the
direction indicated by the arrow, and shall be subject to the provisions that
are applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.





      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal
indication as provided in Section 71.09 or other traffic control device,
pedestrians facing a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal
indication shall not enter the roadway.





      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of
Transportation on State highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against
a steady red signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs
giving notice thereof are posted at the intersection.










   (D)   Flashing Green Signal Indication.  A flashing green signal
indication has no meaning and shall not be used.










   (E)   Flashing Yellow Signal Indication:





      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an
intersection, facing a flashing circular yellow signal indication, is
permitted to cautiously enter the intersection to proceed straight through or
turn right or left or make a u-turn movement except as such movement is
modified by lane-use signs, turn prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway
design, separate turn signal indications, or other traffic control devices. 
Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a
u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:





            1.    Pedestrians lawfully within an associated
crosswalk;





            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the
intersection.





         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or
making a u-turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across
or within the intersection.





      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an
intersection, facing a flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or other such movement as is permitted by other signal indications
displayed at the same time.  Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles
turning right or left or making a u-turn, shall yield the right-of-way to
both of the following:





            1.    Pedestrians lawfully within an associated
crosswalk;





            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the
intersection.





         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or
making a u-turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across
or within the intersection.





      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication
at an intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal
indication or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across
the roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk.  Pedestrians
shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at
the time that the flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.





      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is
displayed as a beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road
users are notified that there is a need to pay additional attention to the
message contained thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of
the other traffic control device, which might not be applicable at all times,
are currently applicable.










   (F)   Flashing Red Signal Indication:





      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection,
facing a flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk
on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection.  The right to proceed shall be subject to the provisions that
are applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.





      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at
an intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication
or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk.  Pedestrians shall yield
the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time
that the flashing red signal indication is first displayed.





      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is
displayed as a beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road
users are notified that there is a need to pay additional attention to the
message contained thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other
traffic control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are
currently applicable.  Use of this signal indication shall be limited to
supplementing stop, do not enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications
where compliance with the supplemented traffic control device requires a stop
at a designated point.










   (G)   General Application: In the event an official traffic-control
signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the
provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions
which by their nature can have no application.  Any stop required shall be
made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be
made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made
at the signal.










   (H)   Exception.  This section does not apply at railroad grade
crossings.  Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade
crossings shall be governed by Ohio R.C. 4511.61 and 4511.62. 
(ORC 4511.13)









71.08  LANE-USE CONTROL SIGNAL INDICATIONS.




   (A)   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as
follows:





      (1)   A steady downward green arrow: A road user is permitted
to drive in the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.





      (2)   A steady yellow "X": A road user is to prepare to vacate
the lane over which the signal indication is located because a lane control
change is being made to a steady red "X" signal indication.





      (3)   A steady white two-way left-turn arrow: A road user is
permitted to use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a
left turn, but not for through travel, with the understanding that common use
of the lane by oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.





      (4)   A steady white one-way left-turn arrow: A road user is
permitted to use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a
left turn, without opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through
travel.





      (5)   A steady red "X": A road user is not permitted to use
the lane over which the signal indication is located and that this signal
indication shall modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls
present.
(ORC 4511.131)










   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.





(ORC 4511.99)









71.09  SPECIAL PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.




   (A)   Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the
words "walk" or "don't walk", or the symbol of a walking person or an
upraised palm are in place, such signals shall indicate the following
instructions:





      (1)   A steady walking person signal indication, which
symbolizes "walk", means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is
permitted to start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal
indication, possibly in conflict with turning vehicles.  The pedestrian
shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at
the time that the walking person signal indication is first shown.





      (2)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which
symbolizes "don't walk", means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the
roadway in the direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian
who has already started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication
shall proceed to the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway,
unless otherwise directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the
median of a divided highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge
area.





      (3)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a
pedestrian shall not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal
indication.





      (4)   Nothing int his section shall be construed to invalidate
the continued use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word "wait" if
those signals were installed prior to March 28, 1985.





      (5)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no
meaning and shall not be used.
(ORC 4511.14)










   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.





(ORC 4511.99)









71.10  FLASHING TRAFFIC SIGNALS.




   (Former Ohio R.C. 4511.15 from which Section 71.10 was derived was
repealed by House Bill 349, effective April 20, 2012.)









71.11  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS,  HIDING FROM VIEW, ADVERTISING.




   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of
any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports
to be, is an imitation of or resembles a traffic control device or railroad
sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or hides
from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic control device
or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor
shall any public authority permit upon any street any traffic sign or signal
bearing thereon any commercial advertising.  This section does not prohibit
either the erection upon private property adjacent to streets of signs giving
useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for
traffic control devices or the erection upon private property of traffic
control devices by the owner of real property in accordance with R.C. §§
4511.211 and 4511.432.










   (B)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device is a public
nuisance, and the police department is authorized to remove it or cause it to
be removed. 
(R.C. § 4511.16)  Penalty, see § 70.99









71.12  ALTERATION, INJURY, REMOVAL OF  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.




   No person, without lawful authority shall do any of the following:





   (A)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or  otherwise
improperly tamper with  any





traffic-control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any inscription,
shield, or insignia on the device, sign, or signal, or any part of the
device, sign, or signal;










   (B)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement
marking material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in
an undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs, or other
devices intended to protect it.










   (C)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly
tamper with a manhole cover.
(R.C. § 4511.17) Penalty, see § 70.99










   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
whoever violates subsection (A) or (C) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.  If a violation of subsection (A) or (C) of
this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If a violation of subsection
(A) or (C) of this section causes serious physical harm to property that is
owned, leased, or controlled by a state or local authority, the offender is
guilty of a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.





      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates subsection (B) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates subsection (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle
or traffic offenses, whoever violates subsection (B) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4511.17)









71.13  SIGNALS NOT CLEARLY ASSIGNING THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.




   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic is
controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following, if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights, or colored lighted
arrows, exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly
indicate the assignment of right of way, or if the vehicle is a bicycle, the
signals are otherwise malfunctioning, due to the failure of a vehicle
detector to detect the presence of the bicycle:










   (A)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none,
stop before entering the intersection;










   (B)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways; and










   (C)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the
intersection.





(R.C. § 4511.132)  Penalty, see § 70.99









71.14  PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES PROHIBITED.




   (A)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption
device.





      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device
to affect the operation of a traffic control signal.










   (B)   Subsection (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following persons and subsection (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any
of the following persons when responding to an emergency call:





      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in Ohio R.C. 109.71(A)(11),
(12), (14) or (19);





      (2)   A State highway patrol trooper;





      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01(E)(1), (3) or (4).










   (C)   Whoever violates subsection (A)(1) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  Whoever violates subsection (A)(2)
of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.










   (D)   As used in this section, “portable signal preemption
device” means a device that, if activated by a person, is capable of
changing a traffic control signal to green out of sequence.





(ORC 4511.031)
























CHAPTER 72
VEHICLES










Section











Operation Generally











72.01   Driving upon right side of roadway; exceptions





72.02   Passing to right when proceeding in opposite directions





72.03   Overtaking, passing to left; driver's duties





72.04   Overtaking and passing upon right





72.05   Overtaking, passing to left of center





72.06   Additional restrictions on driving upon left side of roadway





72.07   Hazardous or no passing zones





72.08   Driving in marked lanes or continuous lines of traffic





72.09   Following too closely





72.10   Turning at intersections





72.11   Turning into private driveway, alley, or building





72.12   “U” turns restricted





72.13   Starting and backing vehicles





72.14   Signals before changing course, turning, or stopping





72.15   Hand and arm signals





72.16   Right-of-way at intersections





72.17   Right-of-way when turning left





72.18   Operation of vehicle at yield signs





72.19   Operation of vehicle at stop signs





72.20   Emergency or public safety vehicles at stop signals or signs





72.21   Right-of-way of public safety or coroner’s vehicle





72.211    Report of vehicle failing to yield right of way to public 
safety vehicle.





72.22   Driving onto roadway from place other than roadway; duty to yield





72.23   Driving onto roadway from place other than roadway; stopping at
sidewalk





72.24   Right-of-way of funeral procession





72.25   Driving across grade crossing





72.26   Stopping at grade crossing





72.27   Driver's view and control to be unobstructed by load or persons





72.28   Driving upon street posted as closed for repair





72.29   Following and parking near emergency or safety vehicles





72.291   Approaching a stationary public  safety, emergency or road
service vehicle





72.30   Driving over fire hose





72.31   Driving through safety zone





72.32   One-way streets and rotary traffic islands





72.33   Driving upon divided roadways





72.34   Entering and exiting controlled access highway





72.35   Obstructing intersection, crosswalk, or grade crossing





72.36   Failure to control; weaving course





72.37   Squealing tires, “peeling”, cracking exhaust noises





72.38   Driving upon sidewalks, street lawns, or curbs





72.39   Stopping for school bus; discharging children





72.391   Suspension of driving privileges





72.392   Report of alleged violations to  Police Department





72.40   Occupying a moving trailer or  manufactured or mobile home.





72.41   Restricting use of motor vehicles on city property and city parks





72.42   Transporting child not in child restraint system prohibited





72.43   Failure to use or illegal use of required ignition interlock device





72.44   Vehicular operation on street closed due to rise in water level











Intoxication; Reckless Operation; Speed











72.45   Driving or physical control  while under the influence





72.46   Reckless operation on streets, public or private property





72.47   Maximum speed limits; assured clear distance ahead





72.48   Slow speed; posted minimum speeds





72.49   Speed limitations over bridges





72.50   Speed exceptions for emergency or safety vehicles





72.51   Street racing prohibited





72.52   Texting while driving prohibited





72.53   Approaching a stationary public safety, emergency or road service
vehicle.











Licensing; Accidents











72.55   Driver’s license or commercial driver’s license required





72.56   Permitting operation without valid license; one license permitted





72.561   Ohio driver's license required for in state residents.





72.57   Driving with temporary instruction permit; curfew





72.571   Driving with probationary license; curfew





72.572   Electronic wireless communication device prohibited





72.58   Certain acts prohibited





72.59   Wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle





72.60   Display of license





72.61   Driving under suspension or license restriction





72.611   Driving under OVI suspension





72.612   Driving under financial  responsibility law suspension or
cancellation





72.613   Driving without complying with license reinstatement requirements





72.614   Driving under license forfeiture or child support suspension





72.62   Operation or sale without certificate of title





72.63   Display of license plates





72.64   Expired or unlawful plates





72.65   Use of illegal license plates; transfer of registration





72.651   Registration within thirty days of residency.





72.66   Stopping after accident upon streets; collision with unattended
vehicle





72.67   Stopping after accident upon property other than street





72.68   Vehicle accident resulting in damage to realty











Safety and Equipment











72.70   Driving unsafe vehicles; vehicle bumpers and height





72.71   Lighted lights; measurement of distances and heights





72.72   Headlights on motor vehicles and motorcycles





72.73   Tail light; illumination of rear license plate





72.74   Rear red reflectors





72.75   Safety lighting on commercial vehicles





72.76   Obscured lights on vehicles in combination





72.77   Red light or red flag on extended loads





72.78   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles





72.79   Lights on slow-moving vehicles; emblem required





72.80   Spotlight and auxiliary lights





72.81   Cowl, fender, and backup lights





72.82   Display of lighted lights





72.83   Use of headlight beams





72.84   Lights of less intensity on slow-moving vehicles





72.85   Number of lights; limitations on flashing, oscillating, or
rotating lights





72.86   Focus and aim of headlights





72.87   Motor vehicle and motorcycle brakes





72.88   Horn, siren, and theft alarm signal





72.89   Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas, or noise





72.90   Rear-view mirror; clear view to front, both sides, and rear





72.91   Sign or poster upon windshield; windshield wiper





72.92   Limited load extension on left side of passenger vehicle





72.93   Motor vehicle stop lights





72.94   Air cleaner required





72.941   Occupant restraining device for school bus operator





72.942   Drivers and passengers required to wear seat belts





72.943   Use of earphones while operating motor vehicle prohibited;
exceptions





72.944   Directional signals required





72.945   Use of sunscreening, nontransparent and reflectorized materials











Commercial and Heavy Vehicles











72.95   Oversize or overweight vehicle operation on state routes; state
permit





72.96   Truck routes (use of local streets, etc.)





72.97   Maximum width, height, and length





72.98   Route and load information





72.99   Wheel protectors





72.100   Vehicles transporting explosives





72.101   Towing requirements





72.102   Loads dropping or leaking; removal required; tracking mud





72.103   Shifting loads; loose loads





72.104   Vehicles with spikes, lugs, and chains





72.105   Weighing vehicles; removal of excess load





72.106   Warning devices required; display when disabled





72.107   Jake-braking prohibited











Drivers of Commercial Cars or Tractors











72.110   Definitions





72.111   Driving or permitting driving while fatigued or ill prohibited











All Purpose Vehicles and Snowmobiles











72.120   Operation by person under sixteen years of age




 



Civil Penalties for Automated Red Light and Speeding System Violations









72.130   Automated red light  and speeding system/civil violation -
general.



72.131   Definitions.



72.132   Offense.



72.133   Penalty; administrative appeal.



 




OPERATION GENERALLY




 



72.01  DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.




   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be
driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows:





      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing
such movements;





      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive
to the left of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon
the unobstructed portion of the highway within the distance as to constitute
an immediate hazard;





      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into 3 or more
marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereto;





      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with
signs for one-way traffic;





      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic
control device.











   (B)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than
the prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under
the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then
available for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster
vehicles if such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the
following circumstances:





         (a)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction;





         (b)   When preparing for a left turn;





         (c)   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane
other than the right- hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.





      (2)   Nothing in subsection (B)(1) of this section requires a
driver of a slower vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow
overtaking by a faster vehicle.











   (C)   Upon any roadway having 4 or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center
of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic control devices
designating certain lanes to the left of the center of the roadway for use by
traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or except as permitted
under division (A) (2) of this section.











   (D)   Division (C) of this section shall not be construed as
prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making a left turn into or
from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(R.C. § 4511.25) Penalty, see § 70.99










72.02  PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.




   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each
other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one line
of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other 1/2 of
the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly 1/2 as is reasonably
possible. 
(R.C. § 4511.26)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.03  OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT; DRIVER'S DUTIES.




   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction:





   (A)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction shall, except as provided in subsection
(a)(3) hereof, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left
thereof at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of
the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.  When a motor
vehicle overtakes and passes a bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a
safe passing distance.











   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted,
the operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of
the overtaking vehicle at the latter's audible signal, and he shall not
increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking
vehicle.











   (C)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another
vehicle proceeding in the same direction on a divided street or highway as
defined in § 72.31, a limited access highway as defined in R.C. § 5511.02
or a highway with 4 or more traffic lanes, is not required to signal audibly
to the vehicle being overtaken and passed.
(R.C. § 4511.27)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.04  OVERTAKING AND PASSING UPON RIGHT.




   (A)   The driver of a vehicle  may overtake  and pass upon the
right of another vehicle only under the following conditions:





      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a
left turn;





      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient
width for 2 or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being
traveled by the overtaking vehicle.











   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle
only under conditions permitting the movement in safety.  The movement shall
not be made by driving off the roadway.
(R.C. § 4511.28)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.05  OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF  CENTER.




   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made,
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from
the opposite direction or any traffic overtaken.  In every event the
overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as
practicable and in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane
authorized for traffic approaching from the opposite direction, before coming
within 200 feet of any approaching vehicle.
(R.C. § 4511.29)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.06  ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS ON DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.




   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:





   (A)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator's view is obstructed within such a distance as





to create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;











   (B)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet
of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel;











   (C)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any
intersection or railroad grade crossing.











   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side or
under the conditions described in § 72.01 (A) (2).





(R.C. § 4511.30)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.07  HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES.




   (A)   Hazardous zones, commonly called "no passing zones," shall
consist of an auxiliary yellow line marked on the roadway pavement and placed
parallel to the normal center line or marked lane line.  When the auxiliary
yellow line appears on the left side in the driver's lane of travel and to
the right of the normal center line or marked lane line, no driver shall
drive across the auxiliary yellow line to overtake and pass another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction.  When auxiliary yellow lines appear on
both sides of the normal center line or marked lane line, drivers proceeding
in either direction shall not drive across such auxiliary yellow lines to
overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction.  No
driver shall, at any other time, drive across the yellow auxiliary line when
it appears in the driver's lane of travel, except to make a lawfully
permitted left-hand turn under the rules governing such movement.  No
passing signs may also be erected facing traffic to indicate the beginning
and end of each no passing zone.




   When appropriate signs or markings indicating hazardous or no passing
zones are in place and clearly visible, every operator of a vehicle shall
obey the directions of the signs or markings, notwithstanding the distance
set out in Section 72.06.










   (B)    Subsection (A) of this section does not apply when all of the
following apply:





      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the
speed of the speed limit applicable to that location.





      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing
the slower vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.





      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of
the center or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing
provisions of Section 72.05, considering the speed of the slower vehicle. 
(ORC 4511.31)










72.08  DRIVING IN MARKED LANES OR  CONTINUOUS LINES OF TRAFFIC.




   Whenever any roadway has been divided into 2 or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic or wherever traffic is lawfully moving in 2 or more
substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the following rules
apply:





   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable,
entirely within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from
the lane  or line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement
can be made with safety.











   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into 3 lanes and provides for
two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is
clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe
distance, or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at
the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle
is proceeding and is posted with signs to give notice of the allocation.











   (C)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to
use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving
in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, and
drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of the signs.











   (D)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting
the changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall
obey the directions of every device.
(R.C. § 4511.33)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.09  FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.




   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another
vehicle, more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for
the speed of such vehicle, and the traffic upon and the condition of the
highway.











   (B)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another
vehicle, when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence
district shall maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit,
between the vehicle and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle
may enter and occupy the space without danger.  This paragraph does not
prevent overtaking and passing nor does it apply to any lane specially
designated for use by trucks.











   (C)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a
business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade, shall maintain a
sufficient space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and
occupy the space without danger.  This paragraph shall not apply to funeral
processions. 
(R.C. § 4511.34)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.10  TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.




   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:





   (A)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.











   (B)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest
the center line thereof and by passing to the right of the center line where
it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line
of the roadway being entered.  Whenever practicable the left turn shall be
made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.











   (C)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one
direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending
to turn left at any intersection shall approach the intersection in the
extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction
of travel of the vehicle, and after entering the intersection the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in
the left-hand lane of the roadway being entered lawfully available to the
traffic moving in that lane.











   (D)   Markers, buttons, or signs may be placed within or adjacent to
intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from
that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an
intersection, and when markers, buttons, or signs are so placed, no operator
of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed
and required by the markers, buttons, or signs. 
(R.C. § 4511.36)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.11  TURNING INTO PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY, OR BUILDING.




   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or
driveway, alley, or building from a public street or highway shall be
governed by the following rules:





   (A)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.











   (B)   Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite
directions, approach for a left turn shall be made from that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof.











   (C)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as
practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.











   (D)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a
private road or driveway, alley, or building to yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway.  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.12  “U” TURNS RESTRICTED.




   (A)   Except as provided in Section 71.07 and division (B) below, no
vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if the vehicle
cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from either direction.











   (B)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle,
when responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction.  This division applies only when the emergency
vehicle or public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an
audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell.  This division does not
relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon
the highway.





(R.C. § 4511.37)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.13  STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.




   (A)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or
parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.











   (B)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample
warning, and while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person
or property on the street or highway.











   (C)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except: in
a rest area; in the performance of public works or official duties; as a
result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a motor
vehicle. 
(R.C. § 4511.38)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.14  SIGNALS BEFORE CHANGING COURSE,  TURNING, OR STOPPING.




   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a
highway unless and until such person has exercised due care to ascertain that
the movement can be made with reasonable safety nor without giving an
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.











   (B)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or
left shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet
traveled by the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person
operating a bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time but is
not required to be continuous.  A bicycle operator is not required to make a
signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and a signal shall not be
given when the operator’s hands are needed for the safe operation of the
bicycle.











   (C)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a
vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided
herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is
opportunity to give a signal.











   (D)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be
given either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly
indicate to both approaching and following traffic intention to turn or move
right or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be
equipped with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when
the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left
outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds
twenty-four inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the
steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds fourteen
feet, whether a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles.











   (E)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be
flashed on one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or "do
pass" signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be
flashed on one side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for
compliance with this section. 





(R.C. § 4511.39)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.15  HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.




   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, all
signals required by the provisions of this traffic code, when given by hand
and arm, shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following
manner, and the signals shall indicate as follows:





      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;





      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;





      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.











   (B)   As an alternative to division (A)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle may give a right turn signal by extending the right hand
and arm horizontally and to the right side of the bicycle.





(R.C. § 4511.40)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.16  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.




   (A)   When 2 vehicles approach or enter an intersection from
different streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of
the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the
right.











   (B)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) of this
section, is modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this
title or R.C. Chapter 4511. 
(R.C. § 4511.41)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.17  RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.




   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is
within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate
hazard.
(R.C. § 4511.42)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.18  OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT YIELD SIGNS.




   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it.  After
slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle
in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or
within the intersection or junction of roadways.  Whenever a driver is
involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of
roadways, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision
shall be prima facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield the
right-of-way.
(R.C. § 4511.43 (B))  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.19  OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT STOP SIGNS.




   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching at stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another
roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the
driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways. 
(R.C. § 4511.43 (A))  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.20  EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES AT STOP SIGNALS OR SIGNS.




   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway. 
(R.C. § 4511.03)










72.21  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY  OR CORONER’S VEHICLE.




   (A)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s
vehicle, equipped with at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light
visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to
the front of the vehicle and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield
the right- of-way, immediately drive if practical to a position parallel to
and as close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the street clear of
any intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public
safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a police officer.











   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety
vehicle or coroner’s vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons and property upon the street.











   (C)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the
vehicle is operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4513.171.  As used in this
section, “coroner’s vehicle” means a vehicle used by a coroner, deputy
coroner or coroner’s investigator that is equipped with a flashing,
oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a siren, exhaust whistle, or
bell capable of giving an audible signal.











   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection or Section
72.211, whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense.  On a second offense
within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree, and, on each subsequent offense within one
year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree. 
(ORC 4511.45)










72.211   REPORT OF VEHICLE FAILING TO YIELD RIGHT OF WAY TO PUBLIC SAFETY
VEHICLE.



   (A)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the
right-of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by Section 72.21(A)
impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency,
any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license
plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the
vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area
where the alleged violation occurred.



 



   (B)   (1)   Upon receipt of a report under subsection (A) of this
section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt
to determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation.



 



      (2)   If the identity of the operator at the time of an
alleged violation of Section 72.21(A) is established, the law enforcement
agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for
that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to
the operator.



 



      (3)   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement
agency may issue a warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation.  However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle,
the law enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who
leased or rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.



 



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates Section 72.21(A) based on a report
filed under subsection (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and shall be fined one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).



 



      (2)   If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of
Section 72.21(A) based on a report filed under subsection (a) of this section
does not enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the person's right
to contest the citation but instead appears in person in the proper court to
answer the charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt
that the person committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who
filed the report appears in person in the court and testifies.



 



   (D)   As used in this section:



 



      (1)   "License plate" includes any temporary license placard
issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.182 or similar law of another jurisdiction.



 




      (2)   "Public safety vehicle" does not include an unmarked
public safety vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer
or other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the State
or a vehicle used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the enforcement
of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission.  (ORC 4511.454)










72.22  DRIVING ONTO ROADWAY FROM PLACE OTHER THAN ROADWAY; DUTY TO YIELD.




   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from any
place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic
approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.





(R.C. § 4511.44)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.23  DRIVING ONTO ROADWAY FROM PLACE OTHER THAN ROADWAY; STOPPING AT
SIDEWALK.




   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road,
or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop the vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across the alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or in the
event there is no  sidewalk area,  shall stop at the point nearest the
street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic
thereon. 
(R.C. § 4511.431) Penalty, see § 70.99










72.24  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF FUNERAL PROCESSION.




   (A)   As used in this section "funeral procession" means two or more
vehicles accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person
in the daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is
displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each
vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from
any direction.










   (B)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with
Section 72.21 or when directed otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and
the operators of all vehicles shall yield the right of way to each vehicle
that is a part of a funeral procession.  Whenever the lead vehicle in a
funeral procession lawfully enters an intersection, the remainder of the
vehicles in the procession may continue to follow the lead vehicle through
the intersection notwithstanding any traffic control devices or right-of-way
provisions of this Traffic Code, provided that the operator of each vehicle
exercises due care to avoid colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.










   (C)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral
procession without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without
displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner
as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.





Penalty, see §70.99










72.25  DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSING.




   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a
railroad grade  crossing, the person shall stop within fifty feet, but not
less than fifteen feet from the nearest rail of the railroad, if any of the
following circumstances exist at the crossing:





         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal
device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train.





         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered.





         (c)   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal
of the approach or passage of a train.





         (d)   There is insufficient space on the other side of
the railroad grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is
operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians, or
railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to
proceed.





         (e)   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal
or is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.





         (f)   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to
safely negotiate the crossing.





      (2)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a
railroad grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (f) of this section exist at the crossing.











   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under
any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier
is closed or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.











   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.





(ORC 4511.62)










72.26  STOPPING AT GRADE CROSSING.




   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (A)(2) hereof, the
operator of any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting material
required to be placarded under 49 CFR Parts 100-185, before crossing at grade
any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle, and, while so stopped, shall
listen through an open door or open window and look in both directions along
the track for any approaching train, and for signals indicating the approach
of a train, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after stopping,
looking and listening as required by this section.  Upon proceeding, the
operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure there
will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing and
shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks.





      (2)   This section does not apply at grade crossings when the
Ohio Public Utilities Commission has authorized and approved an exempt
crossing as provided in this subsection.





         (a)   Any local authority may file an application with
the Commission requesting the approval of an exempt crossing.  Upon receipt
of such a request, the Commission shall authorize a limited period for the
filing of comments by any party regarding the application and then shall
conduct a public hearing in the community seeking the exempt crossing
designation.  The Commission shall provide appropriate prior public notice
of the comment period and the public hearing.  By registered mail, the
Commission shall notify each railroad operating over the crossing of the
comment period.





         (b)   After considering any comments or other
information received, the Commission may approve or reject the application. 
By order, the Commission may establish conditions for the exempt crossing
designation, including compliance with division (b) of 49 C.F.R. Part 392.10,
when applicable.  An exempt crossing designation becomes effective only when
appropriate signs giving notice of the exempt designation are erected at the
crossing as ordered by the Commission and any other conditions ordered by the
Commission are satisfied.





         (c)   By order, the Commission may rescind any exempt
crossing designation made under this section if the Commission finds that a
condition at the exempt crossing has changed to such an extent that the
continuation of the exempt crossing designation compromises public safety. 
The Commission may conduct a public hearing to investigate and determine
whether to rescind the exempt crossing designation.  If the Commission
rescinds the designation, it shall order the removal of any exempt crossing
signs and may make any other necessary order.





      (3)   As used in this section:





         (a)   “School vehicle” means any vehicle used for
the transportation of pupils to and from a school or school-related function
if the vehicle is owned or operated by, or operated under contract with, a
public or nonpublic school.





         (b)   “Bus” means any vehicle originally designed by
its manufacturer to transport sixteen or more passengers, including the
driver, or carries sixteen or more passengers, including the driver.





         (c)   “Exempt crossing” means a highway rail grade
crossing authorized and approved by the Public Utilities Commission under
subsection (A)(2) hereof at which vehicles may cross without making the stop
otherwise required by this section.





      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (A)(4),
whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or
more violations of subsection (A) hereof or Ohio R.C. 4511.76, 4511.761,
4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77 or 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is
substantially similar to any of those sections, whoever violates subsection
(A) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(ORC 4511.63)











   (B)   (1)   When authorized stop signs are erected at railroad
grade crossings, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within fifty but not
less than fifteen feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall
exercise due care before proceeding across such grade crossing.





        (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
whoever violates this subsection (B)(1) hereof is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.  If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.  If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.





         (ORC 4511.61)










72.27  DRIVER'S VIEW AND CONTROL TO BE  UNOBSTRUCTED BY LOAD OR PERSONS.




   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when
there are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view
of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to interfere with the
driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.











   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in any position as to
interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with
his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4511.70 (A), (B))  Penalty, see §70.99










72.28  DRIVING UPON STREET POSTED AS  CLOSED FOR REPAIR.




   No person shall drive upon, along, or across a street or highway, or
any part thereof, which has been closed in the process of its construction,
reconstruction, or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by the authority
having jurisdiction to close the street or highway. 
(R.C. § 4511.71)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.29  FOLLOWING AND PARKING NEAR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.




   The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle
or public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500
feet, or drive into or park the vehicle within the block where fire apparatus
has stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police
officer or a fireman.
(R.C. § 4511.72)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.291 APPROACHING A STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY, EMERGENCY OR ROAD SERVICE
VEHICLE.










   (A)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary
public safety vehicle, an emergency vehicle, or a road service vehicle that
is displaying the appropriate visual signals by means of flashing,
oscillating or rotating lights, as prescribed in Section 72.85, shall do
either of the following:











      (1)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a
street or highway that consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in
the same direction of travel as that of the driver's motor vehicle, the
driver shall proceed with due caution and, if possible with due regard to the
road, weather, and traffic conditions, shall change lanes into a lane that is
not adjacent to that of the stationary public safety vehicle, an emergency
vehicle, or a road service vehicle.











      (2)   If the driver is not traveling on a street or highway of
a type described in subsection (A)(1) of this section, or if the driver is
traveling on a highway of that type but it is not possible to change lanes or
if to do so would be unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution,
reduce the speed of the motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the
road, weather and traffic conditions.











   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety
vehicle, an emergency vehicle, or a road service vehicle from the duty to
drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the
highway.











   (C)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance
with subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this section when so required by subsection
(A) of this section.











   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.











      (2)   Notwithstanding Section 70.99(B), upon a finding that a
person operated a motor vehicle in violation of subsection (C) of this
section, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall
impose a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation. 





(ORC 4511.213)










72.30  DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.




   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the fire department 
official  in  command, be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire
department, when the hose is laid down on any street or private driveway to
be used at any fire or alarm of fire. 
(R.C. § 4511.73) Penalty, see § 70.99










72.31  DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.




   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone. 
(R.C. § 4511.60)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.32  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.




   (A)   The department of transportation may designate any highway or
any separate roadway under its jurisdiction for one-way traffic and shall
erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.











   (B)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way
traffic a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.  A
vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the
right of the island. 
(R.C. § 4511.32)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.33  DRIVING UPON DIVIDED ROADWAYS.




   Whenever any street has been divided into 2 roadways by an intervening
space, or by a physical barrier, or clearly indicated dividing section so
constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven
only upon the right hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over, across
or within any dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an opening,
crossover, or intersection established by public authority.  This section
does not prohibit the occupancy of any dividing space, barrier, or median
section for the purpose of an emergency stop or in compliance with an order
of a police officer. 
(R.C. § 4511.35)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.34  ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY.




   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access
highway except at entrances and exits as are established by public authority.





Penalty, see § 70.99










72.35  OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTION, CROSSWALK, OR GRADE CROSSING.




   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk or drive onto
any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk, or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles,
pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed. 
(R.C. § 4511.712)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.36  FAILURE TO CONTROL; WEAVING COURSE.




   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any
street, highway, or property open to the public for vehicular traffic without
being in reasonable control of the vehicle or motorcycle.





(R.C. § 4511.202)











   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any
street or highway in a weaving or zigzag course unless the irregular course
is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(Ord. 2376, passed 4-12-83)  Penalty, see § 70.99











   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
operating a motor vehicle without being in control of it, a minor
misdemeanor. 
(R.C. § 4511.99(I)










72.37  SQUEALING TIRES, “PEELING”, CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES.




   No person shall unnecessarily race the motor of any vehicle and no
person shall operate any motor vehicle, except in an emergency, in a manner
that the vehicle is so rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position
that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking, or chatter-noise unusual to
its normal operation, or whereby the tires of the vehicle squeal or leave the
tire marks on the roadway, commonly called “peeling.” 
Penalty, see § 70.99










72.38  DRIVING UPON SIDEWALKS, STREET  LAWNS, OR CURBS.




   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than  a bicycle, 
upon  a  sidewalk  or  sidewalk  area except upon a permanent or duly
authorized temporary driveway.











   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be  construed as prohibiting
local authorities  from  regulating  the operation of bicycles within
their respective jurisdictions.











   (C)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a street lawn area or the
curb of a street, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary
driveway or when otherwise lawfully authorized. 
(R.C. § 4511.711) Penalty, see § 70.99










72.39  STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS;  DISCHARGING CHILDREN.




   (A)   The driver of a vehicle upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until
such school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed.





   It is no defense to a charge under this subsection (A) hereof that the
school bus involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically
extended stop warning sign as required by subsection (B) hereof.











   (B)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual
signals meeting the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4511.771, and an automatically
extended stop warning sign of a type approved by the State Board of
Education, which shall be actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only
whenever the bus is stopped or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of
receiving or discharging school children, persons attending programs offered
by community boards of mental health and County boards of developmental
disabilities, or children attending programs offered by head start
agencies.  A school bus driver shall not actuate the visual signals or the
stop warning sign in designated school bus loading areas where the bus is
entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when children or persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and County
boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading at curbside or
at buildings when children attending programs offered by head start agencies
are boarding or unloading at curbside.  The visual signals and stop warning
sign shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by rule of the
Board.











   (C)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic
lanes, a driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from
the  opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and County boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies.  The driver of
any vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with subsection (A) hereof.











   (D)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with
four or more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children,
persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and
County boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs
offered by head start agencies  on their residence side of the highway.











   (E)   No school bus driver shall start the driver's bus until after
any child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and County boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a
program offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has
reached a place of safety on the child or person's residence side of the road.











   (F)   As used in this section:





      (1)   “Head start agency” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 3301.32.





      (2)   “School bus”, as used in relation to children who
attend a program offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned
and operated by a head start agency, is equipped with an automatically
extended stop warning sign of a type approved by the State Board of
Education, is painted the color and displays the markings described in Ohio
R.C. 4511.77, and is equipped with amber and red visual signals meeting the
requirements of Ohio R.C. 4511.771, irrespective of whether or not the bus
has fifteen or more children aboard at any time.  “School bus” does not
include a van owned and operated by a head start agency, irrespective of its
color, lights, or markings. 











   (G)   Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section may be fined
an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).  A person who is
issued a citation for a violation of subsection (A) of this section is not
permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and waive the person’s right to
contest the citation in a trial but instead must appear in person in the
proper court to answer the charge. 
(ORC 4511.75)










72.391 SUSPENSION OF DRIVING PRIVILEGES.



   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by law,
the court or mayor may impose upon an offender who violates Section 72.39 a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (a)(7)
of Ohio R.C. 4510.02.  When a license is suspended under this section, the
court or mayor shall cause the offender to deliver the license to the court,
and the court or clerk of the court immediately shall forward the license to
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, together with notice of the court’s
action. 




(ORC 4511.75)










72.392 REPORT OF ALLEGED VIOLATIONS TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.




   (A)   As used in this section LICENSE PLATE includes, but is not
limited to, any temporary plate issued under any applicable section of the
Ohio Revised Code or similar law of another jurisdiction.











   (B)   When the operator of a school bus believes that a motorist has
violated division (A) of § 72.39 of the code, the operator shall report the
license plate number and general description of the vehicle to the Police
Department.











   (C)   On receipts of the report of the alleged violation of division
(A) of § 72.39 of the code, the Police Department shall conduct an
investigation to attempt to determine the identity of the operator of the
vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.  If the identity of the
operator at the time of the alleged violation is established, the reporting
of the license plate number of the vehicle shall establish probable cause for
the Police Department to issue a citation for the violation of division (A)
of § 72.39 of the code. However, if the identity of the operator of the
vehicle at the time of the alleged violation cannot be established, the
Police Department shall issue a warning to the owner of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation, except in the case of a leased or rented
vehicle when the warning shall be issued to the lessee at the time of the
alleged violation. 





(Ord. 2125, passed 5-8-79)










72.40  OCCUPYING A MOVING TRAILER OR MANUFACTURED  OR MOBILE HOME.




   No person shall occupy any travel trailer or manufactured or mobile
home while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.





(ORC 4511.701)










72.41  RESTRICTING USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON CITY PROPERTY AND CITY PARKS.




   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on lands, paved walks,
or paths on any property owned or controlled by the city, except within those
areas specifically designated for motorized vehicular traffic.  No person
shall operate motorized bicycles in the city parks or on any city owned
property.











   (B)   No unlicensed motor vehicles shall be operated on any city
property except those areas designated for use by motorized recreational
vehicles.











   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles
used in the maintenance of city property nor to city vehicles operated on the
property by city employees, nor to vehicles operated on the property pursuant
to a public event sponsored or approved by the city, nor to emergency
vehicles.











   (D)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than $50. 
(Ord. 1746, passed 5-22-72)










72.42  TRANSPORTING CHILD NOT IN CHILD  RESTRAINT SYSTEM PROHIBITED.




   (A)   When any child who is in either or both of the following
categories is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or
public safety vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01, that is required by
the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts
at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle
shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions in a child restraint system that meets federal motor safety
standards:





      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;





      (2)   A child who weighs less than forty pounds.











   (B)   When any child who is in either or both of the following
categories is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab,
that is owned, leased or otherwise under the control of a nursery school, or
day-care center, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a
child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:





      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;





      (2)   A child who weighs less than forty pounds.











   (C)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less
than four feet nine inches in height, who is not required by subsection (A)
or (B) of this section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being
transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under Ohio
R.C. 5104.011, that is required by the United States Department of
Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of manufacture or
assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly
secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions on a booster seat
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards.











   (D)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not
older than fifteen years of age and who is not otherwise required by
subsection (A), (B) or (C) hereof to be secured in a child restraint system
or booster seat, is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a
taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01, that is
required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped
with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the
motor vehicle shall have the child properly restrained either in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system that meets
federal motor vehicle safety standards or in an occupant restraining device
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.263.











   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of subsection (C) or (D) of this section has
been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket,
citation, or summons for a violation of subsection (C) or (D) of this section
or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of subsection (C) or (D) of this section, and absent another
violation of law, a law enforcement officer's view of the interior or visual
inspection of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not
be used for the purpose of determining whether a violation of subsection (C)
or (D) of this section has been or is being committed.











   (F)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as
are necessary to carry out this section.











   (G)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a
child in a child restraint system, a booster seat or an occupant restraining
device as required by this section is not negligence imputable to the child,
is not admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the
child against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is
not to be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and
is not admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator
of the motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.











   (H)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that
threatens the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that
is being used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be
restrained under this section.  This section does not apply to a person
operating a motor vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed
to practice in this State under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor
licensed to practice in this State under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4734 that states
that the child who otherwise would be required to be restrained under this
section has a physical impairment that makes use of a child restraint system,
booster seat or an occupant restraining device impossible or impractical,
provided that the person operating the vehicle has safely and appropriately
restrained the child in accordance with any recommendations of the physician
or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit.











   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any
person to carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the
age of the child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child
showing that the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a
defense against any ticket, citation or summons issued for violating this
section.











   (J)   Whoever violates subsection (A), (B), (C) or (D) of this
section shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an
operator of a motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child
restraint system, booster seat, or occupant restraining device as required by
this section that occurred at the same time, on the same day, and at the same
location is deemed to be a single violation of this section:





      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (J)(2) of
this section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be
fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seventy-five
dollars ($75.00).





      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (A), (B), (C) or (D) of this
section or of a state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially
similar to any of those subsections, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree.





         (ORC 4511.81)










72.43  FAILURE TO USE OR ILLEGAL USE OF  REQUIRED IGNITION INTERLOCK DEVICE.




   (A)   As used in this section:





      (1)   IGNITION INTERLOCK DEVICE means a device that connects a
breath  analyzer to a motor vehicle's ignition system, that is constantly
available to monitor the concentration by weight of alcohol in the breath of
any person attempting to start that motor vehicle by using its ignition
system, and that deters starting the motor vehicle by use of its ignition
system unless the person attempting to so start the vehicle provides an
appropriate breath sample for the device and the device determines that the
concentration by weight of alcohol in the person's breath is below a preset
level.





      (2)   OFFENDER WITH RESTRICTED DRIVING PRIVILEGES means an
offender who is subject to an order that was issued under R.C. § 4507.16(F)
as a condition of the granting of occupational driving privileges or an
offender whose driving privilege is restricted as a condition of probation
pursuant to R.C. § 2951.02(I).











   (B)   (1)   Except in cases of a substantial emergency when no
other person is reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency,
no person shall knowingly rent, lease, or lend a motor vehicle to any
offender with restricted driving privileges unless the vehicle is equipped
with a functioning ignition interlock device that is certified pursuant to
R.C. § 4511.83(D).





      (2)   Any offender with restricted driving privileges who
rents, leases, or borrows a motor vehicle from another person shall notify
the person who rents, leases, or lends the motor vehicle to the offender that
the offender has restricted driving privileges and of the nature of the
restriction.





      (3)   Any offender with restricted driving privileges who is
required to operate a motor vehicle owned by the offender's employer in the
course and scope of the offender's employment may operate that vehicle
without the installation of an ignition interlock device, provided that the
employer has been notified that the offender has restricted driving
privileges and of the nature of the restriction and provided further that the
offender has proof of the employer's notification in the offender's
possession while operating the employer's vehicle for normal business
duties.  A motor vehicle owned by a business that is partly or entirely
owned or controlled by an offender with restricted driving privileges is not
a motor vehicle owned by an employer, for purposes of this division.











   (C)   (1)   No offender with restricted driving privileges,
during any period that the offender is required  to operate only  a 
motor  vehicle  equipped with an ignition interlock device, shall request
or permit any other person to breathe into the device or start a motor
vehicle equipped with the device, for the purpose of providing the offender
with an operable motor vehicle.





      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(2)(b) below,
no person shall breathe into an ignition interlock device or start a motor
vehicle equipped with an ignition interlock device for the purpose of
providing an operable motor vehicle to an offender with restricted driving
privileges.





         (b)   Division (C)(2)(a) above does not apply to an
offender with restricted driving privileges who breathes into an ignition
interlock device or starts a motor vehicle equipped with an ignition
interlock device for the purpose of providing himself or herself with an
operable motor vehicle.





      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent
the operation of an ignition interlock device. 
(R.C. § 4511.83)











   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree. 





(R.C. § 4511.99(I))










72.44  VEHICULAR OPERATION ON STREET CLOSED DUE TO RISE  IN WATER LEVEL.



   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street
or highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including
groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign
that specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and
that any person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to
two thousand dollars ($2,000).



 



   (B)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of
subsection (a) hereof is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and
waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but instead must
appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.



 



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.




      (2)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or
required under Section 501.99 and to any costs otherwise authorized or
required under any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of subsection
(a) hereof shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers for the
cost any such rescurer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any cost of
transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for treatment
of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of two thousand dollars ($2,000). 
If more than one rescuer was involved in the emergency response, the court
shall allocate the reimbursement proportionately, according to the cost each
rescuer incurred.  A financial sanction imposed under this section is a
judgment in favor of the rescuer and, subject to a determination of indigency
under division (B) of Ohio R.C. 2929.28, a rescuer may collect the financial
sanction in the same manner as provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.28.




 



   (D)   As used in this section:




      (1)   “Emergency medical service organization”,
“firefighting agency” and “private fire company” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 9.60.





      (2)   “Rescuer” means a state agency, political
subdivision, firefighting service, private fire company, or emergency medical
service organization. (ORC 4511.714.)

















INTOXICATION; RECKLESS OPERATION; SPEED










72.45  DRIVING OR PHYSICAL CONTROL WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.




   (A)   (1)   Operation Generally. No person shall operate any
vehicle within this Municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of
the following apply:





         (a)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a
drug of abuse, or a combination of them.





         (b)   The person has a concentration of eight-hundredths
of one per cent or more but less than seventeen-hundredths of one per cent by
weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.





         (c)   The person has a concentration of
ninety-six-thousandths of one per cent or more but less than two hundred
four-thousandths of one per cent by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the
person’s blood serum or plasma.





         (d)   The person has a concentration of eight-hundredths
of one gram or more but less than seventeen-hundredths of one gram by weight
of alcohol per two hundred ten liters of the person’s breath.





         (e)   The person has a concentration of
eleven-hundredths of one gram or more but less than two hundred thirty-eight-
thousandths of one gram by weight of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of
the person’s urine.





         (f)   The person has a concentration of
seventeen-hundredths of one per cent or more by weight per unit volume of
alcohol in the person’s whole blood.





         (g)   The person has a concentration of two hundred
four-thousandths of one per cent or more by weight per unit volume of alcohol
in the person’s blood serum or plasma.





         (h)   The person has a concentration of
seventeen-hundredths of one gram or more by weight of alcohol per two hundred
ten liters of the person’s breath.





         (i)   The person has a concentration of two hundred
thirty-eight-thousandths of one gram or more by weight of alcohol per one
hundred milliliters of the person’s urine.





         (j)   Except as provided in subsection (M) of this
section, the person has a concentration of any of the following controlled
substances or metabolites of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the
following:





            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine
in the person’s urine of at least five hundred nanograms of amphetamine per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in
the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least one hundred
nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.





            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in
the person’s urine of at least one hundred fifty nanograms of cocaine per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least fifty nanograms
of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.





            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine
metabolite in the person’s urine of at least one hundred fifty nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of cocaine metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least fifty nanograms of cocaine metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.





            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in
the person’s urine of at least two thousand nanograms of heroin per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of heroin in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least fifty nanograms
of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.





            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin
metabolite (6- monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten
nanograms of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl
morphine) in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least
ten nanograms of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of
the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.





            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in
the person’s urine of at least twenty-five nanograms of L.S.D. per
milliliter of the person’s urine or a concentration of L.S.D. in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of
L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.





            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana
in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana
per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.





            8.   Either of the following applies:





               a.   The person is under the influence of
alcohol, a drug of abuse or a combination of them, and the person has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least
fifteen nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of marihuana
metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.





               b.   The person has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least thirty-five
nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least fifty nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.





            9.   The person has a concentration of
methamphetamine in the person’s urine of at least five hundred nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration
of methamphetamine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least one hundred nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.





            10.   The person has a concentration of
phencyclidine in the person’s urine of at least twenty-five nanograms of
phencyclidine per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration
of phencyclidine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at
least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.




            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a
rule pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia
divinorum and the amount of salvinorin  A that constitute concentrations of
salvia divinorum and salvinorin A in a person's urine, in a person's whole
blood, or in a person's blood serum or plasma at or above which the person is
impaired for purposes of operating any vehicle within this Municipality, the
rule is in effect, and the person has a concentration of salvia divinorum or
salvinorin A of at least that amount so specified by rule in the person's
urine, in the person's whole blood, or in the person's blood serum or plasma.




      (2)   No person who, within twenty years of the conduct
described in subsection (A)(2)(a) of this section, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B),
or a municipal OVI offense shall do both of the following:





         (a)   Operate any vehicle within this Municipality while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or a combination of them;





         (b)   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the
vehicle as described in subsection (A)(2)(a) of this section, being asked by
a law enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under Ohio
R.C. 4511.191, and being advised by the officer in accordance with Ohio R.C.
4511.192 of the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission to the
test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.











   (B)   Operation After Under-Age Consumption. No person under
twenty-one years of age shall operate any vehicle within this Municipality,
if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:





      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least
two-hundredths of one per cent but less than eight-hundredths of one per cent
by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.





      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least
three-hundredths of one per cent but less than ninety-six-thousandths of one
per cent by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum
or plasma.





      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least
two-hundredths of one gram but less than eight-hundredths of one gram by
weight of alcohol per two hundred ten liters of the person’s breath.





      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least twenty-eight
one-thousandths of one gram but less than eleven-hundredths of one gram by
weight of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of the person’s urine.











   (C)   One Conviction Limitation.  In any proceeding arising out of
one incident, a person may be charged with a violation of subsection (A)(1)a.
or (A)(2) and a violation of subsection (B)(1), (2) or (3) of this section,
but the person may not be convicted of more than one violation of these
subsections. 





(ORC 4511.99)











   (D)   Physical Control.





      (1)   As used in this subsection, “physical control” means
being in the driver’s position of the front seat of a vehicle and having
possession of the vehicle’s ignition key or other ignition device.





      (2)   (a)   No person shall be in physical control of a
vehicle if, at the time of the physical control, any of the following apply:





            1.   The person is under the influence of alcohol,
a drug of abuse, or a combination of them.





            2.   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine contains at least the concentration of alcohol
specified in subsection (A)(1)(b), (c), (d) or (e) hereof.





            3.   Except as provided in subsection (D)(3) of
this section, the person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance
or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the
concentration specified in subsection (A)(1)(j) hereof.





         (b)   No person under twenty-one years of age shall be
in physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, or a combination of them or while the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine contains at least the concentration of
alcohol specified in subsection (B)(1) to (4) hereof.





      (3)   Subsection (D)(2)(a)3. of this section does not apply to
a person who is in physical control of a vehicle while the person has a
concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in subsection (A)(1)(j)
hereof, if both of the following apply:





         (a)   The person obtained the controlled substance
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs.





         (b)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the
controlled substance in accordance with the health professional’s
directions.











   (E)   Evidence; Tests. 





      (1)   (a)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court
proceeding for a violation of (A)(1)a. of this section or for any equivalent
offense, the result of any test of any blood or urine withdrawn and analyzed
at any health care provider, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2317.02, may be admitted
with expert testimony to be considered with any other relevant and competent
evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.





         (b)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court
proceeding for a violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section or for an
equivalent offense that is vehicle related, the court may admit evidence on
the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, controlled substances,
metabolites of a controlled substance, or a combination of them in the
defendant's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine or other bodily
substance at the time of the alleged violation as shown by chemical analysis
of the substance withdrawn within three hours of the time of the alleged
violation.  The three-hour time limit specified in this subsection regarding
the admission of evidence does not extend or affect the two-hour time limit
specified in Ohio R.C. 4511.192(A) as the maximum period of time during which
a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as described in that section.





            The court may admit evidence on the concentration of
alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them as described in this
section when a person submits to a blood, breath, urine or other bodily
substance test at the request of a law enforcement officer under Ohio R.C.
4511.191, or a blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search
warrant.  Only a physician, a registered nurse, an emergency medical
technician-intermediate, an emergency medical technician-paramedic or a
qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample
for the purpose of determining the alcohol, drug, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination content of the whole
blood, blood serum, or blood plasma.  This limitation does not apply to the
taking of breath or urine specimens.  A person authorized to withdraw blood
under this subsection may refuse to withdraw blood under this subsection, if
in that person's opinion, the physical welfare of the person would be
endangered by the withdrawing of blood.





            The bodily substance withdrawn under subsection
(E)(1)(b)  hereof shall be analyzed in accordance with methods approved by
the Director of Health by an individual possessing a valid permit issued by
the Director pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3701.143.





         (c)   As used in subsection (e)(1)B. of this section,
"emergency medical technician-intermediate" and "emergency medical
technician-paramedic" have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4765.01.





      (2)   In a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding
for violation of subsection (A) of this section or for an equivalent offense,
if there was at the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration
of less than the applicable concentration of alcohol specified in subsections
(A)(1)(b), (c), (d) and (e) of this section, or less than the applicable
concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance specified for a violation of subsection (A)(1)(j) of
this section, that fact may be considered with other competent evidence in
determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.  This subsection does
not limit or affect a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of subsection (B) of this section or for an equivalent offense that
is substantially equivalent to that subsection.





      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the
results of the chemical test shall be made available to the person or the
person’s attorney, immediately upon the completion of the chemical test
analysis.





         If the chemical test was obtained pursuant to subsection
(E)(1)(b)  hereof, the person tested may have a physician, a registered
nurse, or a qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist of the person’s
own choosing administer a chemical test or tests, at the person’s expense,
in addition to any administered at the request of a law enforcement officer.
If the person was under arrest as described in division (A)(5) of Ohio R.C.
4511.191, the arresting officer shall advise the person at the time of the
arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test taken at the
person's own expense.  If the person was under arrest other than described
in division (A)(5) of Ohio R.C. 4511.191, the form to be read to the person
to be tested, as required under Ohio R.C. 4511.192, shall state that the
person may have an independent test performed at the person's expense.  The
failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical test by a person shall
not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the chemical test or tests
taken at the request of a law enforcement officer.





      (4)   (a)   As used in subsections (E)(4)(b) and (c) of
this section, “national highway traffic safety administration” means the
National Traffic Highway Safety Administration established as an
administration of the United States Department of Transportation under 96
Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C.A. 105.





         (b)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court
proceeding for a violation of subsection (A), (B) or (D) of this section, of
a municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of
a municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the blood, breath or urine, if a law enforcement
officer has administered a field sobriety test to the operator or person in
physical control of the vehicle involved in the violation and if it is shown
by clear and convincing evidence that the officer administered the test in
substantial compliance with the testing standards for any reliable, credible,
and generally accepted field sobriety tests that were in effect at the time
the tests were administered, including, but not limited to, any testing
standards then in effect that were set by the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, all of the following apply:





            1.   The officer may testify concerning the
results of the field sobriety test so administered.





            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of
the field sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.





            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is
introduced under subsection (E)(4)(b)1. or 2. of this section and if the
testimony or evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court
shall admit the testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it
whatever  weight the trier of fact considers to be appropriate.





         (c)   Subsection (E)(4)(b) of this section does not
limit or preclude a court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a
person was supported by probable cause or its determination of any other
matter in a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type
described in that subsection, from considering evidence or testimony that is
not otherwise disallowed by subsection (E)(4)(b) of this section. 
(ORC 4511.19; 4511.194)











   (F)   Forensic Laboratory Reports. 





      (1)   Subject to subsection (F)(3) of this section, in any
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of
subsection (A)(1)(b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i) or (j) or (B)(1),
(2), (3) or (4) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is
substantially equivalent to any of those subsections, a laboratory report
from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the Department of Health
authorizing an analysis as described in this subsection that contains an
analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine, or other
bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information specified in
this subsection shall be admitted as prima-facie evidence of the information
and statements that the report contains.  The laboratory report shall
contain all of the following:





         (a)   The signature, under oath, of any person who
performed the analysis;





         (b)   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of
alcohol, a drug of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a
controlled substance, or a combination of them that was found;





         (c)   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory
director or a designee of the director that contains the name of each
certified analyst or test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s
or test performer’s employment relationship with the laboratory that issued
the report, and a notation that performing an analysis of the type involved
is part of the analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;





         (d)   An outline of the analyst’s or test
performer’s education, training, and experience in performing the type of
analysis involved and a certification that the laboratory satisfies
appropriate quality control standards in general and, in this particular
analysis, under rules of the Department of Health.





      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the
admission of evidence, a report of the type described in subsection (F)(1) of
this section is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in
any proceeding, other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding,
unless the prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s
attorney or, if the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.





      (3)   A report of the type described in subsection (F)(1) of
this section shall not be prima-facie evidence of the contents, identity, or
amount of any substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the
report pertains or the defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report,
the defendant or the defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the
person who signed the report.  The judge in the case may extend the
seven-day time limit in the interest of justice.











   (G)   Immunity From Liability For Withdrawing Blood. Except as
otherwise provided in this subsection, any physician, registered nurse,
emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.191
or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station, or clinic at which blood is
withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.191 or
4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability based upon a
claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a claim of
malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the person. 
The immunity provided in this subsection also extends to an emergency medical
service organization that employs an emergency medical
technician-intermediate or emergency medical technician-paramedic who
withdraws blood under this section.  The immunity provided in this
subsection is not available to a person who withdraws blood if the person
engaged in willful or wanton misconduct.





   As used in this subsection, "emergency medical technician-intermediate"
and "emergency medical technician-paramedic" have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 4765.01.











   (H)   General OVI Penalty. 





      (1)   Whoever violates any provision of subsections (A)(1)(a)
to (i) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the influence
of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them.  Whoever violates
subsection (A)(1)(j) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle while
under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite
of a controlled substance.  The court shall sentence the offender for either
offense under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929, and this Traffic Code, except as
otherwise authorized or required by subsections (H)(1)(a) to (e) of this
section:





         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in subsections
(H)(1)(b), (c), (d) or (e) of this section, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender to
all of the following:





            1.   If the sentence is being imposed for a
violation of subsections (A)(1)(a), (b), (c), (d), (e) or (j)  of this
section, a mandatory jail term of three consecutive days.  As used in this
subsection, three consecutive days means seventy-two consecutive hours.  The
court may sentence an offender to both an intervention program and a jail
term.  The court may impose a jail term in addition to the three-day
mandatory jail term or intervention program.  However, in no case shall the
cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months.





   The court may suspend the execution of the three-day jail term under
this subsection if the court, in lieu of that suspended term, places the
offender under a community control sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.25 and
requires the offender to attend, for three consecutive days, a drivers’
intervention program certified under Ohio R.C. 5119.38.. 





   The court also may suspend the execution of any part of the three-day
jail term under this subsection if it places the offender under a community
control sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.25 for part of the three days,
requires the offender to attend for the suspended part of the term a
drivers’ intervention program so certified, and sentences the offender to a
jail term equal to the remainder of the three consecutive days that the
offender does not spend attending the program.  The court may require the
offender, as a condition of community control and in addition to the required
attendance at a drivers’ intervention program, to attend and satisfactorily
complete any treatment or education programs that comply with the minimum
standards adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 5119 by the Director of
Mental Health and Addiction Services that the operators of the drivers’
intervention program determine that the offender should attend and to report
periodically to the court on the offender’s progress in the programs.  The
court also may impose on the offender any other conditions of community
control that it considers necessary.





If the court grants unlimited driving privileges to a first-time offender
under Ohio R.C. 4510.022, all penalties imposed upon the offender by the
court under subsection (h)(1)A.1. of this section for the offense apply,
except that the court shall suspend any mandatory or additional jail term
imposed by the court under subsection (h)(1)A.1. of this section upon
granting unlimited driving privileges in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4510.022.





            2.   If the sentence is being imposed for a
violation of subsection (A)(1)(f), (g), (h) or (i). or (A)(2) of this
section, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a mandatory jail
term of at least three consecutive days and a requirement that the offender
attend, for three consecutive days, a drivers’ intervention program that is
certified pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5119.38.  As used in this subsection, three
consecutive days means seventy-two consecutive hours.  If the court
determines that the offender is not conducive to treatment in a drivers’
intervention program, if the offender refuses to attend a drivers’
intervention program, or if the jail at which the offender is to serve the
jail term imposed can provide a drivers’ intervention program, the court
shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term of at least six
consecutive days.





               If the court grants unlimited driving
privileges to a first-time offender under Ohio R.C. 4510.022, all penalties
imposed upon the offender by the court under subsection (h)(1)A.2. of this
section for the offense apply, except that the court shall suspend any
mandatory or additional jail term imposed by the court under subsection
(h)(1)A.2. of this section upon granting unlimited driving privileges in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4510.022.





   The court may require the offender, under a community control sanction
imposed under Ohio R.C. 2929.25, to attend and satisfactorily complete any
treatment or education  programs that comply with the minimum standards
adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 5119 by the Director of Mental Health
and Addiction Services, in addition to the required attendance at drivers’
intervention program, that the operators of the drivers’ intervention
program determine that the offender should attend and to report periodically
to the court on the offender’s progress in the programs.  The court also
may impose any other conditions of community control on the offender that it
considers necessary.





            3.   In all cases, a fine of not less than three
hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00) and not more than one thousand
seventy-five dollars ($1,075).





            4.   In all cases, a suspension of the offender's
driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege for a definite period of one to three years.  The court may grant
limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under Ohio R.C.
4510.021 and 4510.13.  The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with
an ignition interlock device relative to the suspension and may reduce the
period of suspension as authorized under Ohio R.C. 4510.022.





         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection
(H)(1)(e) of this section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense,
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of
subsection (A) or (B) of this section or one other equivalent offense is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  The court shall sentence the
offender to all of the following:





            1.   If the sentence is being imposed for a
violation of subsection (A)(1)(a), (b), (c), (d), (e) or (j) of this section,
a mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days.  The court shall impose the
ten-day mandatory jail term under this subsection unless, subject to
subsection (H)(3) of this section, it instead imposes a sentence under that
subsection consisting of both a jail term and a term of house arrest with
electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both
electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring.  The court may
impose a jail term in addition to the ten-day mandatory jail term.  The
cumulative jail term imposed for the offense shall not exceed six months.





   In addition to the jail term or the term of house arrest with
electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring or both types of
monitoring and jail term, the court shall require the offender to be assessed
by a community addiction services provider that is authorized by Ohio R.C.
5119.21, subject to subsection (k) of this section, and shall order the
offender to follow the treatment recommendations of the services provider. 
The purpose of the assessment is to determine the degree of the offender's
alcohol usage and to determine whether or not treatment is warranted.  Upon
the request of the court, the services provider shall submit the results of
the assessment to the court, including all treatment recommendations and
clinical diagnoses related to alcohol use.





            2.   If the sentence is being imposed for a
violation of subsection (A)(1)(f), (g), (h) or (i) or (A)(2) of this section,
except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a mandatory jail term of
twenty consecutive days.  The court shall impose the twenty-day mandatory
jail term under this subsection unless, subject to subsection (H)(3) of this
section, it instead imposes a sentence under that subsection consisting of
both a jail term and a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with
continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.  The court may impose a jail term in addition
to the twenty- day mandatory jail term.  The cumulative jail term imposed
for the offense shall not exceed six months.




               In addition to the jail term or the term of
house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring or
both types of monitoring and jail term, the court shall require the offender
to be assessed by a community addiction services provider that is authorized
by Ohio R.C. 5119.21, subject to subsection (k) of this section, and shall
order the offender to follow the treatment recommendations of the services
provider.  The purpose of the assessment is to determine the degree of the
offender's alcohol usage and to determine whether or not treatment is
warranted.  Upon the request of the court, the services provider shall
submit the results of the assessment to the court, including all treatment
recommendations and clinical diagnoses related to alcohol use.




            3.   In all cases, notwithstanding the fines set
forth in Section 70.99, a fine of not less than five hundred twenty-five
dollars ($525.00) and not more than one thousand six hundred twenty-five
dollars ($1,625).





            4.   In all cases, a suspension of the offender's
driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege for a definite
period of one to seven years.  The court may grant limited driving
privileges relative to the suspension under Ohio R.C. 4510.021 and 4510.13. 
(ORC 4511.19)





            5.   In all cases, if the vehicle is registered in
the offender’s name, immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense
for ninety days in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233 and impoundment of the
license plates of that vehicle for ninety days. 
(ORC 4511.193)





         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection
(H)(1)e. of this section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense,
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of
subsection (A) or (B) of this section or other equivalent offenses is guilty
of a misdemeanor.  The court shall sentence the offender to all of the
following:





            1.   If the sentence is being imposed for a
violation of subsection (A)(1)(a), (b), (c), (d), (e) or (j) of this section,
a mandatory jail term of thirty consecutive days.  The court shall impose
the thirty-day mandatory jail term under this subsection unless, subject to
subsection (H)(3) of this section, it instead imposes a sentence under that
subsection consisting of both a jail term and a term of house arrest with
electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both
electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring.  The court may
impose a jail term in addition to the thirty- day mandatory jail term. 
Notwithstanding the jail terms set forth in Section 70.99, the additional
jail term shall not exceed one year, and the cumulative jail term imposed for
the offense shall not exceed one year.





            2.   If the sentence is being imposed for a
violation of subsection (A)(1)(f), (g), (h) or (i) or (A)(2) of this section,
a mandatory jail term of sixty consecutive days.  The court shall impose the
sixty-day mandatory jail term under this subsection unless, subject to
subsection (H)(3) of this section, it instead imposes a sentence under that
subsection consisting of both a jail term and a term of electronically
monitored house arrest with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both
electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring.  The court may
impose a jail term in addition to the sixty- day mandatory jail term. 
Notwithstanding the terms of imprisonment set forth in Section 70.99, the
additional jail term shall not exceed one year, and the cumulative jail term
imposed for the offense shall not exceed one year.





            3.   In all cases, notwithstanding the fines set
forth in Section 70.99, a fine of not less than eight hundred fifty dollars
($850.00) and not more than two thousand seven  hundred fifty dollars
($2,750).





            4.   In all cases, a suspension of the offender's
driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege for a definite
period of two to twelve years.  The court may grant limited driving
privileges relative to the suspension under Ohio R.C. 4510.021 and 4510.13. 
(ORC 4511.19)





            5.   In all cases, if the vehicle is registered in
the offender’s name, criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the
offense in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.234.  Subsection (H)(5) of this
section applies regarding any vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under this subsection. 
(ORC 4511.193)




            6.   In all cases, the court shall order the
offender to participate with a community addiction services provider
authorized by Ohio R.C. 5119.21, subject to subsection (K) of this section,
and shall order the offender to follow the treatment recommendations of the
services provider.  The operator of the program shall determine and assess
the degree of the offender's alcohol dependency and shall make
recommendations for treatment.  Upon the request of the court, the services
provider shall submit the results of the assessment to the court, including
all treatment recommendations and clinical diagnoses related to alcohol use.






         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection
(H)(1)(e) of this section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense,
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or four
violations of subsection (A) or (B) of this section or other equivalent
offenses or an offender who, within twenty years of the offense, previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to five or more violations of that
nature is guilty of a felony of the fourth degree and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.





         (e)   An offender who previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) that was a felony,
regardless of when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred,
is guilty of a felony of the third degree and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.





      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of subsection (A) of this section and who subsequently seeks
reinstatement of the driver’s or occupational driver’s license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege suspended under this section as a result
of the conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in
division (F)(2) of Ohio R.C. 4511.191.





      (3)   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under
subsection (H)(1)(b)1. or 2. or (H)(1)(c)1. or 2. of this section and if,
within sixty days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be
able to begin serving that term within the sixty-day period following the
date of sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence under this
subsection that includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring,
with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.





As an alternative to a mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days required
by subsection (H)(1)(b)1. of this section, the court, under this subsection,
may sentence the offender to five consecutive days in jail and not less than
eighteen consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with
continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.  The cumulative total of the five consecutive
days in jail and the period of house arrest with electronic monitoring,
continuous alcohol monitoring, or both types of monitoring shall not exceed
six months.  The five consecutive days in jail do not have to be served
prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest.





As an alternative to the mandatory jail term of twenty consecutive days
required by subsection (H)(1)(b)2. of this section, the court, under this
subsection, may sentence the offender to ten consecutive days in jail and not
less than thirty- six consecutive days of house arrest with electronic
monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic
monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring.  The cumulative total of the
ten consecutive days in jail and the period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring, continuous alcohol monitoring or both types of monitoring  shall
not exceed six months.  The ten consecutive days in jail do not have to be
served prior to or consecutively to the period of house arrest.





As an alternative to a mandatory jail term of thirty consecutive days
required by subsection (H)(1)(c)1. of this section, the court, under this
subsection, may sentence the offender to fifteen consecutive days in jail and
not less than fifty- five consecutive days of house arrest with electronic
monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic
monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring.  The cumulative total of the
fifteen consecutive days in jail and the period of house arrest with
electronic monitoring, continuous alcohol monitoring or both types of
monitoring  shall not exceed one year.  The fifteen consecutive days in
jail do not have to be served prior to or consecutively to the period of
house arrest.





As an alternative to the mandatory jail term of sixty consecutive days
required by subsection (H)(1)(c)2. of this section, the court, under this
subsection, may sentence the offender to thirty consecutive days in jail and
not less than one hundred ten consecutive days of house arrest with
electronic monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both
electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring.  The cumulative
total of the thirty consecutive days in jail and the period of house arrest
with electronic monitoring, continuous alcohol monitoring, or both types of
monitoring shall not exceed one year.  The thirty consecutive days in jail
do not have to be served prior to or consecutively to the period of house
arrest.





      (4)   If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under
subsection (H) of this section and if Ohio R.C. 4510.13 permits the court to
grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving
privileges in accordance with that section.  If division (A)(7) of that
section requires that the court impose as a condition of the privileges that
the offender must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the
privileges restricted license plates that are issued under Ohio R.C.
4503.231, except as provided in division (B) of that section, the court shall
impose that condition as one of the conditions of the limited driving
privileges granted to the offender, except as provided in division (B) of
Ohio R.C. 4503.231.





      (5)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order
of criminal forfeiture under this section is assigned or transferred and
division (B)(2) or (3) of Ohio R.C. 4503.234 applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the
national auto dealers association.  The proceeds of any fine so imposed
shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that section.





      (6)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under
subsection (h) of this section, the offender shall provide the court with
proof of financial responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If the
offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, the court,
in addition to any other penalties provided by law, may order restitution
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five
thousand dollars ($5,000) for any economic loss arising from an accident or
collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's
operation of the vehicle before, during or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under subsection (h) of this section.





      (7)   A court may order an offender to reimburse a law
enforcement agency for any costs incurred by the agency with respect to a
chemical test or tests administered to the offender if all of the following
apply:





         A.   The offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of subsection (A) of this section.





         B.   The test or tests were of the offender's whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine.





         C.   The test or tests indicated that the offender had a
prohibited concentration of a controlled substance or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the offender's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine at the time of the offense.





      (8)   As used in subsection (H) of this section, “electronic
monitoring”, “mandatory prison term” and “mandatory term of local
incarceration” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.











   (I)   Vehicle Operation After Underage Alcohol Consumption Penalty.
Whoever violates subsection (B) of this section is guilty of operating a
vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows:





      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (i)(2) of
this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
In addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall
impose a class six suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(6)
of Ohio R.C. 4510.02.





         The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to
the suspension under Ohio R.C. 4510.021 and 4510.13.  The court may grant
unlimited driving privileges with an ignition interlock device relative to
the suspension and may reduce the period of suspension as authorized under
Ohio R.C. 4510.022.  If the court grants unlimited driving privileges under
Ohio R.C. 4510.022, the court shall suspend any jail term imposed under
subsection (i)(1) of this section as required under that section.





      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of subsection (a) or (b) of this section or other equivalent offenses, the
offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.  In addition to any
other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class four
suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in division (A)(4) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02. 
The court may grant limited driving privileges relative to the suspension
under Ohio R.C. 4510.021 and 4510.13.





      (3)   If the offender also is convicted of or also pleads
guilty to a specification of the type described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1416 and if
the court imposes a jail term for the violation of subsection (B) of this
section, the court shall impose upon the offender an additional definite jail
term pursuant to division (E) of Ohio R.C. 2929.24. 





      (4)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If the offender
fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to
any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 2929.28, in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars
($5,000) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was
the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle
before, during or after committing the violation of subsection (b) of this
section. (ORC 4511.19)











   (J)   Physical Control Penalty.  Whoever violates subsection (D)
hereof is guilty of having physical control of a vehicle while under the
influence, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  In addition to other
sanctions imposed, the court may impose on the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of Ohio R.C.
4510.02. 
(ORC 4511.194)











   (K)   Compliance With Ohio R.C. Chapter 5119 Standards.





      (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol
treatment program under this section unless the treatment program complies
with the minimum standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under Ohio
R.C. Chapter 5119 by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.





      (2)   An offender who stays in a driver’s intervention
program or in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this
section shall pay the cost of the stay in the program.  However, if the
court determines that an offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program
under an order issued under this section is unable to pay the cost of the
stay in the program, the court may order that the cost be paid from the
court’s indigent drivers’ alcohol treatment fund.











   (L)   Appeal Does Not Stay Operation of License Suspension.  If a
person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege is suspended under this section files an
appeal regarding any aspect of the person’s trial or sentence, the appeal
itself does not stay the operation of the suspension.











   (M)   Subsection (A)(1)(j) of this section does not apply to a
person who operates a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a
listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance
in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or
exceeds the amount specified in that subsection, if both of the following
apply:





      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to
a prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs.





      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled
substance in accordance with the health professional’s directions.











   (N)   The prohibited concentrations of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance listed in subsection (A)(1)(j) of this
section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.16(D) in
the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for a prohibited
concentration of alcohol.











   (O)   Conflict of Terms. All terms defined in Ohio R.C. 4510.01
apply to this section.  If the meaning of a term defined in Ohio R.C .
4510.01 conflicts with the meaning of the same term as defined in Ohio R.C.
4501.01 or this Traffic Code, the term as defined in Ohio R.C. 4510.01
applies to this section. 
(ORC 4511.19)











   (P)   Indigent Drivers Alcohol Treatment Fund. Twenty-five dollars
($25.00) of any fine imposed for a violation of subsection (A) hereof shall
be deposited into the municipal or county indigent





drivers alcohol treatment fund pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.193. 
(ORC 4511.193)











   (Q)   Definitions. As used in this section:





      (1)   “Equivalent offense” means any of the following:





         (a)   A violation of division (A) or (B) of Ohio R.C.
4511.19;





         (b)   A violation of a municipal OVI ordinance;





         (c)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.04 in a case in
which the offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of
that section;





         (d)   A violation of division (A)(1) of Ohio R.C.
2903.06 or 2903.08 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent
to either of those divisions;





         (e)   A violation of division (A)(2), (3) or (4) of Ohio
R.C. 2903.06, division (A)(2) of Ohio R.C. 2903.08, or former Ohio R.C.
2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those divisions or that former section, in a case in which a judge or jury as
the trier of fact found that the offender was under the influence of alcohol,
a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;





         (f)   A violation of division (A) or (B) of Ohio R.C.
1547.11;





         (g)   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a
person from operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or
from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters
of this State while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in
physical control of any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis,
aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this State with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or
urine;





         (h)   A violation of an existing or former municipal
ordinance, law of another state, or law of the United States that is
substantially equivalent to division (A) or (B) of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or
division (A) or (B) of Ohio R.C. 1547.11;





         (i)   A violation of a former law of this State that was
substantially equivalent to division (A) or (B) of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or
division (A) or (B) of Ohio R.C. 1547.11;





      (2)   “Mandatory jail term” means the mandatory term in
jail of three, six, ten, twenty, thirty, or sixty days that must be imposed
under subsection (H)(1)a., b. or c. upon an offender convicted of a violation
of subsection (A) hereof and in relation to which all of the following apply:





         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under this
section, the term must be served in a jail.





         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under this
section, the term cannot be suspended, reduced or otherwise modified pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, or any other provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.





      (3)   “Municipal OVI ordinance” and “municipal OVI
offense” mean any municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a
vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them or prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a
prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite
of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum, or plasma, breath
or urine.





      (4)   “Community residential sanction”, “jail”,
“mandatory prison term”, “mandatory term of local incarceration”,
“sanction” and “prison term” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
2929.01.





      (5)   “Drug of abuse” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4506.01.





(ORC 4511.181)










72.46  RECKLESS OPERATION ON STREETS,  PUBLIC, OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.




   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in
willful or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
(R.C. § 4511.20)











   (B)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private
property other than streets or highways, in willful or wanton disregard of
the safety of persons or property.  This section does not apply to the
competitive operation of vehicles on public or private property when the
owner of the property knowingly permits the operation thereon.





(R.C. § 4511.201) (Ord. 2376, passed 4-12-83)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.47  MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS; ASSURED CLEAR DISTANCE AHEAD.




   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or
less than is reasonable or proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface
and width of the street or highway, and any other conditions.  No person
shall drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater
speed than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.











   (B)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit
declared or established pursuant to this section by the State Director of
Transportation or local authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle, to
operate the same at a speed not exceeding the following:





      (1)   A.   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during
school recess and while children are going to or leaving school during the
opening or closing hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs
are erected; except, that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if
the right-of-way line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the
speed shall be governed by division (B) (4) of this section and on freeways,
if the right-of-way line fence has been erected without  pedestrian opening,
the speed shall be governed by division (B) (7) of this section.  The end of
every school zone may be marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone. 
Nothing in this section or in the manual and specifications for a uniform
system of traffic-control devices shall be construed to require school zones
to be indicated by signs equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving
other special notice of the hours in which the school zone speed limit is in
effect.





         B.   As used in this section, and R.C. § 4511.212,
SCHOOL means any school chartered under R.C. § 3301.16 and any nonchartered
school that during the preceding year filed with the State Department of
Education in compliance with rule 3301-35-08 of the Ohio Administrative Code,
a copy of the school's report for the parents of the school's pupils
certifying that the school meets Ohio minimum standards for nonchartered,
non-tax supported schools  and presents  evidence of  this  filing  to 
the jurisdiction from which it is requesting the establishment of a school
zone.





         C.   As used in this section, SCHOOL ZONE means that
portion of a street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or
highway that is encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the
fronting street or highway, and also includes that portion of a state
highway.  Upon request from local authorities for streets and highways under
their jurisdiction and that portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction
of the State Director of Transportation, the Director may extend the
traditional school zone boundaries.  The distance shall not exceed 300 feet
per approach per direction, and be bounded by whichever of the following
distances or combinations thereof the Director of Transportation approves as
most appropriate:





            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the
school building lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance
of 300 feet on each approach direction;





            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the
school property lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a
distance of 300 feet on each approach direction;





            3.   The distance encompassed by the special
marking of the pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a
distance of 300 feet on each approach direction the highway.





   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the Director's
initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at the
traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property
lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in division
(B)(1)C. 1. through 3. of this section.





      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
city, except on state routes, through highways outside business districts,
and alleys;





      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or
through highways within the city outside business districts, except as
provided in divisions (B) (4) and (5) of this section;





      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and
expressways within the city;





      (5)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the city
outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;





      (6)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the city;




      (7)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways with
paved shoulders inside the Municipality other than freeways as provided in
subsection (B)(10) and (12);



      (8)   Sixty miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle
at all times on all portions of rural divided highways;



      (9)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor
vehicle at all times on rural expressways without traffic control signals;



      (10)   Seventy miles per hour for operators of any motor
vehicle at all times on all rural freeways.



      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor
vehicle at all times on all portions of freeways in congested areas as
determined by the Director and that are part of the interstate system and are
located within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway
outerbelt;



      (12)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor
vehicle at all times  on all portions of freeways in urban areas as
determined by the Director and that are part of the interstate system and are
part of an interstate freeway outerbelt;










   (C)   It is prima-facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the
speed limitations in subsection (B)(1)(a) to  (B)(6) hereof, or any declared
or established pursuant to this section by the Director or local authorities
and it is unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed limitations in
subsection (D) hereof.  No person shall be convicted of more than one
violation of this section for the same conduct, although violations of more
than one provision of this section may be charged in the alternative in a
single affidavit.











   (D)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or
highway as follows:





      (1)   At a speed exceeding fifty-five miles per hour, except
upon a highway, expressway or freeway as provided in subsection (B)(8), (9),
(10) and (12) hereof;





      (2)   At a speed exceeding sixty miles per hour upon a highway
as provided in subsection (B)(8) hereof;





      (3)   At a speed exceeding sixty-five miles per hour upon an
expressway as provided in subsection (B)(9) hereof, except upon a freeway as
provided in subsection (B)(10) hereof;





      (4)   At a speed exceeding seventy miles per hour upon a
freeway as provided in subsection (B)(10) hereof;





      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a
highway, expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and
declared a speed limit pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).











   (E)   In every charge of violation of this section the affidavit and
warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at which the defendant is
alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance upon subsection (C)
hereof also the speed which subsections (B)(1)(a) to (B)(6) hereof, or a
limit declared or established pursuant to this section declares is
prima-facie lawful at the time and place of such alleged violation, except
that in affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater
speed than will permit the person to bring the vehicle to a stop within the
assured clear distance ahead the affidavit and warrant need not specify the
speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven.











   (F)   When a speed in excess of both a prima-facie limitation and a
limitation in subsection (D) hereof is alleged, the defendant shall be
charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act, with a violation
indicated of both subsections (B)(1)(a) to (B)(6) hereof, or of a limit
declared or established pursuant to this section by the Director or local
authorities, and of the limitation in subsection (D) hereof.  If the court
finds a violation of subsection (B)(1)(a) to (B)(6) hereof, or a limit
declared or established pursuant to this section has occurred, it shall enter
a judgment of conviction under such subsection and dismiss the charge under
subsection (D) hereof.  If it finds no violation of subsections (B)(1)(a) to
(B)(6) hereof or a limit declared or established pursuant to this section, it
shall then consider whether the evidence supports a conviction under
subsection (D) hereof.











   (G)   Points shall be assessed for violation of a limitation under
subsection (D) hereof in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4510.036.











   (H)   Whenever, in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or this
section, the speed limitations as established herein have been altered,
either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been
erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the
speed limitations set forth on such signs.  It is prima-facie unlawful for
any person to exceed the speed limits posted upon such signs.











   (I)   As used in this section:





      (1)   URBANIZED AREA and INTERSTATE SYSTEM.  Have the same
meanings as in 23 U.S.C.A. 101.





      (2)   COMMERCIAL BUS.  Means a motor vehicle designed for
carrying more than nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons
for compensation.





      (3)   NONCOMMERCIAL BUS.  Includes but is not limited to a
school bus, or a motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of
persons associated with a charitable or nonprofit organization.





      (4)   OUTERBELT. A portion of a freeway that is part of the
interstate system and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal
corporation or group of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.





      (5)   RURAL.  Outside urbanized areas, as designated in
accordance with 23 USC 101, and outside of a business or urban district.











   (J)   (1)   A violation of any provision of this section is one
of the following:





         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in subsections
(J)(1)(b), (1)(c), (2) and (3) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;





         (b)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any
provision of this section or of any provision of a municipal ordinance that
is substantially similar to any provision of this section, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree;





         (c)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of any provision of this section or of any provision of a
municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any provision of this
section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.





      (2)   If the offender has not previously been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of any provision of Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or of any
provision of a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to Ohio R.C.
4511.21 and operated a motor vehicle faster than thirty-five miles an hour in
a business district of a municipal corporation, faster than fifty miles an
hour in other portions of a municipal corporation, or faster than thirty-five
miles an hour in a school zone during recess or while children are going to
or leaving school during the school’s opening or closing hours, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.





      (3)   Notwithstanding subsection (J)(1) of this section, if
the offender operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was
then posted in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.98, the court, in addition to
all other penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of
two times the usual amount imposed for the violation.  No court shall impose
a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation upon an
offender if the offender alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior
to the offender’s sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable
to pay the fine imposed pursuant to this subsection and if the court
determines that the offender is an indigent person and unable to pay the
fine. 
(ORC 4511.21)










72.48  SLOW SPEED; POSTED MINIMUM SPEEDS.



   (A)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an
unreasonably slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable
movement of traffic, except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for
safe operation or to comply with law.



 



   (B)   Whenever, in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.22(B), the minimum
speed limit of a controlled-access highway, expressway or freeway has been
declared and the appropriate signs giving notice have been erected as
required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on such signs.  No person shall operate a motor
vehicle below the speed limits posted upon such signs except when necessary
for safe operation or in compliance with law.










   (C)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of
fact, in determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an
unreasonably slow speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and
its operator. 
(ORC 4511.22)










72.49  SPEED LIMITATIONS OVER BRIDGES.




   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a street at a speed which is
greater than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to the
bridge or structure, when the structure is posted with authorized signs
stating the maximum speed.  The signs shall be erected and maintained at a
distance of at least 100 feet before each end of the structure.











   (B)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this
section, proof of the determination of the maximum speed and the existence of
the signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the maximum speed which
can be maintained with safety to the bridge or structure. 
(R.C. § 4511.23)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.50  SPEED EXCEPTIONS FOR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.



   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in § 72.47 do not apply to
emergency vehicles or public safety vehicles when they are responding to
emergency calls and are equipped with and displaying at least one flashing,
rotating, or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions
from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and when the drivers
thereof sound audible signals by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle.  This
section does not relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the street or highway.




(R.C. § 4511.24)










72.51  STREET RACING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   As used in this section and in R.C. §§ 4507.021 and 4507.16,
STREET RACING means the operation of 2 or more vehicles from a point side by
side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to out-distance each
other or the operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected course,
from the same point to the same point, wherein timing is made of the
participating vehicle involving competitive accelerations or speeds.



 



   (B)   Persons rendering assistance in any manner to the competitive
use of vehicles shall be equally charged as the participants.



 



   (C)   The operation of 2 or more vehicles side by side either at
speeds in excess of prima facie lawful speeds established by § 72.47 or
rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in excess of
such prima-facie lawful speeds shall be prima-facie evidence of street racing.



 



   (D)   No person shall participate in street racing upon any public
road, street or highway in this municipality. 



 



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  In addition to any other sanctions, the
court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or
nonresident operating privilege for not less than thirty days or more than
three years.  No judge shall suspend the first thirty days of any suspension
of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege imposed under this
subsection. 




(ORC 4511.251)










72.52  TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway,
or property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using a handheld
electronic wireless communications device to write, send, or read a
text-based communication.



 



   (B)   Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:




      (1)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless
communications device in that manner for emergency purposes, including an
emergency contact with a law enforcement agency, hospital or health care
provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or entity;





      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle who uses a
handheld electronic wireless communications device in that manner in the
course of the person's duties;





      (3)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless
communications device in that manner whose motor vehicle is in a stationary
position and who is outside a lane of travel;





      (4)   A person reading, selecting, or entering a name or
telephone number in a handheld electronic wireless communications device for
the purpose of making or receiving a telephone call;





      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on a device
regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle; safety-related
information, including emergency, traffic or weather alerts; or data used
primarily by the motor vehicle;





      (6)   A person receiving wireless messages via radio waves;





      (7)   A person using a device for navigation purposes;





      (8)   A person conducting wireless interpersonal communication
with a device that does not require manually entering letters, numbers, or
symbols or reading text messages, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate
the device or a feature or function of the device;





      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a
mobile data terminal that transmits and receives data;





      (10)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless
communications device in conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free
device feature or function of the vehicle.




 



   (C)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated
on any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of subsection (a) of this section has been or
is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or
summons for a violation of that nature or causing the arrest of or commencing
a prosecution of a person for a violation of that nature, and no law
enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any
automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of that nature has been or is being committed.



 



   (D)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.



 



   (E)   A prosecution for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.204 does not
preclude a prosecution for a violation of a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance based on the same conduct.  However, if an offender is
convicted of  or pleads guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.204 and is
also convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance based on the same conduct, the two offenses
are allied offenses of similar import under Ohio R.C. 2941.25.



 



   (F)   As used in this section:




      (1)   "Electronic wireless communications device" includes any
of the following:





         (a)   A wireless telephone;





         (b)   A text-messaging device;





         (c)   A personal digital assistant;





         (d)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a
computer tablet;





         (e)   Any other substantially similar wireless device
that is designed or used to communicate text.





      (2)   "Voice-operated or hands-free device" means a device
that allows the user to vocally compose or send, or to listen to a text-based
communication without the use of either hand except to activate, or
deactivate a feature or function.





      (3)   "Write, send or read a text-based communication" means
to manually write or send, or read a text-based communication using an
electronic wireless communications device, including manually writing or
sending,  or reading communications referred to as text messages, instant
messages, or electronic mail.




         (ORC 4511.204)



 



72.53  APPROACHING A STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY, EMERGENCY OR ROAD SERVICE
VEHICLE.



   (A)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary
public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, vehicle used
by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4923.04 and 4923.06 or a highway maintenance
vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals by means of
flashing, oscillating or rotating lights, as prescribed in Section 72.85,
shall do either of the following:



      (1)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a
street or highway that consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in
the same direction of travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the
driver shall proceed with due caution and, if possible with due regard to the
road, weather, and traffic conditions, shall change lanesinto a lane that is
not adjacent to that of the stationary public safety vehicle, emergency
vehicle, road service vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities
Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with Ohio R.C.
4923.04 and 4923.06 or a highway maintenance vehicle.



      (2)   If the driver is not traveling on a street or highway of
a type described in subsection (A)(1) of this section, or if the driver is
traveling on a highway of that type but it is not possible to change lanes or
if to do so would be unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution,
reduce the speed of the motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the
road, weather and traffic conditions.



 



   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety
vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, vehicle used by the Public
Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with
Ohio R.C. 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle from the duty
to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the
highway.



 



   (C)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance
with subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this section when so required by subsection
(A) of this section.



 



   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (2)   Notwithstanding Section 303.99(B), upon a finding that a
person operated a motor vehicle in violation of subsection (C) of this
section, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall
impose a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation.  (ORC
4511.213)



 










LICENSING; ACCIDENTS










72.55  DRIVER'S LICENSE OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED.




   (A)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under Ohio
R.C. 4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a
public road or highway or any public or private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this Municipality unless the
person has a valid driver's license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 or a
commercial driver's license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506.











      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under Ohio
R.C. 4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a
public road or highway or any public or private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this Municipality unless the
person has a valid license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon
application by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio R.C. Chapter
4507.  The license shall be in the form of an endorsement, as determined by
the Registrar, upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s license, if the
person has a valid license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor
vehicle, or in the form of a restricted license as provided in Ohio R.C.
4507.14, if the person does not have a valid license to operate a motor
vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.











   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima-facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver's or commercial driver's license at the time of the alleged violation
of subsection (A)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle
operator either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver's or commercial
driver's license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation
of subsection (A)(2) of this section.  The person charged with a violation
of subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this
prima-facie evidence.











   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as
follows:





      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has
held a valid driver's or commercial driver's license issued by this state or
any other jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle
by the offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a
motorcycle operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver's or
commercial driver's license or in the form of a restricted license, except as
otherwise provided in this subsection, the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor.  When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the
offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be
sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26;
notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of Ohio R.C. 2929.28, the offender may be
fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000); and, notwithstanding division
(A)(3) of Ohio R.C. 2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division
(C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to five
hundred hours.  The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under division (A) of Ohio R.C. 2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying
case.  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
any violation of Ohio R.C. 4510.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.





      (2)   If the offender's driver's or commercial driver's
license or permit or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by
the offender, the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license bearing
the motorcycle endorsement or the offender's restricted license was expired
at the time of the offense, except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
the offense is a minor misdemeanor.  If, within three years of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or
more violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.











   (D)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first
violation of this section or if more than three years have passed since the
offender's last violation of Ohio R.C. 4510.12 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.











   (E)   If the offender is sentenced under subsection (C)(2) hereof,
if within three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.12 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and if the offender's license
was expired for more than six months at the time of the offense, the court
may impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in
division (A)(7) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02.  (ORC 4510.12)










72.56  PERMITTING OPERATION WITHOUT VALID LICENSE; ONE LICENSE PERMITTED.




   (A)   No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking knowing the operator does not have a valid driver’s
license issued to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver’s license issued under Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4506.











   (B)   No person shall receive a driver's license, or a motorcycle
operator's endorsement of a driver's or commercial driver's license, unless
and until he surrenders to the Registrar all valid licenses issued to him by
another jurisdiction recognized by the State of Ohio.  No person shall be
permitted to have in his possession more than one valid license at any time. 
(ORC 4507.02)











   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of an unclassified
misdemeanor.  When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the
offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be
sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26;
notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of Ohio R.C. 2929.28, the offender may be
fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000) and, notwithstanding division
(A)(3) of Ohio R.C. 2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division
(C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to five
hundred hours.  The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under division (A) of Ohio R.C. 2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying
case.  If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of Ohio R.C.
4507.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.





      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (B) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4507.02; 4507.99)










72.561   OHIO DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED FOR IN STATE RESIDENTS.



   (A)   Any person who becomes a resident of this State, within thirty
days of becoming a resident, shall surrender any driver's license issued by
another state to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a Deputy Registrar.  If
such a person intends to operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads or
highways, the person shall apply for a driver's license in this State.  If
the person fails to apply for a driver's license within thirty days of
becoming a resident, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in this
Municipality under a license issued by another state.



 



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



 



      (2)   The offense established under subsection (B)(1) of this
section is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable
mental state for purposes of Ohio R.C. 2901.20.  The designation of this
offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that
any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is
not a strict liability offense.



 



   (C)   For purposes of subsection (A) of this section, "resident"
means any person to whom any of the following applies:



 



      (1)   The person maintains their principal residence in this
State and does not reside in this State as a result of the person's active
service in the United States Armed Forces.



 



      (2)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles to be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the
Registrar under Ohio R.C. 4507.01.  (ORC 4507.213)









72.57  DRIVING WITH TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION PERMIT; CURFEW.




   (A)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under Ohio
R.C. 4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in violation of the following conditions:





      (1)   If the permit is issued to a person who is at least
fifteen years six months of age, but less than sixteen years of age:





         (a)   The permit and identification card are in the
holder’s immediate possession;





         (b)   The holder is accompanied by an eligible adult who
actually occupies the seat beside the permit holder and does not have a
prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A);





         (c)   The total number of occupants of the vehicle does
not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.





      (2)   If the permit is issued to a person who is at least
sixteen years of age:





         (a)   The permit and identification card are in the
holder’s immediate possession;





         (b)   The holder is accompanied by a licensed operator
who is at least twenty-one years of age and is actually occupying a seat
beside the driver and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in
the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in Ohio
R.C. 4511.19(A);





         (c)   The total number of occupants of the vehicle does
not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.











   (B)   Except as provided in subsection (B) hereof, no holder of a
temporary instruction permit that is issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.05(A) and
that is issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age of
eighteen years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking between the hours of midnight and six a.m.




   The holder of a permit issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.05(A) on or after
July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of eighteen years, may operate a
motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of
midnight and six a.m. if, at the time of such operation, the holder is
accompanied by the holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian, and the parent,
guardian or custodian holds a current valid driver’s or commercial
driver’s license issued by this State and is actually occupying a seat
beside the permit holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of
alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as
provided in Section 72.45(A).










   (C)   As used in this section:





      (1)   “Eligible adult” means any of the following:





         (a)   An instructor of a driver education course
approved by the Department of Education or a driver training course
approved  by the Department of Public Safety;





         (b)   Any of the following persons who holds a current
valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this State:





            1.   A parent, guardian or custodian of the permit
holder;





            2.   A person twenty-one years of age or older who
acts in loco parentis of the permit holder.





      (2)   “Occupant restraining device” has the same meaning
as in Ohio R.C. 4513.263. 











   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.





(ORC 4507.05)










72.571 DRIVING WITH PROBATIONARY LICENSE; CURFEW.




   (A)   (1)   (a)   No holder of a probationary driver's license
who has held the license for less than twelve months shall operate a motor
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and
six a.m. unless the holder is accompanied by the holder's parent or guardian.











         (b)   No holder of a probationary driver's license who
has held the license for twelve months or longer shall operate a motor
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of one a.m. and
five a.m. unless the holder is accompanied by the holder's parent or guardian.











      (2)   (a)   Subject to subsection (C)(1) of this section,
subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section does not apply to the holder of a
probationary driver's license who is doing either of the following:





            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours
of midnight and six a.m. provided that the holder has in the holder's
immediate possession written documentation from the holder's employer.











            2.   Traveling to or from an official function
sponsored by the school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and
six a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder's immediate possession
written documentation from an appropriate official of the school;











            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious
event between the hours of midnight and six a.m., provided that the holder
has in the holder's immediate possession written documentation from an
appropriate official affiliated with the event.











         (b)   Subsection (A)(1)(b) of this section does not
apply to the holder of a probationary driver's license who is doing either of
the following:











            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours
of one a.m. and five a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder's
immediate possession written documentation from the holder's employer.











            2.   Traveling to or from an official function
sponsored by the school the holder attends between the hours of one a.m. and
five a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder's immediate possession
written documentation from an appropriate official of the school;











            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious
event between the hours of one a.m. and five a.m., provided that the holder
has in the holder's immediate possession written documentation from an
appropriate official affiliated with the event.











      (3)   An employer, school official or official affiliated with
a religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related
to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with
a religious event provided the holder of a  probationary driver's license
with the written documentation described in subsection (A)(2) of this section.











         The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no
cost a form to serve as the written documentation described in subsection
(A)(2) of this section, and employers, school officials, officials affiliated
with religious events, and holders of probationary driver's licenses may
utilize that form or may choose to utilize any other written documentation to
meet the requirements of that subsection.











      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver's license who has
held the license for less than twelve months shall operate a motor vehicle
upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking with more than one person who is not
a family member occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder
is accompanied by the probationary license holder's parent, guardian or
custodian.











   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of subsection
(A)(1)(a) or (b) of this section if, at the time of the violation, an
emergency existed that required the holder of the probationary driver's
license to operate a motor vehicle in violation of subsection (A)(1)(a) or
(b) of this section; or the holder was an emancipated minor.











   (C)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver's license
prior to attaining the age of seventeen years and the person pleads guilty
to, is convicted of, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed
a moving violation during the six-month period commencing on the date on
which the person is issued the probationary driver's license, the court with
jurisdiction over the violation may order that the holder must be accompanied
by the holder's parent or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking for a period not to exceed six
months or the date the holder attains the age of seventeen years, whichever
occurs first.











      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions
established under subsection (C)(1) of this section as a result of a first
moving violation may petition the court for driving privileges without being
accompanied by the holder's parent or guardian during the period of time
determined by the court under that subsection.  In granting the driving
privileges, the court shall specify the purposes of the privileges and shall
issue the person appropriate forms setting forth the privileges granted.  If
a person is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile
court of having committed a second or subsequent moving violation, the court
with jurisdiction over the violation may terminate any driving privileges
previously granted under this division.











      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction
imposed under subsection (C)(1) or (2) of this section.











   (D)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of
occupants of the vehicle does not exceed the total number of occupant
restraining devices originally installed in the motor vehicle by its
manufacturer, and each occupant of the vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.











   (E)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no
law enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being
operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole
purpose of determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device as required by subsection (d) hereof, or for the sole purpose of
issuing a ticket, citation, or summons if the requirement in that subsection
has been or is being violated, or for causing the arrest of or commencing a
prosecution of a person for a violation of that requirement.











   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no
law enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being
operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole
purpose of determining whether a violation of subsection (A)(1)(a) or (b)
hereof has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation, or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest
of or commencing a prosecution of a person for such violation.











   (G)   As used in this section:





      (1)   “Occupant restraining device” has the same meaning
as in Ohio R.C. 4513.263.





      (2)   “Family member” of a probationary license holder
includes any of the following:





         (a)   A spouse;





         (b)   A child or stepchild;





         (c)   A parent, stepparent, grandparent, or
parent-in-law;





         (d)   An aunt or uncle;





         (e)   A sibling, whether or the whole or half blood  or
by adoption, a brother- in-law or a sister-in-law;





         (f)   A son or daughter of the probationary license
holder’s stepparent if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary
license holder;





         (g)   An eligible adult, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4507.05.





      (3)   “Moving violation” means any violation of any
statute or ordinance that regulates the operation of vehicles, streetcars, or
trackless trolleys on the highways or streets.  “Moving violation” does
not include a violation of Ohio R.C. 4513.263 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance regulating
pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load limitations,
vehicle fitness requirements, or vehicle registration.











   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.





(ORC 4507.071)










72.572 USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICE PROHIBITED WHILE
DRIVING.




   (A)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not
attained the age of eighteen years and no holder of a probationary driver's
license shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used
by the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any
manner an electronic wireless communications device.











   (B)   Subsection (A) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:





      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications
device for emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law
enforcement agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or
other similar emergency agency or entity;





      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications
device whose motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle
is outside a lane of travel;





      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated
or hands-free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.











   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this
section, whoever violates subsection (A) of this section shall be fined one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).  In addition, the court shall impose a
class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license or permit for a
definite period of sixty days.





      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a
delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this
section, whoever violates this section shall be fined three hundred dollars
($300.00).  In addition, the court shall impose a class seven suspension of
the person's driver's license or permit for a definite period of one year.











   (D)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.205 does not preclude the filing of a sworn
complaint for a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
for the same conduct.  However, if a person is adjudicated a delinquent
child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.205
and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for
a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for the same
conduct, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar import under Ohio
R.C. 2941.25.











   (E)   As used in this section, "electronic wireless communications
device" includes any of the following:





      (1)   A wireless telephone;





      (2)   A personal digital assistant;





      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer
tablet;





      (4)   A text-messaging device;





      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless
device that is designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written
word. 
(ORC 4511.205)










72.58  CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.




   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:





      (1)   Display, or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess
any identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit or commercial driver's license temporary instruction
permit knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended
or altered;





      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly
permit a person not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver's
or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending
or permitting the use thereof;





      (3)   Display or represent as one's own, any identification
card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit
or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;





      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
upon the Registrar’s demand, any identification card, driver's or
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit that has been suspended or
canceled;





      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver's
or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit, or any renewal or duplicate
thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact, or present any physician's
statement required under Ohio R.C. 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same
to be false or fictitious. 











   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.





(ORC 4507.30)










72.59  WRONGFUL ENTRUSTMENT OF A MOTOR VEHICLE.




   (A)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or
under the person’s control to be driven by another if any of the following
apply:





      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the other person does not have a valid driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or valid nonresident driving privileges.





      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the other person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privileges have been suspended or canceled
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510, or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code
or this Traffic Code.





      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the other person’s act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any
prohibition contained in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4509.





      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the other person’s act of driving would violate Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.





      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued
under Ohio R.C. 4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating
the vehicle under that order.











   (B)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other
evidence in determining whether a violation of subsection (A)(1), (2), (3),
or (4) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima-facie evidence that
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of
the motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender’s control is
in a category described in subsection (A)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of this section
if any of the following applies:





      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category
described in subsection (A)(1) or (3) of this section, the offender and the
operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by
consanguinity or affinity.





      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category
described in subsection (A)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator
of the motor vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or
has reasonable cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or
convicted of any violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other
act or omission, that would or could result in the suspension or cancellation
of the operator’s license, permit or privilege.





      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category
described in subsection (A)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator
of the motor vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the
offense.











   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful
entrustment of a motor vehicle and shall be punished as provided in
subsections (C) to (H) of this section.





      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this section,
whoever violates subsection (A)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is guilty of
an unclassified misdemeanor.  When the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to
2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the
offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of Ohio R.C.
2929.28, the offender may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000); and,
notwithstanding division (A)(3) of Ohio R.C. 2929.27, the offender may be
ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve a term of community
service of up to five hundred hours.  The failure of an offender to complete
a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect
criminal contempt under division (A) of Ohio R.C. 2705.02.





      (2)   A.   If, within three years of a violation of
subsection (A)(1), (2) or (3) of this section, the offender previously has
pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more violations of division
(A)(1), (2) or (3) of Ohio R.C. 4511.203 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.





         B.   Whoever violates subsection (A)(4) or (5) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.





      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the
penalties imposed under Section 70.99, the court may impose a class seven
suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02,
and, if the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the
offender, the court may order one of the following:





         A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection
(C)(3)(b) or (c). of this section, the court may order, for thirty days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle's license plates.  If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.233.





         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.203  or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for sixty days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle's license plates.  If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.233.





         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of Ohio R.C. 4511.203 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the
criminal forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense.  If
issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.234.




   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for criminal
forfeiture under this subsection is assigned or transferred and division
(B)(2) or (3) of Ohio R.C. 4503.234 applies, in addition to or independent of
any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the offender the
value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the national automobile
dealer's association.  The proceeds from any fine imposed under this
subsection shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of Ohio
R.C. 4503.234.










   (D)   If a court orders the immobilization of a vehicle under
subsection (C) of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle from
the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization
ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.











   (E)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under
subsection (C) of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court,
neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept
any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order.  The period of
denial shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during
that five- year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that
resulted in the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of
the termination.  If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
Registrar, the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the
person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.











   (F)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or
motor vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4549.65.











   (G)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or
adjudication as a delinquent child for a violation of this section or a
substantially similar municipal ordinance shall not be admissible as evidence
in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who is the
subject of the conviction, plea, or adjudication and that arises from the
wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.











   (H)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person
if, at the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in
the person’s name.





(ORC 4511.203)










72.60  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.




   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator's
driver's license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a
driver's license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged
or injured in any collision in which the licensee may be involved.  When a
demand is properly made and the operator has the operator's driver's license
on or about the operator's person, the operator shall not refuse to display
the license.  A person's failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the
person is licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have
the person's license on or about the person's person shall be prima-facie
evidence of the person's not having obtained a driver's license.











   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (B)(2) hereof,
whoever violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. 
When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender
shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to
a community residential sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26;
notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of Ohio R.C. 2929.28, the offender may be
fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000); and, notwithstanding division
(A)(3) of Ohio R.C. 2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division
(C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to five
hundred hours.  The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under division (A) of Ohio R.C. 2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying
case.





      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations
of Ohio R.C. 4507.35 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  (ORC 4507.35)










72.61  DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR LICENSE RESTRICTION.




   (A)   Except as provided under subsection (B) hereof and Sections
72.612 and 72.614, no person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under
any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, other than Ohio R.C. Chapter 4509, or
under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which the person’s
license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public
roads and highways or upon any public or private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this Municipality during
the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving
privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the
limited driving privileges.











   (B)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking in this Municipality in violation of any restriction of the
person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed
under division (D) of Ohio R.C. 4506.10 or under Ohio R.C. 4507.14.











   (C)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima-facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (A) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction
at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (B) of this section.  The
person charged with a violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section may
offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence.











   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (A) or (B) hereof, is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  The court may impose upon the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in
division (A)(7) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02.





      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (D)(2)(b) or
(c) of this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it
imposes on the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender's
name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of Ohio R.C. 4510.11 or
Ohio R.C. 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the court, in addition to or independent of any other sentence
that it imposes upon the offender, may order the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense for thirty days and the impoundment of that
vehicle's license plates for thirty days in accordance with Ohio R.C.
4503.233.





         (b)   If the vehicle is registered in the offender's
name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.11 or
any combination of two violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.11 or Ohio R.C. 4510.111
or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender may order the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense for sixty days and the
impoundment of that vehicle's license plates for sixty days in accordance
with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.





         (c)   If the vehicle is registered in the offender's
name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of Ohio R.C.
4510.11, or any combination of three or more violations of Ohio R.C. 4501.11
or Ohio R.C. 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal
ordinance, the court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on
the offender may order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the
offense to the State.











   (E)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this
section shall be issued and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.233 and 4507.02 as
applicable.  The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization
ordered under this section unless the court is presented with current proof
of financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle.











   (F)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be
issued and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.234.  Upon receipt of the copy of
the order from the court, neither the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a
deputy registrar shall accept any application for the registration or
transfer of registration of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person
named in the declaration of forfeiture.  The period of registration denial
shall be five years after the date of the order, unless, during that period,
the court having jurisdiction of the offense that lead to the order
terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the termination. 
The Registrar shall then take necessary measures to permit the person to
register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer registration
of the vehicle.










   (G)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000)
for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the
direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle
before, during, or after committing the offense for which the offender is
sentenced under this section.  (ORC 4510.11)



 



   (H)   Any person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic
offender under this section and who, during the suspension, operates any
motor vehicle upon any public roads and highways is guilty of driving under a
twelve-point suspension, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall
sentence the offender to a minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall
suspend the first three days of jail time imposed pursuant to this
subsection. (ORC 4510.037)



 



72.611 DRIVING UNDER OVI SUSPENSION.




   (A)   No person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under Ohio R.C.
4511.19, 4511.191, or 4511.196 or under Ohio R.C. 4510.07 for a conviction of
a violation of a municipal OVI ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon
the public roads or highways within this Municipality during the period of
the suspension.











   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under OVI
suspension.  The court shall sentence the offender under Ohio R.C. Chapter
2929, subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.





      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (B)(2) or (3)
of this section, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:





         (a)   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. 
The three-day term shall be imposed, unless, subject to subsection (C) of
this section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than thirty
consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring.  A period of
house arrest with electronic monitoring imposed under this subsection shall
not exceed six months.  If the court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term
under this subsection, the court may impose a jail term in addition to that
term, provided that in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the
offense exceed six months.





         (b)   A fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000).





         (c)   A license suspension under subsection (E) of this
section.





      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this
section or one equivalent offense, driving under OVI suspension is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  The court shall sentence the offender to
all of the following:





         (a)   A mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. 
Notwithstanding the jail terms provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929, the court
may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. 
The ten-day mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to
subsection (C) of this section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not
less than ninety consecutive days of house arrest with electronic
monitoring.  The period of house arrest with electronic monitoring shall not
exceed one year.





         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in Ohio
R.C. Chapter 2929, a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and
not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500).





         (c)   A license suspension under subsection (E) of this
section.





      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations
of this section or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under OVI
suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  The court shall sentence
the offender to all of the following:





         (a)   A mandatory jail term of thirty consecutive
days.  Notwithstanding the jail terms provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929,
the court may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than
one year.  The court shall not sentence the offender to a term of house
arrest with electronic monitoring in lieu of the mandatory portion of the
jail term.





         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in Ohio R.C.
Chapter 2929, a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not
more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500).





         (c)   A license suspension under subsection (E) of this
section.











   (C)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest
with electronic monitoring under subsection (B)(1) or (2) of this section
unless, within sixty days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a
written finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the
jail where the offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the
offender will not be able to begin serving that term within the sixty-day
period following the date of sentencing.





   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house arrest
with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that period.











   (D)   Fifty per cent of any fine imposed by a court under subsection
(B)(1), (2) or (3) of this section shall be deposited into the county
indigent drivers alcohol treatment fund or municipal indigent drivers alcohol
treatment fund under the control of that court, as created by the county or
municipal corporation pursuant to division (H) of Ohio R.C. 4511.191.











   (E)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided
by law or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a
mayor’s court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of this section a class seven suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in division (A)(7)
of Ohio R.C. 4510.02.





   When permitted as specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.021, if the court grants
limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this section,
the privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the offender
must display restricted license plates, issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.231, on
the vehicle driven subject to the privileges, except as provided in division
(B) of that section.





   A suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under
Ohio R.C. 3123.58 or 4506.16.  No person who is disqualified for life from
holding a commercial driver’s license under Ohio R.C. 4506.16 shall be
issued a driver’s license under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period
for which the commercial driver’s license was suspended under this section,
and no person whose commercial driver’s license is suspended under this
section shall be issued a driver’s license under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507
during the period of the suspension. 
(ORC 4510.14)











   (F)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000)
for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the
direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle
before, during, or after committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the
first degree under this section for which the offender is sentenced.  (ORC
4510.14)











   (G)   (1)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to Ohio
R.C. 4510.14, the court, in addition to and independent of any sentence that
it imposes upon the offender for the offense, if the vehicle the offender was
operating at the time of the offense is registered in the offender's name,
shall do whichever of the following is applicable:





         (a)   If, within six years of the current offense, the
offender has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of Ohio
R.C. 4510.14 or former division (D)(2) of Ohio R.C. 4507.02, or a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that section or former
division, the court shall order the immobilization for thirty days of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment for thirty days of the
license plates of that vehicle in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.





         (b)   If, within six years of the current offense, the
offender has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of Ohio
R.C. 4510.14 or former division (D)(2) of Ohio R.C. 4507.02, or a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that section or former
division, the court shall order the immobilization for sixty days of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment for sixty days of the
license plates of that vehicle in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.





         (c)   If, within six years of the current offense, the
offender has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of
Ohio R.C. 4510.14 or former division (D)(2) of Ohio R.C. 4507.02 or a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that section or
former division, the court shall order the criminal forfeiture to the State
of the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the offense.





      (2)   An order for immobilization and impoundment of a vehicle
under this section shall be issued and enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C
4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable.  The court shall not release a vehicle
from immobilization ordered under this section unless the court is presented
with current proof of financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle.





      (3)   An order for criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under this
section shall be issued and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.234.  Upon receipt
of a copy of the order from the court, neither the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles nor a Deputy Registrar shall accept any aplication for the
registration or transfer of registration of any motor vehicle owned or leased
by the person named in the declaration of forfeiture.  The period of
registration denial shall be five years after the date of the order unless,
during that period, the court having jurisdiction of the offense that led to
the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination.  The Registrar then shall take the necessary measures to permit
the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer
registration of the vehicle.  (ORC 4510.161)











   (H)   As used in this section:





      (1)   “Electronic monitoring” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2929.01.





      (2)   “Equivalent offense” means any of the following:





         (a)   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent
to subsection (a) of this section;





         (b)   A violation of a former law of this State that was
substantially equivalent to subsection (A) of this section.





      (3)   “Jail” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.





      (4)   “Mandatory jail term” means the mandatory term in
jail of three, ten, or thirty consecutive days that must be imposed under
subsection (B)(1), (2) or (3) of this section upon an offender convicted of a
violation of subsection (A) of this section and in relation to which all of
the following apply:





         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under this
section, the term must be served in a jail.





         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under this
section, the term cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified
pursuant to any provision of the Ohio Revised Code.





(ORC 4510.14)










72.612 DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR CANCELLATION.




   (A)   No person, whose driver's or commercial driver's license or
temporary instruction permit or nonresident's operating privilege has been
suspended or canceled pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any
motor vehicle within this Municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle
owned by the person to be operated by another person in the Municipality,
during the period of the suspension or cancellation, except as specifically
authorized by Ohio R.C. Chapter 4509.  No person shall operate a motor
vehicle within this Municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned
by the person to be operated by another person in the Municipality, during
the period in which the person is required by Ohio R.C. 4509.45 to file and
maintain proof of financial responsibility for a violation of Ohio R.C.
4509.101, unless proof of financial responsibility is maintained with respect
to that vehicle.











   (B)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking in this Municipality if the person's driver's or commercial
driver's license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating
privilege has been suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4509.37 or 4509.40 for
nonpayment of a judgment.











   (C)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima-facie evidence that the license of the person was under
either a financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged
violation of subsection (A) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (B) of this
section.  The person charged with a violation of subsection (A) or (B) of
this section may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence.











   (D)   Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of
driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and
shall be punished as provided in subsection (D) hereof.  Whoever violates
subsection (B) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment of
judgment suspension and shall be punished as provided in subsection (D)
hereof.





      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (D)(2) of
this section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor.  When the offense
is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced
to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding division
(A)(2)(a) of Ohio R.C. 2929.28, the offender may be fined up to one thousand
dollars ($1,000); and, notwithstanding division (A)(3) of Ohio R.C. 2929.27,
the offender may be ordered pursuant to division (C) of that section to serve
a term of community service of up to five hundred hours.  The failure of an
offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be
punished as indirect criminal contempt under division (A) of Ohio R.C.
2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying case.





      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of
Ohio R.C. 4510.16, or any combination of two violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.16
or Ohio R.C. 4510.11 or 4510.111, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.





      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If the offender
fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to
any other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars
($5,000) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was
the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle
before, during or after committing the offense for which the offender is
sentenced under this section.




         (ORC 4510.16)



 



   (E)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4509.101 shall produce
any document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless
communications device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose
to mislead a peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of
financial responsibility made in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4509.101. 
Whoever violates this subsection (e) hereof is guilty of falsification, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  (ORC 4509.102)









72.613 DRIVING WITHOUT COMPLYING WITH LICENSE  REINSTATEMENT REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)   No person whose driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or nonresident’s operating privilege
has been suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or
highway or any public or private property after the suspension has expired
unless the person has complied with all license reinstatement requirements
imposed by the court, the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, or another provision of
the Ohio Revised Code.











   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of subsection (A) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima-facie evidence that the license of the person had not been
reinstated by the person at the time of the alleged violation of subsection
(A) hereof.  The person charged with a violation of subsection (A) hereof
may offer evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence.











   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to
reinstate a license and shall be punished as follows:





      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this section,
whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of an unclassified
misdemeanor.  When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the
offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be
sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26;
notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of Ohio R.C. 2929.28, the offender may be
fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000); and, notwithstanding division
(A)(3) of Ohio R.C. 2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division
(C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to five
hundred hours.  The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under division (A) of Ohio R.C. 2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying
case.





      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of subsection (a)
of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted of two or more violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.21(A) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.





      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a
class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in
division (A)(7) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02.  (ORC 4510.21)










72.614 DRIVING UNDER LICENSE FORFEITURE OR CHILD SUPPORT SUSPENSION.




   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking in this Municipality whose driver's or commercial driver's
license has been suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27,
3123.58, 4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22  or 4510.33.











   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of subsection (A) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima-facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension
at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (A) of this section.  The
person charged with a violation of subsection (A) of this section may offer
evidence to rebut this prima-facie evidence.











   (C)   Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of
driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in subsection (C)
of this section.





      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(2) of
this section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor.  The offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the
offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be
sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26;
notwithstanding division (A)(2)(a) of Ohio R.C. 2929.28, the offender may be
fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000); and, notwithstanding division
(A)(3) of Ohio R.C. 2929.27, the offender may be ordered pursuant to division
(C) of that section to serve a term of community service of up to five
hundred hours.  The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under division (A) of Ohio R.C. 2705.02 that may be filed in the underlying
case.





      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of
subsection (A) of Ohio R.C. 4510.111, or any combination of two or more
violations of subsection (A) of Ohio R.C. 4510.111, or Ohio R.C. 4510.11 or
4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree and the offender shall provide the court
with proof of financial responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If
the offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then in
addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order
restitution pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five
thousand dollars ($5,000) for any economic loss arising from an accident or
collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.  (ORC 4510.111)










72.62  OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.




   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:





      (1)   Operate in this Municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in
accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title
has not been issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this
Municipality knowing that the ownership information relating to the vehicle
has not been entered into the automated title processing system by a clerk of
a court of common pleas;





      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or
acting on behalf of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a
manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate, a certificate of title, or an
assignment of a certificate of title for it as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4505;





      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any
certificate of registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as
prescribed in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505;





      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a clerk of
a court of common pleas as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the
destruction or dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that
it is not the motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;





      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter
4505;





      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505
and Chapter 4517, sell at wholesale a motor vehicle the ownership of which is
not evidenced by an Ohio certificate of title, or the current certificate of
title issued for the motor vehicle, or the manufacturer’s certificate of
origin, and all title assignments that evidence the seller’s ownership of
the motor vehicle, and an odometer disclosure statement that complies with
Ohio R.C. 4505.06 and subchapter IV of the “Motor Vehicle Information and
Cost Savings Act”, 86 Stat.  961 (1972), 15 U.S.C. 1981;





      (7)   Operate in this Municipality a motor vehicle knowing
that the certificate of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as
otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has been
canceled.











   (B)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business
of warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition. 











   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both.





(ORC 4505.18)










72.63  DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES.




   (A)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor
vehicle shall fail to display in plain view on the front and rear of the
motor vehicle a license plate that bears the distinctive number and
registration mark assigned to the motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety, including any county identification sticker and any validation
sticker issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.19 and 4503.191, as follows:





         A.   A manufacturer of motor vehicles or dealer therein,
the holder of an in transit permit, and the owner or operator of a
motorcycle, motorized bicycle or moped, motor-driven cycle or motor scooter,
autocycle, cab-enclosed motorcycle, manufactured home, mobile home, trailer
or semitrailer shall display a license plate on the rear only.





         B.   A motor vehicle that is issued two license plates
shall display the validation sticker only on the rear license plate, except
that a commercial tractor that does not receive an apportioned license plate
under the international registration plan shall display the validation
sticker on the front of the commercial tractor.





         C.   An apportioned vehicle receiving an apportioned
license plate under the international registration plan shall display the
license plate only on the front of a commercial tractor and on the rear of
all other vehicles.





      (2)   All license plates shall be securely fastened so as not
to swing, and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs their
visibility.





      (3)   No person to whom a temporary license placard or
windshield sticker has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under Ohio
R.C. 4503.182, and no operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display
the temporary license placard in plain view from the rear of the vehicle
either in the rear window or on an external rear surface of the motor
vehicle, or fail to display the windshield sticker in plain view on the rear
window of the motor vehicle.  No temporary license placard or windshield
sticker shall be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.











   (B)   A law enforcement officer shall only issue a ticket, citation
or summons, or cause the arrest or commence a prosecution, for the failure to
display a license plate in plain view on the front of a parked motor vehicle
if the officer first determines that another offense has occurred and either
places the operator or vehicle owner under arrest or issues a ticket,
citation, or summons to the operator or vehicle owner for the other offense.











   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this
section, whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.





      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section by
failing to display a license plate in plain view on the front of a motor
vehicle as required under subsection (A) of this section while the motor
vehicle is otherwise legally parked is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and may
be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).





         A person who is subject to the penalty prescribed in
subsection (C)(2) of this section is not subject to the charging of points
under Ohio R.C. 4510.036.





      (3)   The offense established under subsection (A) of this
section is a strict liability offense and Ohio R.C. 2901.20 does not apply. 
The designation of this offense as a strict liability offense shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.  (ORC 4503.21)










72.64  EXPIRED OR UNLAWFUL LICENSE PLATES.




   (A)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle which is parked
or operated upon the public streets or highways shall fail to annually file
the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor, as required by
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4503. 





(ORC 4503.11)











   (B)   No person shall operate, drive or park upon the public streets
or highways a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle in Ohio, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive
number or identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration. 
(ORC 4549.11)











   (C)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident
of Ohio shall operate, drive or park the motor vehicle upon the public
streets or highways, while it displays a distinctive number or identification
mark issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying
with the laws of Ohio relating to the registration and identification of
motor vehicles.   
(ORC 4549.12)











   (D)   No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public
street or highway upon which is displayed an expired license plate or an
expired validation sticker.











   (E)   No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public
street or highway upon which are displayed any license plates not legally
registered and issued for such vehicle, or upon which are displayed any
license plates that were issued on an application for registration that
contains any false statement by the applicant.











   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.





      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (B) hereof is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
on each subsequent offense.





      (3)   Whoever violates any provision of this section for which
no other penalty is provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.





         (ORC 4549.11; 4549.12)










72.65  USE OF ILLEGAL LICENSE PLATES; TRANSFER OF REGISTRATION.




   (A)    No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the
streets in this Municipality if it displays a license plate or a distinctive
number or identification mark that meets any of the following criteria:





      (1)   Is fictitious;





      (2)   Is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any
distinctive number or identification mark;





      (3)   Belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this
section does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the streets in
this Municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates that
originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by the
same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the streets in
this Municipality, during the thirty-day period described in subsection (c)
hereof.











   (B)   Whoever violates subsection (A)(1), (2) or (3) of this section
is guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense
and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense. 
(ORC 4549.08)











   (C)   Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the
registration of the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner shall
immediately remove the license plates from the motor vehicle.  The transfer
of the registration and, where applicable, the license plates from the motor
vehicle for which they originally were issued to a succeeding motor vehicle
purchased by the same person in whose name the original registration and
license plates were issued shall be done within a period not to exceed thirty
days.  During that thirty-day period, the license plates from the motor
vehicle for which they originally were issued may be displayed on the
succeeding motor vehicle, and the succeeding motor vehicle may be operated on
the streets of the Municipality. 











   (D)   Whoever violates subsection (C) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(ORC 4503.12)










72.651  REGISTRATION WITHIN THIRTY DAYS OF RESIDENCY.



   (A)   Within thirty days of becoming a resident of this State, any
person who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or
highways shall register the vehicle in this State.  If such a person fails
to register a vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any
motor vehicle in this Municipality under a license issued by another state.



 



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



 



      (2)   The offense established under subsection (B)(1) of this
section is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable
mental state for purposes of Ohio R.C. 2901.20.  The designation of this
offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that
any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is
not a strict liability offense.



 



   (C)   For purposes of subsection (A) of this section, "resident"
means any person to whom any of the following applies:



 



      (1)   The person maintains their principal residence in this
State and does not reside in this State as a result of the person's active
service in the United States Armed Forces.



 



      (2)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles to be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the
Registrar under Ohio R.C. 4507.01.  (ORC 4503.111)









72.66  STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT UPON STREETS; COLLISION WITH  UNATTENDED
VEHICLE.



   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision
with persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the
motor vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately
shall stop the operator's motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or
collision.  The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or
collision until the operator has given the operator's name and address and,
if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the owner of that
motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to
all of the following:



 



         A.   Any person injured in the accident or collision;



 



         B.   The operator, occupant, owner or attendant of any
motor vehicle damaged in the accident or collision;



 



         C.   The police officer at the scene of the accident or
collision.



 



      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend
and record the information required to be given under subsection (A)(1) of
this section, the other operator involved in the accident or collision shall
notify the nearest police authority concerning the location of the accident
or collision, and the operator's name, address and the registered number of
the motor vehicle the operator was operating.  The operator shall remain at
the scene of the accident or collision until a police officer arrives, unless
removed from the scene by an emergency vehicle operated by a political
subdivision or an ambulance.



 



      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or
unattended motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle
shall securely attach the information required to be given in this section,
in writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle.



 



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is
guilty of failure to stop after an accident.  Except as otherwise provided
in subsection (B)(2) or (3) of this section, failure to stop after an
accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



 



      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical
harm to a person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.



 



      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate State law.



 



      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five
suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in division (A)(5) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02. 
No judge shall suspend the first six months of suspension of an offender's
license, permit, or privilege required by this subsection.




   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars
($5,000) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was
the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the motor
vehicle before, during or after committing the offense charged under this
section.  (ORC 4549.02)










72.67  STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT UPON PROPERTY OTHER THAN  STREET.



   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision
resulting in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private
property other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the
scene of the accident or collision.  Upon request of any person who is
injured or damaged, or any other person, the operator shall give that person
the operator's name and address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the
name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together with the
registered number of that motor vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the
operator's driver's or commercial driver's license.



 



      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the
accident or collision does not provide the information specified in
subsection (a)(1) of this section, the operator shall give that information,
within twenty-four hours after the accident or collision, to the Police
Department.



 



      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or
unattended motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle
shall securely attach the information required under subsection (A)(1) of
this section, in writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or
unattended motor vehicle.



 



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is
guilty of failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident.  Except as
otherwise provided in subsection (B)(2) or (3) of this section, failure to
stop after a nonpublic road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



 



      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical
harm to a person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony
and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.



 



      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony and shall
be prosecuted under appropriate State law.



 



      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five
suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in division (A)(5) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02.
No judge shall suspend the first six months of suspension of an offender's
license, permit, or privilege required by this subsection.




   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars
($5,000) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was
the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the motor
vehicle before, during or after committing the offense charged under this
section.  (ORC 4549.021)










72.68  VEHICLE ACCIDENT RESULTING IN DAMAGE TO REALTY.




   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop
and take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge
of the property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address, and of the
registration number of the vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request
and if available, shall exhibit the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license.





   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property, within twenty-four hours after the
accident, shall forward to the police authority in the municipality in which
the accident or collision occurred, the same information required to be given
to the owner or person in control of the property and give the location of
the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is known.











   (B)   Whoever violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. 





   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01.  If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000)
for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the
direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the motor vehicle
before, during or after committing the offense charged under this section. 
(ORC 4549.03)











SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT










72.70  DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES; VEHICLE  BUMPERS AND HEIGHT.




   (A)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to
be driven or moved, on any street any vehicle or combination of vehicles
which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property.











   (B)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to
prohibit the use of additional parts and accessories on any vehicle not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.











   (C)   The provisions of this chapter with respect to equipment on
vehicles do not apply to implements of husbandry, road machinery, road
rollers, or agricultural tractors except as made applicable to the articles
of machinery.





(R.C. § 4513.02)











   (D)   (1)   (a)   "Passenger car" means any motor vehicle with
motive power, designed for carrying ten persons or less, except a
multipurpose passenger vehicle or motorcycle.





         (b)   "Multipurpose passenger vehicle" means a motor
vehicle with motive power, except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons
or less, that is constructed either on a truck chassis or with special
features for occasional off-road operation.





         (c)   "Truck" means every motor vehicle, except trailers
and semitrailers, designed and used to carry property and having a gross
vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less.





         (d)   "Manufacturer" has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 4501.01.





         (e)   "Gross vehicle weight rating" means the
manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating established for the vehicle.





         (f)   "Body floor height" means the vertical distance
between top of the frame rail and the bottom of the passenger compartment
(cab) floor.  In the event that the vehicle is a truck body, floor height
will be measured by the vertical distance between the passenger compartment
(cab) floor and the floor of the truck bed.





         (g)   "Bumper height" means the vertical distance
between the ground and the highest point of the bottom of the bumper,
measured when the vehicle is laden on a level surface with the vehicle tires
inflated to the manufacturer's recommended pressure.





         (h)   "Frame" means the main longitudinal structural
members of the chassis of the vehicle or, for vehicles with unitized body
construction, the lowest main longitudinal structural members of the body of
the vehicle.





         (i)   "Wheel track distance" means the distance on the
ground between the center of the tire tread on one side of the vehicle, and
the center of the tire tread on the opposite side.  (OAC 4501-43-02)





      (2)   Prohibitions; Application.





         (a)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway
any passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in
this State that does not conform to the requirements of this section.





         (b)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle
registered in this State in such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or
chassis to come in contact with the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage
from collision, or cause the wheels to come in contact with the body under
normal operation, and no person shall disconnect any part of the original
suspension system of the vehicle to defeat the safe operation of that system
including the installation of inverted, altered or modified suspension system
component parts which results in elevation of the height of the vehicle
bumper or frame unit which is not in compliance with this section.





         (c)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway
any passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this
State without a bumper on the front and rear of the vehicle if such vehicle
was equipped with bumpers as standard equipment by the manufacturer.





         (d)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway
any passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this
State if the difference in height between the body floor and the top of the
frame exceeds four inches.





         (e)   Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to prohibit either of the following:





            1.  The installation upon a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this State of heavy
duty equipment, including shock absorbers and overload springs as long as
such equipment does not cause the vehicle to be in violation of this section;





            2.  The operation on a street or highway of a
passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this
State with normal wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not
adversely affect the control of the vehicle.





         (f)   This section does not apply to any specially
designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck
when operated off a street or highway in races and similar events.





         (g)   A specially designed or modified passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck which does not conform to this
section shall not be operated on a street or highway.  (OAC 4501-43-03)





      (3)   Specifications.





         (a)   The horizontal bumper shall be at least 4.5 inches
in vertical height, centered on the vehicle's centerline, and extend no less
than the width of the respective wheel track distances.  Bumpers shall be
horizontal load bearing bumpers and attached to the vehicle frame to
effectively transfer impact when engaged.





         (b)   Maximum bumper heights shall be determined by the
type of vehicle at time of manufacture.  If other than a passenger vehicle,
the maximum bumper height shall be determined by the gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR) at the time of manufacture.  The height shall be measured in
terms of the vertical distance between the ground and the bottom of the
bumper.  Maximum bumper heights are as follows:










 




 

Front (inches)

 

Rear (inches)




Passenger Vehicles

 

22

 

22




All Other Vehicles:

 



 






4,500 lbs. and under GVWR

 

24

 

26




4,501 lbs. to 7,500 lbs. GVWR

 

27

 

29




7,501 lbs. to 10,000 lbs. GVWR

 

28

 

31











         (c)   If the body and/or truck bed height is altered the
difference in height between the body floor and/or the truck bed floor to the
top of the frame rail shall not exceed four inches.





         (d)   For any vehicle with bumpers or attaching
components which have been modified or altered from the original
manufacturer's design in order to conform with the maximum bumper
requirements of this section, the bumper height shall be measured from a
level surface to the bottom of the vehicle frame rail at the most forward and
rearward points of the frame rail.  Frame rail height if bumper modified or
altered: 










 




 

Front (inches)

 

Rear (inches)




Passenger Vehicles

 

22

 

22




All Other Vehicles:

 



 






4,500 lbs. and under GVWR

 

24

 

26




4,501 lbs. to 7,500 lbs. GVWR

 

27

 

29




7,501 lbs. to 10,000 lbs. GVWR

 

28

 

31











         (e)   The height restriction in this subsection (3)
applies to the distance from the ground to the bottom of the frame rail under
any one or more of the following conditions:





            1.   A motor vehicle is not equipped with a front
and rear bumper.





            2.   The bumper height relative to the frame rails
has been altered.





            3.   A supplemental bumper has been installed or
an addition to the original or replacement has been made.





               (OAC 4501-43-04)





      (4)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.





(ORC 4513.021)










72.71  LIGHTED LIGHTS; MEASUREMENT OF  DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS.




   (A)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a
street or highway shall display lighted lights and illuminating devices as
required by this chapter during all of the following times:





      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;





      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural
light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles, and
substantial objects on the street or highway are not discernible at a
distance of one thousand feet ahead;





      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle
are in use because of precipitation on the windshield.





   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under Ohio
R.C. 4511.521.  No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section,
shall be operated upon a street or highway using only parking lights as
illumination.











   (B)   Whenever in this chapter a requirement is declared as to the
distance from which certain lights and devices shall render objects visible,
or within which such lights or devices shall be visible, such distance shall
be measured upon a straight level unlighted street under normal atmospheric
conditions unless a different condition is expressly stated.











   (C)   Whenever in this chapter a requirement is declared as to the
mounted height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such
light or device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.











   (D)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon
a street or highway to stop the vehicle solely because the officer observes
that a violation of subsection (A)(3) of this section has been or is being
committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons
for a violation of that subsection, or causing the arrest of or commencing a
prosecution of a person for a violation of that subsection.





(R.C. §4513.03)  Penalty, see §70.99










72.72  HEADLIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES.




   (A)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be
equipped with at least 2 headlights with at least one near each side of the
front of the motor vehicle.











   (B)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not
more than 2 headlights.





(R.C. § 4513.04)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.73  TAIL LIGHT; ILLUMINATION OF REAR  LICENSE PLATE.




   (A)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, or
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be
equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when
lighted, shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear, provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on
the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.











   (B)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so
constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear
registration plate, when the registration plate is required, and render it
legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear.  Any tail light, together
with any separate light for illuminating the rear registration plate, shall
be so wired as to be lighted whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving
lights are lighted, except where separate lighting systems are provide  for
trailers for the purpose of illuminating the registration plate. 
(R.C. 4513.05)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.74  REAR RED REFLECTORS.




   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and operated on a
street, other than vehicles of the type mentioned in § 72.75 or a commercial
tractor to which a trailer or semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the
rear, either as a part of the tail lights or separately, 2 red reflectors of
the size and characteristics and so maintained as to be visible at night from
all distances within 300 feet to 50 feet from the vehicle. 
(See R.C. § 4513.06)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.75  SAFETY LIGHTING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.




   (A)   Buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers,
and pole trailers, when operated upon any street, shall be equipped with
clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors, and stop lights as required by
state regulations.  The equipment shall be lighted at all times mentioned in
§ 72.71 except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be
lighted on a vehicle operated where there is sufficient light to reveal any
person or substantial object on the street at the distance of 500 feet.











   (B)   The equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by §§ 72.71 to 72.84, inclusive.  Vehicles operated
under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission are not subject to
this section. 
(R.C. § 4513.07)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.76  OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES IN  COMBINATION.




   Whenever  motor  and  other  vehicles  are operated in combination
during the time that  lights are required, any light, except tail lights,
which by reason of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be
obscured by another vehicle of the combination need not be lighted, but this
section does not affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be
displayed on the front of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance
lights or that all lights required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any
combination shall be lighted.
(R.C. § 4513.08) Penalty, see § 70.99










72.77  RED LIGHT OR RED FLAG ON EXTENDED LOADS.




   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear 4 feet or more
beyond the bed or body of the vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in § 72.71, a red light
or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides
and rear.  The red light or lantern required by this section is in addition
to the red rear light required upon every vehicle.  At any other time there
shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load a red flag or cloth
not less than 16 inches square. 
(R.C. § 4513.09)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.78  LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED  VEHICLES.




   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped
upon a roadway open to traffic or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended
or unattended during the times mentioned in § 72.71, the vehicle shall be
equipped with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light
on the roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. 
No lights need be displayed upon any vehicle when it is stopped or parked
where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object
within a distance of 500 feet upon any street.  Any lighted headlights upon
a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.





(R.C. § 4513.10) Penalty, see § 70.99










72.79  LIGHTS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES;  EMBLEM REQUIRED.



   (A)   All vehicles other than bicycles, including animal-drawn
vehicles and vehicles referred to in Section 72.70(C), not specifically
required to be equipped with lights or other lighting devices by Section
72.71 to 72.78, shall at all times specified in Section 72.71, be equipped
with at least one light displaying a white light visible from a distance of
not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle, and also shall be
equipped with two lights displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one
light displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000
feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all distances of 600
feet to 100 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of
headlights.




   Lights and reflectors required or authorized by this section shall meet
standards adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.











   (B)   All boat trailers, farm machinery and other machinery,
including all road construction machinery, upon a street or highway, except
when being used in actual construction and maintenance work in an area
guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used, or when operating or
traveling within the limits of a construction area designated by the Ohio
Director of Transportation, or the Municipal or County Engineer, when such
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Director
and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as set forth in Ohio R.C.
4511.09, which is designed for operation at a speed of twenty-five miles per
hour or less shall be operated at a speed not exceeding twenty-five miles per
hour, and shall display a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem (SMV).  The
emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance of not less than
500 feet to the rear.  The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt
standards and specifications for the design and position of mounting the SMV
emblem.  The standards and specifications for SMV emblems referred to in
this section shall correlate with and, so far as possible, conform with those
approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers.





   A unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour may be operated on
a street or highway at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour
provided it is operated in accordance with this section.





   As used in this subsection (B), "machinery" does not include any
vehicle designed to be drawn by an animal.











   (C)   The use of the SMV emblem shall be restricted to animal-drawn
vehicles, and to the slow- moving vehicles specified in subsection (b) hereof
operating or traveling within the limits of the highway.  Its use on
slow-moving vehicles being transported upon other types of vehicles or on any
other type of vehicle or stationary object on the highway is prohibited.











   (D)   (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate any boat
trailer, farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle
in subsection (b) hereof, except those units designed to be completely
mounted on a primary power unit, which is manufactured or assembled on or
after April 1, 1966, unless the vehicle is equipped with a slow- moving
vehicle emblem mounting device as specified in subsection (B) hereof.





      (2)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a
street or highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour
unless the unit displays a slow-moving vehicle emblem as specified in
subsection (B) of this section and a speed identification symbol that meets
the specifications contained in the American Society of Agricultural
Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, agricultural equipment; speed
identification symbol (SIS).










   (E)   Any boat trailer, farm machinery, or other machinery defined
as a slow-moving vehicle in subsection (B) of this section, in addition to
the use of the slow-moving vehicle emblem, and any unit of farm machinery
that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than
twenty-five miles per hour, in addition to the display of a speed
identification symbol may be equipped with a red flashing light that shall be
visible from a distance of not less than one thousand feet to the rear at all
times specified in Section 72.71.  When a double-faced light is used, it
shall display amber light to the front and red light to the rear.



   In addition to the lights described in this subsection, farm machinery
and motor vehicles escorting farm machinery may display a flashing,
oscillating or rotating amber light, as permitted by Section 72.85, and also
may display simultaneously flashing turn signals or warning lights, as
permitted by that section.










   (F)   Every animal-drawn vehicle upon a street or highway shall at
all times be equipped in one of the following ways:





      (1)   With a slow-moving vehicle emblem complying with
subsection (B) hereof;





      (2)   With alternate reflective material complying with rules
adopted under this subsection (F);





      (3)   With both a slow-moving vehicle emblem and alternate
reflective material as specified in this subsection (F).




   The Ohio Director of Public Safety, subject to Ohio R.C. Chapter 119,
shall adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the position
of mounting of the alternate reflective material authorized by this
subsection (F).  The rules shall permit, as a minimum, the alternate
reflective material to be black, gray or silver in color.  The alternate
reflective material shall be mounted on the animal-drawn vehicle so as to be
visible at all times specified in Section 72.70, from a distance of not less
than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of
headlamps.










   (G)   Every unit of farm machinery that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour
shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol
that meets the specifications contained in the American Society of
Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, agricultural
equipment; speed identification symbol (SIS) when the unit is operated upon a
street or highway, irrespective of the speed at which the unit is operated on
the street or highway.  The speed identification symbol shall indicate the
maximum speed in miles per hour at which the unit of farm machinery is
designed by its manufacturer to operate.  The display of the speed
identification symbol shall be in accordance with the standard prescribed in
this subsection.





   If an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour is being operated
on a street or highway at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour and
is towing, pulling or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery, the unit of
farm machinery shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed
identification symbol that is the same as the speed identification symbol
that is displayed on the agricultural tractor.











   (H)   When an agricultural tractor that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour is
being operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than twenty-five
miles per hour, the operator shall possess some documentation published or
provided by the manufacturer indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour
at which the manufacturer designed the agricultural tractor to operate.











   (I)   As used in this section, "boat trailer" means any vehicle
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of
twenty-five miles per hour or less. 











   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first
offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each
subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 4513.11)










72.80  SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY LIGHTS.




   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left
side of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.











   (B)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than 3 state
approved auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle.  The
Director of Public Safety shall prescribe specifications for auxiliary
driving lights and regulations for their use, and any such lights which do
not conform to these specifications and regulations shall not be used.





(R.C. § 4513.12) Penalty, see § 70.99










72.81  COWL, FENDER, AND BACKUP LIGHTS.




   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender
lights or lights on each side thereof which shall emit a white or amber light
without glare.











   (B)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light.  No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion. 
(R.C. § 4513.13)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.82  DISPLAY OF LIGHTED LIGHTS.




   (A)   At all times mentioned in § 72.71 at least 2 state approved
lighted lights shall be displayed conforming to state regulations, one near
each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when the vehicle is
parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles. 
(R.C. § 4513.14)











   (B)   However, on a motorcycle, there shall be displayed at least
one and not more than 2 lighted lights as required herein.
(See R.C. § 4513.04)





Penalty, see § 70.99










72.83  USE OF HEADLIGHT BEAMS.




   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a  roadway or  shoulder
adjacent thereto  during  the times specified in § 72.71, the driver shall
use a distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles, and substantial objects at
a safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following
requirements:





   (A)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming
vehicle, the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam so
aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming
driver.











   (B)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state, which has
multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam
indicator, which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of
light from the headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. 
The indicator shall be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be
readily visible without glare to the driver of the vehicle. 
(R.C. 4513.15)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.84  LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY ON SLOW- MOVING VEHICLES.




   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in §
72.71 when it is equipped with 2 lighted lights upon the front thereof
capable of revealing persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead in lieu of
lights required in § 72.82, provided that the vehicle shall not be operated
at a speed in excess of 20 m.p.h.
(R.C. § 4513.16)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.85  NUMBER OF LIGHTS; LIMITATIONS ON FLASHING, OSCILLATING, OR ROTATING
LIGHTS.




   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also
equipped with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the
front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candle
power, not more than a total of 5 of the lights on the front of a vehicle
shall be lighted at any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.











   (B)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle,
other than headlights, spotlights, signal lights, or auxiliary driving
lights, that projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300
candle  power shall be so  directed  that  no part of the beam will
strike the level of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of
more than 75 feet from the vehicle.











   (C)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles,
except as a means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence
of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or
overtaking or passing.  This prohibition does not apply to emergency
vehicles, road service vehicles servicing or towing a disabled vehicle, rural
mail delivery vehicles, vehicles transporting preschool children as provided
in Ohio R.C. 4513.182, highway maintenance vehicles, funeral hearses, funeral
escort vehicles and similar equipment operated by the Department or local
authorities, which shall be equipped with and display, when used on a street
or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing, 
oscillating or rotating amber light, but shall not display a flashing,
oscillating or rotating light of any other color, nor to vehicles or
machinery permitted by Section 72.79 to have a flashing red light.





      (2)   When used on a street or highway, farm machinery and
vehicles escorting farm machinery may be equipped with and display a
flashing, oscillating or rotating amber light, and the prohibition contained
in division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to such machinery or
vehicles.  Farm machinery may also display the lights described in § 72.79.











   (D)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined
in § 70.01 (Y), or a school bus, no person shall operate, move or park upon
or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public street or highway
any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying a flashing red
or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating or rotating
red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating light; and
except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the
criminal and traffic laws of the state or municipality, operating a public
safety vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move or park upon, or
permit to stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle
or equipment that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying
a flashing blue or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an
oscillating or rotating blue light, or a combination blue and white
oscillating or rotating light. 











   (E)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning  lights
required  by law  or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled
vehicles or on vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions
in order to enhance their visibility.  This section also does not prohibit
the simultaneous flashing of turn signals or warning lights either on farm
machinery or vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or
highway.





(R.C. 4513.17) 











   (F)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor
vehicle operated by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator may
be equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and
siren, whistle or bell capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet.  Such a vehicle may
display the flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and may give
the audible signal of the siren, whistle or bell only when responding to a
fatality or a fatal motor vehicle accident on a street or highway and only at
those locations where the stoppage of traffic impedes the ability of the
coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator to arrive at the site of
the fatality.





      (2)   This division (F) does not relieve the coroner, deputy
coroner or coroner's investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to
drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the
highway.





(R.C. § 4513.171)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.86  FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.



   (A)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in §§ 72.71 to
72.85, inclusive, upon any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless the
lights are equipped, mounted and adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance
with state regulations.  (R.C. § 4513.19)



 



   (B)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the
headlamp color requirements contained in federal motor vehicle safety
standard number 108, 49 C.F.R. 571.108.  No person shall operate a motor
vehicle in violation of this subsection.



Penalty, see § 70.99









72.87  MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE  BRAKES.




   (A)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on
vehicles:





      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when
operated upon a street or highway, shall be equipped with brakes adequate to
control the movement of and to stop and hold such motor vehicle, including
two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be
effective to apply the brakes to at least two wheels.  If these two separate
means of applying the brakes are connected in any way, then on such motor
vehicles manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1942, they shall be so
constructed that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not
leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels.





      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a street or
highway, shall be equipped with at least one adequate brake, which may be
operated by hand or by foot.





      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under Ohio
R.C. 4511.521.





      (4)   When operated upon the streets or highways of this
Municipality, the following vehicles shall be equipped with brakes adequate
to control the movement of and to stop and to hold the vehicle designed to be
applied by the driver of the towing motor vehicle from its cab, and also
designed and connected so that, in case of a breakaway of the towed vehicle,
the brakes shall be automatically applied:





         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every
trailer or semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of two
thousand pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1,
1942;





         B.   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an
empty weight of two thousand pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or
after January 1, 2001.





      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or
manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of three thousand pounds or more
that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have
separate brakes equipped with hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes
on two wheels.





      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or
semitrailers equipped with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the
rearmost brakes in approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing
vehicle, and developing the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at
the fastest rate; or means shall be provided for applying braking effort
first on the rearmost brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being
used alternatively, may be employed.





      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except
motorcycles and motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a
gross weight of less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped
with parking brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is
operated, under all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice
or loose material.  The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in
conformance with the foregoing requirements by the driver's muscular effort
or by spring action or by equivalent means.  Their operation may be assisted
by the service brakes or other sources of power provided that failure of the
service brake actuation system or other power assisting mechanism will not
prevent the parking brakes from being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements.  The parking brakes shall be so designed that when
once applied they shall remain applied with the required effectiveness
despite exhaustion of any source of energy or leakage of any kind.





      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies,
brake shoe anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally
associated with the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service
brakes and the parking brakes.  If the means of applying the parking brakes
and the service brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed
that failure of any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative
brakes.





      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn
vehicles shall be capable at all times and under all conditions of loading of
being stopped on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon
application of the service or foot brake, within the following specified
distances, or shall be capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate
corresponding to these distances:










 




 

From a speed of 20 miles per hour






 

Stopping distance



in feet

 

Deceleration in feet



per second per second




Brakes on all wheels

 

30

 

14




Brakes not on all four wheels

 

40

 

10.7











      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order
and shall be so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect
to the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(ORC 4513.20)











   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.





(ORC 4513.99)










72.88  HORN, SIREN, AND THEFT ALARM SIGNAL.




   (A)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a street shall be
equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200
feet.











   (B)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person
use upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle, or bell.  Any vehicle may be
equipped with a theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it
cannot be used as an ordinary warning signal.  Every  emergency  or 
public  safety  vehicle shall  be equipped with a siren, whistle, or bell
capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of
not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by the Director of Public
Safety.  The equipment shall not be used except when the vehicle is operated
in response to an emergency call or is in the immediate pursuit of an actual
or suspected violator of the law, in which case the driver of the emergency
vehicle shall sound the equipment when it is necessary to warn pedestrians
and other drivers of the approach thereof. 





(R.C. § 4513.21)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.89  MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS, OR NOISE.




   (A)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion
engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no
person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass, or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a highway.  Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with
baffle plates.











   (B)   No person shall own, operate, or have in his possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with  a device  for producing
excessive  smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other
chemical to flow into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of the vehicle, or
equipped in any other way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying
gases from any portion of the vehicle, other than the ordinary  gases
emitted by the exhaust of an internal combustion engine under normal
operation.
(R.C. § 4513.22) Penalty, see § 70.99










72.90  REAR-VIEW MIRROR; CLEAR VIEW TO FRONT, BOTH SIDES, AND REAR.




   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the street to the rear of the
vehicle or motorcycle.  Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a
clear and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles
or motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles or
motorcycles by mirror.





(R.C. § 4513.23)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.91  SIGN OR POSTER UPON WINDSHIELD;  WINDSHIELD WIPER.




   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway
in this municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is
not equipped with a windshield.











   (B)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a
bus, with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front
windshield, sidewings, side or rear windows of such vehicle other than a
certificate or other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there
may be in the lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign,
poster or decal not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. 
No sign, poster or decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a
manner as to conceal the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle
when in accordance with federal law, that number is located inside the
vehicle passenger compartment and so placed as to be readable through the
vehicle glazing without moving any part of the vehicle.





      (2)   Subsection (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who is driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an
antenna, electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional
navigation device, or other similar electronic device located in the front
windshield if the device meets both of the following:





         (a)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator's sight
lines to the road and highway signs and signals.





         (b)   It does not conceal the vehicle identification
number.





      (3)   Subsection (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who is driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including
anantenna, electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional
navigation device, or other similar electronic device located in the front
windshield if the device meets both of the following:





         (a)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator's sight
lines to the road and highway signs and signals.





         (b)   It is mounted not more than six inches below the
upper edge of the windshield and is outside the area swept by the vehicle's
windshield wipers.











   (C)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a
device for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the  windshield. The
device shall be maintained in good working order  and so constructed as to
be controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle. 
(R.C. § 4513.24)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.92  LIMITED LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF PASSENGER VEHICLE.




   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a street with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than 6 inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle's left side. 
(R.C. § 4513.30) Penalty, see § 70.99










72.93  MOTOR VEHICLE STOP LIGHTS.




   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer when
operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped with two or more stop
lights, except that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January
1, 1967, motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least
one stop light.  Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle,
actuated upon application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with
other rear lights.  Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light
visible from a distance of five hundred feet to the rear, provided that in
the case of a train of vehicles only the stop lights on the rear-most vehicle
need be visible from the distance specified.





   Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light to the
rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.





   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall be
constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
Ohio R.C. 4513.19.





   Historical motor vehicles as defined in Ohio R.C. 4503.181, not
originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section. 





(ORC 4513.071)










72.94  AIR CLEANER REQUIRED.




   No person shall operate upon any street, alley, or other public place
any motor vehicle which is not equipped with a functioning air cleaner. 
Penalty, see § 70.99










72.941 OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE FOR SCHOOL BUS OPERATOR.




   (A)   On and after May 6, 1986, no person, school board, or
governmental entity shall purchase, lease, or rent a new school bus unless
the school bus has an occupant restraining device, as defined in § 72.942,
installed for use in its operator's seat. 
(ORC 4511.772) 











   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4511.99(F)) (Ord. 2558, passed 8-26-86)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.942 DRIVERS AND PASSENGERS REQUIRED TO WEAR SEAT BELTS.




   (A)   As used in this section:





      (1)   "Automobile" means any commercial tractor, passenger
car, commercial car or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an
occupant restraining device for the operator or any passenger by regulations
adopted by the United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the
"National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966," 80 Stat. 719, 15
U.S.C.A. 1392.





      (2)   "Occupant restraining device" means a seat safety belt,
shoulder belt, harness or other safety device for restraining a person who is
an operator of or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum
Federal vehicle safety standards established by the United States Department
of Transportation.





      (3)   "Passenger" means any person in an automobile, other
than its operator, who is occupying a seating position for which an occupant
restraining device is provided.





      (4)   "Commercial tractor," "passenger car," and "commercial
car" have the same meanings as provided in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.





      (5)   "Vehicle" and "motor vehicle", as used in the
definitions of the terms set forth in subsection (A)(4) hereof, have the same
meanings as provided in Chapter 70.





      (6)   “Tort action” means a civil action for damages for
injury, death, or loss to person or property.  “Tort action” includes a
product liability claim, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2307.71 and an asbestos
claim, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2307.91, but does not include a civil action
for damages for breach of contract or another agreement between persons.











   (B)   No person shall do either of the following:





      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless
that person is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant
restraining device installed for use in its operator's seat unless that
person is wearing all of the available elements of the device, as properly
adjusted;





      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless
each passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth
in subsection (B)(3) hereof is wearing all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device;





      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front
seat of an automobile being operated on any street or highway unless that
person is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device;





      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all
factory-equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained
in usable form.











   (C)   Subsection (B)(3) hereof does not apply to a person who is
required by Ohio R.C. 4511.81 to be secured in a child restraint device or
booster seat. Subsection (B)(1) hereof does not apply to a person who is an
employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery
service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of
an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees.  Subsections
(B)(1) and (3) hereof do not apply to a person who has an affidavit signed by
a physician licensed to practice in this State under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4731
or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this State under Ohio R.C. Chapter
4734 that states that the person has a physical impairment that makes use of
an occupant restraining device impossible or impractical.











   (D)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated
on any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of subsection (B) hereof has been or is being
committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons
for a violation of that nature or causing the arrest of or commencing a
prosecution of a person for a violation of that nature, and no law
enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any
automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of that nature has been or is being committed.











   (E)   All fines collected for violations of subsection (B) hereof
shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of State for deposit as provided in Ohio
R.C. 4513.263.











   (F)   (1)   Subject to subsection (F)(2) of this section, the
failure of a person to wear all of the available elements of a properly
adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of subsection (B)(1) or (3)
or the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an
automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device, in violation of
subsection (B)(2)  of this section, shall not be considered or used by the
trier of fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory
negligence.  But the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted
consistent with the Ohio rules of evidence that the failure contributed to
the harm alleged in the tort action and may diminish a recovery of
compensatory damages that represents noneconomic loss, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 2307.011 in a tort action that could have been recovered but for the
plaintiff’s failure to wear all of the available elements of a properly
adjusted occupant restraining device.  Evidence of that failure shall not be
used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the person other than a
prosecution for a violation of this section; and shall not be admissible as
evidence in a criminal action involving the person other than a prosecution
for a violation of this section.





      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car
equipped with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car
who sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then,
consistent with the Rules of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not
wearing the available occupant restraining device, was not wearing all of the
available elements of such a device, or was not wearing such a device as
properly adjusted is admissible in evidence in relation to any claim for
relief in a tort action to the extent that the claim for relief satisfies all
of the following:





         (a)   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to
the occupant.





         (b)   The defendant in question is the manufacturer,
designer, distributor or seller of the passenger car.





         (c)   The claim for relief against the defendant in
question is that the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced
or aggravated by some design defect in the passenger car or that the
passenger car was not crashworthy.











   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (B)(1) of this section
shall be fined thirty dollars ($30.00).





      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (B)(3) of this section shall
be fined twenty dollars ($20.00).





      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates subsection (B)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of subsection (B)(4) of this section, whoever violates
subsection (B)(4) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.





(ORC 4513.263)










72.943 USE OF EARPHONES WHILE OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.




   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing
earphones over, or earplugs in, both ears. As used in this section, EARPHONES
means any headset, radio, tape player, or other similar device that provides
the listener with radio programs, music, or other recorded information
through a device attached to the head and that covers all or a portion  of
both ears. EARPHONES does not include speakers or other listening devices
that are built into protective headgear.











   (B)   This section does not apply to:





      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;





      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;





      (3)   Fire Department personnel and emergency medical service
personnel while on duty;





      (4)   Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use
in the maintenance or repair of any highway; or





      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection
equipment.





(ORC 4511.84)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.944 DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS REQUIRED.




   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle
manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1954, unless the vehicle is
equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals.





      (2)   No person shall operate any motorcycle or motor-driven
cycle manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1968, unless the
vehicle is equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals.











   (B)   “Directional signals” means an electrical or mechanical
signal device capable of clearly indicating an intention to turn either to
the right or to the left and which shall be visible from both the front and
rear.










   (C)   All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminating
devices when in use at the times mentioned in Section 72.71. 
(ORC 4513.261)









72.945 USE OF SUNSCREENING, NONTRANSPARENT AND REFLECTORIZED MATERIALS.




   (A)   Requirements.





      (1)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public
or private property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking,
lease, or rent any motor vehicle that is required to be registered in this
State with any sunscreening material, or other product or material which has
the effect of making the windshield or windows nontransparent or would alter
the windows’ color, increase its reflectivity, or reduce its light
transmittance, unless the product or material satisfies one of the following
exceptions:





         (a)   Any manufacturer's tinting or glazing of motor
vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or
permitted by "Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205" (FMVSS 205)
in effect at the time of the manufacture of the motor vehicle until such
standard is subsequently repealed or reduced.  In "Federal Motor Vehicle
Safety Standard Number 205" (FMVSS 205) "manufacturer" means any person
engaged in the manufacturing or assembling of motor vehicles or motor vehicle
equipment, including any person importing motor vehicles or motor vehicle
equipment for resale.  "Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205"
(FMVSS), Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49, Part 571, can be obtained
online at web site http://www.gpo.gov.





         (b)   Any sunscreening material or other product or
material applied to the windshield when used in conjunction with the safety
glazing materials of such window, has a light transmittance of not less than
seventy per cent plus or minus three per cent and is not red or yellow in
color.





         (c)   Any sunscreening material or other product or
material applied to the side windows to the immediate right or left the
driver, so long as such material, when used in conjunction with the safety
glazing materials of such windows, has a light transmittance of not less than
fifty per cent plus or minus three per cent and is not red or yellow in color.





         (d)   Any sunscreening material or other product or
material applied to a window not otherwise listed in subsections (A)(1)(a) to
(c) or (e) of this section, except that outside left and right rear view
mirrors are required if the sunscreening material is applied to the rear
window and the sunscreening material, when used in conjunction with the
safety glazing material of such window, has a light tranmsmittance of less
than fifty per cent plus or minus three per cent.





         (e)   Any sunscreening material or other product or
material applied along the top of the windshield and that does not extend
downward beyond the AS-1 line or five inches from the top of the windshield,
whichever is closer to the top, is not regulated by this section.





      (2)   No person shall install in any motor vehicle any glass
or other material that fails to conform to the specifications of this section.





      (3)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle
dealer, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that
fails to conform to the specifications of this section.





      (4)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in
any front windshield, side windows, sidewings or rear window.





      (5)   No person shall operate on any highway or other public
or private property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking,
lease, or rent any motor vehicle that is required to be registered in this
State that is equipped with privacy drapes, louvers, curtains or blinds
unless the drapes, louvers, curtains or blinds are open and secure during
vehicle operation.





      (6)   All motor vehicles, beginning with the 1990 model year,
must be equipped with labels identifying sunscreening material.  All
sunscreening material must indicate the manufacturer’s name and the
percentage level of light transmission of the material permanently installed
between the material and the surface to which the material is applied or
affixed.  Such label must be legible and must be placed in the lower
left-hand corner of the vehicle window when viewed from the outside. 
(OAC 4501-41-03)











   (B)   Exemptions.  The provisions of this section do not apply to:





      (1)   A motor vehicle registered in this State in the name of
a person, or the person's parent, legal guardian or spouse who has an
affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this State under Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4731 or an affidavit signed by an optometrist licensed to
practice in this State under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4725 that states that the
person has a physical condition that makes it necessary to equip such motor
vehicle with sunscreening material which would be of a light transmittance
and/or luminous reflectance in violation of this section.  Such affidavit
shall be in the possession of the person so afflicted or the driver at all
times while in the motor vehicle;





      (2)   The windows to the rear of the driver in chauffeured
limousines as defined herein;





      (3)   The windows to the rear of the driver in those vehicles
designed and used to transport corpses which include hearses and other
vehicles adapted for such use; and





      (4)   The manufacturer's tinting or glazing of motor vehicle
windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or permitted by
"Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205" (FMVSS 205) in effect at
the time of the manufacture of the motor vehicle as provided in subsection
(a) hereof.  "Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 205" (FMVSS 205),
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49, Part 571, can be obtained online at
web site http://www.gpo.gov.  (OAC 4501-41-05)











   (C)   Definitions.  As used in this section, certain terms are
defined as follows:





      (1)   "Motor vehicle" has the same meaning as specified in
Section 70.01.





      (2)   "Sunscreening material" means products or materials,
including film, glazing and perforated sunscreening, which, when applied to
the windshield or windows of a motor vehicle, reduce the effects of the sun
with respect to light reflectance or transmittance.





      (3)   "Transmittance" means the ratio of the amount of total
light, expressed in percentages, which is allowed to pass through the product
or material, including glazing, to the amount of total light falling on the
product or material and the glazing.





      (4)   "Windshield" means the front exterior viewing device of
a motor vehicle.





      (5)   "Window" means any device designed for exterior viewing
from a motor vehicle, except the windshield or any roof-mounted viewing
device.





      (6)   "Manufacturer" unless otherwise specified in this
section, means any person who engages in the manufacturing or assembling of
sunscreening products or materials or any person who fabricates, laminates or
tempers a safety glazing material, incorporating, during the manufacturing
process, the capacity to reflect or reduce the transmission of light.





      (7)   “Chauffeured limousine” means a motor vehicle that
is designed to carry nine or fewer passengers and is operated for hire on an
hourly basis pursuant to a prearranged contract for the transportation of
passengers on public roads and highways along a route under the control of
the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and regular route. 
“Prearranged contract” means an arrangement, made in advance of boarding,
to provide transportation from a specific location in a chauffeured limousine
at a fixed rate per hour or trip.  “Chauffeured limousine” does not
include any vehicle that is used exclusively in the business of funeral
directing.





(OAC 4501-41-02)











   (D)   Penalty.  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.





(ORC 4513.241)











COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES










72.95  OVERSIZE OR OVERWEIGHT VEHICLE  OPERATION ON STATE ROUTES; STATE
PERMIT.




   (A)   No person shall operate or move a vehicle or combination of
vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, inclusive, or otherwise not in
conformity with R.C. §§ 4513.01 to 4513.37, inclusive, upon any state route
within the municipality, except pursuant to special written permit issued by
the director of transportation.  Every permit shall be carried in the
vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to
inspection by any police officer.











   (B)   No holder of a permit issued by the director of transportation
shall be required to obtain any local permit or license or pay any local fee
or charge for movement on any state route within the municipality, however,
it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or combination of vehicles upon
any roadway within the municipality which is not a state route, except
pursuant to a permit granted by the city manager and except for movement
necessitated by an emergency or for purposes of local delivery or pickup,
provided the person shall compensate for any damage to a roadway or road
structure. 
Penalty, see § 70.99










72.96  TRUCK ROUTES (USE OF LOCAL STREETS, ETC.).




   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section the following
words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them
respectively.





      (1)   DEVIATING TRUCK.  A truck which leaves and departs from
a truck route while traveling inside the city.





      (2)   TRUCK.  Any vehicle designed or operated primarily for
the transportation of property, and whose body weight or combined body and
load weight exceeds 10,000 pounds.





      (3)   TRUCK ROUTE.  A way over certain streets, as designated
herein, over and along which trucks coming into and going out of the city
must operate.











   (B)   Application of section.  All trucks within the city shall be
operated only over and along the truck routes herein established and on the
other designated streets over which truck travel is permitted.





      (1)   Exceptions.  This section shall not prohibit:





         (a)   Operation on street of destination.  The
operation of trucks upon any street of origin or where necessary to conduct
business at a destination point, provided truck routes are used to or from
the nearest intersection to the point of origin or destination.





         (b)   Emergency vehicles.  The operation of emergency
vehicles upon any street in the city.





         (c)   Public utilities.  The operation of trucks owned
or operated by the city, public utilities, any contractor or a material man,
while engaged in the repair, maintenance, or construction of streets, street
improvements, or street utilities within the city.





         (d)   Detoured trucks. The operation of trucks upon any
officially established detour in any case where the truck could lawfully be
operated upon the street for which the detour is established.











   (C)   Truck routes established.  There are established within the
city the following truck routes:  I.R. 75, Alex Bell Road, Dixie Drive,
Central Avenue, Miami Avenue, Crossover Road, Kimberly Lane, and Alex Road
from Central Avenue to S.R. 725.











   (D)   Truck traffic in the city.





      (1)   Outside origin; outside destination.  All trucks
entering the city from points outside the city and proceeding directly to a
destination point outside the city shall operate only over the designated
truck routes.





      (2)   Outside origin; inside destination.





         (a)   One inside destination point.  All trucks
entering the city for a destination point in the city shall proceed only over
an established truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection nearest
to the destination point.  Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating
truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route.





         (b)   Multiple inside destination points.  All trucks
entering the city for multiple destination points shall proceed only over
established truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection nearest
to the first destination point.  Upon leaving the first destination point a
deviating truck shall proceed to other destination points by the shortest and
most direct course.  Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating
truck shall return to a truck route by the shortest permissible route.





      (3)   Inside origin.





         (a)   Outside destination point.  All trucks, on a trip
originating in the city and traveling in the city for a destination point
outside the city, shall proceed by the shortest and most direct course over
streets to a truck route as herein established.





         (b)   Inside destination point.  All trucks, on a trip
originating in the city and traveling in the city for destination points in
the city, shall proceed only by the shortest and most direct course.











   (E)   Signs.  The city manager shall cause all truck routes to be
clearly sign posted to give notice that this section is in effect.











   (F)   Compliance required.  No person shall drive a truck over any
public street within the city except upon those streets herein designated as
truck routes and except upon streets providing the shortest and most direct
course between truck routes and origin or destination points as herein
provided. 
Penalty, see § 70.99










72.97  MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT, AND LENGTH.




   (A)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways,
streets, bridges and culverts within the Municipality, whose dimensions
exceed those specified in this section.











   (B)   No such vehicle shall have a width in excess of:





      (1)   104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated
exclusively within municipal corporations;





      (2)   102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are
required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and
such other State roads with minimum pavement widths of twenty-two feet,
except those roads or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch
buses is prohibited by order of the Ohio Director of Transportation;





      (3)   132 inches for traction engines;





      (4)   102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety
devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less
in width and except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch
recreational vehicles on designated State highways or portions of highways;





      (5)   102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles,
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on
such State highways or portions of State highways as the Director designates.











   (C)   No such vehicle shall have a length in excess of:





      (1)   66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and articulated
passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit authority pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 306.30 to 306.54;





      (2)   45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles;





      (3)   53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a
commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that
the Director may, by journal entry, prohibit the operation of any such
commercial tractor-semitrailer combination on such State highways or portions
of State highways as the Director designates;





      (4)   28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated
in a commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial
tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, except that  the Director may
prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or
commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination on such State highways
or portions of State highways as the Director designates;





      (5)   (a)   97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United States
route, or State route, including reasonable access travel on all other
roadways for a distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate,
United States route, or State route, not to exceed three saddlemounted
vehicles, but which may include one fullmount;





         (b)   75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations, when operated on any roadway not designated as an
interstate, United States route, or State route, not to exceed three
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount;





      (6)   65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled
together, with or without load, except as provided in subsections (c)(3) and
(4) and in subsection (e) hereof;





      (7)   45 feet for recreational vehicles.





      (8)   50 feet for all other vehicles except trailers and
semitrailers, with or without load.











   (D)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of thirteen feet
six inches, with or without load.











   (E)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed
a length of sixty-five feet and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or
stinger-steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of seventy-five
feet, except that the load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond
the rear of such vehicles and may extend no more than three feet beyond the
front of such vehicles, and except further that the Director may prohibit the
operation of any stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-steered
boat transporter or a B-train assembly on any State highway or portion of any
State highway that the Director designates.











   (F)   The widths prescribed in subsection (B) shall not include side
mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry and egress,
flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant devices,
and load-induced tire bulge.





   The width prescribed in subsection (B)(5) shall not include automatic
covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown assemblies,  provided
these safety devices do not extend more than three inches from each side of
the vehicle.





   The lengths prescribed in subsections (C)(2) to (8) hereof shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of such bus or
combination, nonproperty carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than twenty-four inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed
for loading or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second
semitrailer of a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination,
energy conservation devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the
Secretary of the United States Department of Transportation, or any
noncargo-carrying refrigeration equipment attached to the front of trailers
and semitrailers.  In special cases, vehicles whose dimensions exceed those
prescribed by this section may operate in accordance with rules adopted by
the Ohio Director of Transportation.











   (G)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to any municipal corporation or to the
volunteer fire department of any municipal corporation or used by such
department in the discharge of its functions.  This section does not apply
to vehicles and pole trailers used in the transportation of wooden and metal
poles, nor to the transportation of pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to
farm machinery and equipment.  The owner or operator of any vehicle,
machinery or equipment not specifically enumerated in this section but the
dimensions of which exceed the dimensions provided by this section, when
operating the same on the highways and streets of this State shall comply
with the rules of the Director governing such movement, that the Director may
adopt.  Ohio R.C. 119.01 to 119.13 apply to any rules the Director adopts
under this section, or the amendment or rescission of the rules, and any
person adversely affected shall have the same right of appeal as provided in
those sections.





   This section does not require the State, the Municipality, County,
township or any railroad or other private corporation to provide sufficient
vertical clearance to permit the operation of such vehicle, or to make any
changes in or about existing structures now crossing streets, roads and other
public thoroughfares in the Municipality.











   (H)   As used in this section, "recreational vehicle" has the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.    (ORC 5577.05)











   (I)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
on a first offense; on a second offense or subsequent offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 





(ORC 5577.99)










72.98  ROUTE AND LOAD INFORMATION.




   Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter shall be required, upon
request by police officer, to give full and true information as to the route
they are following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of
delivery or removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods
being removed, and upon a designation by the police officer of a route to be
followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue the route.










72.99  WHEEL PROTECTORS.




   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer, or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds 3 tons, upon
the streets, bridges and culverts within this municipality unless the vehicle
is equipped with suitable metal protectors or substantial  flexible flaps on
the rearmost  wheels  of the vehicle or combination of vehicles to prevent,
as far as practicable, the wheels from throwing dirt, water, or other
materials on the windshields of following vehicles.  The protectors or flaps
shall have a ground clearance of not more than 1/3 of the distance from the
center of the rearmost axle to the center of the flaps under any conditions
of loading of the vehicle, and they shall be at least as wide as the tires
they are protecting.  If the vehicle is so designed and constructed that the
requirements are accomplished by means of fenders, body construction, or
other means of enclosure, then no protectors or flaps are required.  Rear
wheels not covered at the top by fenders, bodies, or other parts of the
vehicle shall be covered at the top by protective means extending at least to
the center line of the rearmost axle. 
(R.C. § 5577.11) Penalty, see § 70.99










72.100  VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.




   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a street
shall at all times comply with the following requirements:





   (A)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on
the rear with the word EXPLOSIVES in letters not less than 8 inches high, or
there shall be displayed on the rear of the vehicle a red flag not less than
24 inches square marked with the word DANGER in white letters 6 inches high.











   (B)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than 2 fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on the vehicle. 
(R.C. § 4513.29)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.101  TOWING REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or
other connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from
one vehicle to the other, except the connection between any 2 vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery, or other objects of structural nature
which cannot readily be dismembered.











   (B)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists
only of a chain, rope, or cable, there shall be displayed upon the connection
a white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.











   (C)   In addition to the drawbar or other connection, each trailer
and each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means
of a fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle
by which it is being drawn.  The chains or cables shall be of sufficient
size and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's parting from the drawing
vehicle in case the drawbar or other connection should break or become
disengaged.  In case of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the
drawing vehicle shall be coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or
cables of sufficient size and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's parting
from the drawing vehicle.











   (D)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers
and pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility, as defined in R.C.
§ 5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so
designed and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the
path of the vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to
side.  Vehicles used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials between a local place of storage and supply and the
farm, when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed of 25 m.p.h. or
less, and vehicles designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between
a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or
towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at
a speed of 25 m.p.h. or less, shall have a drawbar or other connection,
including the hitch mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of
sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed thereby.  Only one such
vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production
materials as provided in this section may be towed or drawn at one time
unless the towing vehicle is an agricultural tractor.





(R.C. § 4513.32)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.102  LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING; REMOVAL REQUIRED; TRACKING MUD.




   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless such
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand
or other substance may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or
water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining such roadway.





(R.C. § 4513.31)











   (B)   No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track mud or
other similarly objectionable matter on the public streets, alleys, sidewalks
or other public places.  It shall be incumbent upon the person depositing
the matter to forthwith remove or cause the same to be removed.











   (C)   Any mud or similarly objectionable matter deposited or placed
on the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other public places by any
person employed by the property owner or by his subcontractors, or at the
invitation of the property owner, shall be attributable to the owner as well
as the person depositing the matter.  It shall be incumbent upon the owner
as well as the person depositing the matter to forthwith remove or cause the
same to be removed.  The intent and purpose of this requirement is to place
upon the owner of property in the city and any persons employed in connection
therewith or using the property with the owner's permission a duty to control
that property so as not to allow mud or any other similarly objectionable
matter from that property to be deposited on the public streets, alleys,
sidewalks, or other public places.  For a violation of this requirement, in
addition to any penalty that may be imposed, any building, electrical, or
plumbing permits relating to the property may be suspended by the city until
the mud or other similarly objectionable matter is removed.





(Ord. 1971, passed 5-25-76; amend. Ord. 2677, passed 10-25-88)  Penalty, see
§ 70.99










72.103  SHIFTING LOAD; LOOSE LOADS.




   (A)   In addition to any other lawful requirements of load
distribution, no person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or highway
unless the vehicle is so laden as to prevent its contents from shifting or
otherwise unbalancing the vehicle to an extent as to interfere with the safe
operation of the same.











   (B)   No motor vehicle or trailer shall be driven unless the
tailboard or tailgate, tarpaulins, chains (except ground or contact chains),
ropes, stakes, poles, and the like, or any part of the load, are securely
fastened to prevent dangling, flapping, swinging, or falling from the side,
end, or top of the load or body.  All projecting cargo shall be properly
guarded by a red flag or cloth or a red light or lantern as required by §
72.77.





(Ord. 1971, passed 5-25-76)











   (C)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the
vehicle is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load
from dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that
sand or other substance may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction,
or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining the roadway.











   (D)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural
produce or agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the
process of acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans,
bottles, waste paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper,
cartons, boxes, glass, solid waste, or any other material of an unsanitary
nature that is susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall
be driven or moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a
sufficient cover to prevent the load or any part of the load, from spilling
onto the highway.





(R.C. § 4513.31)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.104  VEHICLES WITH SPIKES, LUGS, AND  CHAINS.




   (A)   No person shall drive over the improved streets of this
municipality a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with
ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending
beyond the cleats, or no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle
over the improved streets of this municipality, which towed or pulled vehicle
has tires or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other
projections of any kind.  TRACTION ENGINE or TRACTOR, as used in this
section, applies to all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired
wheels operated or propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.











   (B)   No person shall operate upon any street any vehicle equipped
with cleats, spikes, lugs, chains or similar devices injurious to the
roadway, except metal or other nonskid contrivances which may be used only
while the streets are slippery or covered with ice and snow.
(R.C. § 5589.08)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.105  WEIGHING VEHICLE; REMOVAL OF EXCESS LOAD.




   (A)   Any police officer having reason to  believe that the weight
of a vehicle and its load is unlawful may require the driver of the vehicle
to stop and submit to a weighing of it by means of a compact, self-contained,
portable, sealed scale specially adapted to determine the wheel loads of
vehicles on highways; a sealed scale permanently installed in a fixed
location, having a load-receiving element specially adapted to determining
the wheel loads of highway vehicles; a sealed scale, permanently installed in
a fixed location, having a load-receiving element specially adapted to
determining the combined load of all wheels on a single axle or on successive
axles of a highway vehicle, or a sealed scale adapted to weighing highway
vehicles, loaded or unloaded.  The driver of the vehicle shall, if
necessary, be directed to proceed to the nearest available of the sealed
scales to accomplish the weighing, provided the scales are within 3 miles of
the point where the vehicle is stopped.  Any vehicle stopped in accordance
with this section may be held by the police officer for a reasonable time
only to accomplish the weighing as prescribed by this section.  All scales
used in determining the lawful weight of a vehicle and its load shall be
annually compared by a municipal, county, or state sealer with the state
standards or standards approved by the state and the scales shall not be
sealed if they do not conform to the state standards or standards approved by
the state.











   (B)   At each end of a permanently installed scale, there shall be a
straight approach in the same plane as the platform, of sufficient length and
width to insure the level positioning of vehicles during weight
determinations.











   (C)   During determination of weight by compact, self-contained,
portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of
vehicles on highways, they shall always be used on terrain of sufficient
length and width to accommodate the entire vehicle being weighed.  The
terrain shall be level, or if not level, it shall be of the elevation that
the difference in elevation between the wheels on any one axle does not
exceed 2 inches and the difference in elevation between axles being weighed
does not exceed 1/4 inch per foot of the distance between the axles.











   (D)   In all determination of all weights, except gross weight, by
compact, self-contained, portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to
determining the wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all successive axles, 12
feet or less apart, shall be weighted simultaneously by placing one such 
scale under  the  outside wheel of each such axle.  In determinations of
gross weight by the use of compact, self-contained, portable, sealed scales,
specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all
axles shall be weighed simultaneously by placing one scale under the outside
wheel of each axle.











   (E)   Whenever the officer upon weighing a vehicle and load
determines that the weight is unlawful, he may require the driver to stop the
vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until the portion of the load
is removed as is necessary to reduce the weight of the vehicle to the limit
permitted under R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.14.











   (F)   Whenever the officer upon weighing a vehicle and load
determines that the weight is unlawful, he may require the driver to stop the
vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until such portion of the
load is removed as is necessary to reduce the weight of the vehicle to the
limit permitted under R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.14, or, when compact,
self-contained, portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to determining the
wheel loads of vehicles on highways, are used, to the limits permitted under
R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.14, plus 2%.











   (G)   Whenever local authorities determine upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that the weight limits permitted under
R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.14, or the weight limits permitted when compact,
self-contained, portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to determining the
wheel loads of vehicles on highways, are used on any part of a state route
under their jurisdiction is greater than is reasonable under the conditions
found to exist at the location, the local authorities may, by resolution,
request the director of transportation to determine and declare reasonable
weight limits.  Upon the receipt of the request the director may determine
and declare reasonable weight limits at the location, and if the director
alters the weight limits set by R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.14 and this
section, then the altered weight limits shall become effective, only when
appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected at the location by local
authorities.











   (H)   The director may withdraw his approval of any altered weight
limit whenever, in his opinion, any altered weight limit becomes
unreasonable, and upon the withdrawal the altered weight limit shall become
ineffective, and the signs relating thereto shall be immediately removed by
local authorities.  Alteration of weight limits on state  routes  by 
local authorities is not effective until  alteration has been approved by
the director.
(R.C. § 4513.33)










72.106  WARNING DEVICES REQUIRED; DISPLAY WHEN DISABLED.




   (A)   No person shall operate any commercial motor truck, bus, or
commercial tractor upon any street or highway unless such vehicle shall carry
any flares, fusees, red reflectors, lanterns, and flags required by and
conforming to the requirements of the laws of this state and the regulations
of the director of transportation.











   (B)   Whenever any motor truck, bus, commercial tractor, trailer,
semitrailer, or pole trailer is disabled upon any freeway, expressway,
thruway and connecting, entering or exiting ramps within this municipality,
at any time when lighted lamps are required on vehicles and the operator of
the vehicle shall display the following warning devices upon the highway
during the time the vehicle is so disabled on the highway except as provided
in division (C) of this section:





      (1)   A lighted fusee shall be immediately placed on the
roadway at the traffic side of the vehicle, unless red electric lanterns or
red reflectors are displayed.





      (2)   Within the burning period of the fuse and as promptly as
possible, 3 lighted flares or pot torches, or 3 red reflectors or 3 red
electric lanterns shall be placed on the roadway as follows:





         (a)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100
feet in advance of the vehicle;





         (b)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100
feet to the rear of the vehicle except as provided in this section, each in
the center of the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle;





         (c)   One at the traffic side of the vehicle.











   (C)   Whenever any vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in
bulk, or in transporting compressed flammable gases, is disabled upon a
highway at any time or place mentioned in division (B) of this section, the
driver of the vehicle shall display upon the roadway the following warning
devices:





      (1)   One red electric lantern or one red reflector shall be
immediately placed on the roadway at the traffic side of the vehicle;





      (2)   Two other red electric lanterns or 2 other red
reflectors shall be placed to the front and rear of the vehicle in the same
manner prescribed for flares in division (B) of this section.











   (D)   When a vehicle of a type specified in division (C) of this
section is disabled, the use of flares, fusees, or any signal produced by
flame as warning signals is prohibited.











   (E)   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is
disabled upon any freeway, expressway, thruway and connecting, entering or
exiting ramps within the municipality, at any time when the display of
fusees, flares, red reflectors, or electric lanterns is not required, the
operator of the vehicle shall display 2 red flags upon the roadway in the
lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle, one at a distances of 40
paces or approximately 100 feet in advance of the vehicle and one at a
distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet to the rear of the vehicle,
except as provided in this section.











   (F)   The flares, fusees, lanterns, red reflectors, and flags to be
displayed as required in this section shall conform with the requirements of
§ 4513.27 of the Revised Code applicable thereto.











   (G)   In the event the vehicle is disabled near a curve, crest of a
hill, or other obstruction of view, the flare, flag, reflector, or lantern in
that direction shall be placed as to afford ample warning to other users of
the highway, but in no case shall it be placed less than 40 paces or
approximately 100 feet nor more than 120 paces or approximately 300 feet from
the disabled vehicle.











   (H)   This section does not apply to the operator of any vehicle in
a work are designated by protection equipment devices that are displayed and
used in accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation under R.C. § 4511.09.





(R.C. § 4513.28)  Penalty, see § 70.99










72.107  JAKE-BRAKING PROHIBITED.




   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or
operate or cause to be used or operated within the City, any mechanical
exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle
which results in the excessive, loud, unusual or explosive noise from such
vehicle, or otherwise known as jake-braking.











   (B)   Signs shall be posted at all major points into the City
indicating that all such mechanical exhaust braking systems are prohibited in
the City.











   (C)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent offense within one year
after the first offense such person is guilty of a third degree misdemeanor. 





(Ord.  3144.  Passed 10-26-99.)











DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL CARS OR TRACTORS










72.110  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this subchapter the following words and phrases
shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.











   APPORTIONABLE VEHICLE.  Any vehicle used or intended for use in two or
more international registration plan member jurisdictions that allocate or
proportionally register vehicles, that is used for the transportation of
persons for hire or designed, used, or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property, and that meets any of the following
qualifications:





      (1)   Is a power unit having a gross vehicle weight in excess
of 26,000 pounds;





      (2)   Is a power unit having three or more axles, regardless
of the gross vehicle weight; or





      (3)   Is a combination vehicle with a gross vehicle weight in
excess of 26,000 pounds.











   APPORTIONABLE VEHICLE does not include recreational vehicles, vehicles
displaying restricted plates, city pick-up and delivery vehicles, buses used
for the transportation of chartered parties, or vehicles owned and operated
by the United States, this state, or any political subdivisions thereof.











   CHARTERED PARTY.  A group of persons who contract as a group to
acquire the exclusive use of a passenger-carrying motor vehicle at a fixed
charge for the vehicle in accordance with the carrier's tariff, lawfully on
file with the United Stated Department of Transportation, for the purpose of
group travel to a specified destination or for a particular itinerary, either
agreed upon in advance or modified by the chartered group after having left
the place of origin.











   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE.  A motor vehicle designed to carry nine or
fewer passengers and operated for hire on an hourly basis pursuant to a
prearranged contract for the transportation of passengers on public roads and
highways along a route under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and
not over a defined and regular route.  PREARRANGED  CONTRACT  means  an 
agreement,  made  in  advance  of  boarding, to provide transportation
from a specific location in a chauffeured limousine at a fixed rate per hour
or trip.  CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE does not include any vehicle used
exclusively in the business of funeral directing.











   COMBINED GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT.  With regard to any combination of a
commercial car, trailer and semitrailer, that is taxed at the rates
established under R.C. § 4503.042, means the total unladen weight of the
combination of vehicles fully equipped plus the maximum weight of the load to
be carried on that combination of vehicles.











   COMMERCIAL CAR.  Any motor vehicle having motor power designed and
used for carrying merchandise or freight, or used as a commercial tractor.











   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR.  Except as defined in § 70.01 (B), means any
motor vehicle having motive power designed or used for drawing other motor
vehicles, or designed or used for drawing another motor vehicle while
carrying a portion of such other motor vehicle or its load, or both.











   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT.  With regard to any commercial car, trailer,
semitrailer or bus that is taxed at the rates established under R.C. §
4503.042, means the unladen weight of the vehicle fully equipped plus the
maximum weight of the load to be carried on the vehicle.











   INTERNATIONAL REGISTRATION PLAN.  A reciprocal agreement of member
jurisdictions that is endorsed by the American Association of Motor Vehicle
Administrators, and that promotes and encourages the fullest possible use of
the highway system by authorizing apportioned registration of fleets of
vehicles and recognizing registration of vehicles apportioned in member
jurisdictions.











   OWNER.  Any person, firm or corporation other than a manufacturer or
dealer having title to a motor vehicle; except that in § 72.62 it includes
in addition manufacturers and dealers.











   RESTRICTED PLATE.  A license plate that has a restriction of time,
geographic area, mileage or commodity, and includes license plates issued to
farm trucks under R.C. § 4503.04(K).





(R.C. § 4501.01)










72.111  DRIVING OR PERMITTING DRIVING WHILE FATIGUED OR ILL PROHIBITED.




   (A)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle as defined in
R.C. § 4506.01 or commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined herein,
while his ability or alertness is so impaired by fatigue, illness or other
causes that it is unsafe for him to drive a vehicle.  No driver shall use
any drug which would adversely affect his ability or alertness.











   (B)   No owner, as defined herein, of a commercial motor vehicle,
commercial car, or commercial tractor, or a person employing or otherwise
directing the driver of the vehicle, shall require or knowingly permit a
driver in any such condition described in division (A) of this section to
drive the vehicle upon any street or highway.





(R.C. § 4511.79)  Penalty, see §70.99











ALL PURPOSE VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES










72.120  OPERATION BY PERSON UNDER SIXTEEN YEARS OF AGE.




   (A)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle
driver's or commercial driver's license, motorcycle operator's endorsement or
probationary license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 or 4507, or a valid,
current driver's license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle on any street or
highway, on any portion of the right of way thereof, or on any public land or
waters.  This subsection shall not be construed to permit the holder of such
a license to operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose
vehicle in violation of Ohio R.C. 4519.40.











   (B)   No person who is less than sixteen years of age shall operate
a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all purpose vehicle on any land or
waters other than private property or waters owned by or leased to such
person's parent or guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is
eighteen years of age, or older, and who holds a license as provided in
subsection (a) hereof, except that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources
may permit such operation on State controlled land under its jurisdiction
when such person is less than sixteen years of age and is accompanied by a
parent or guardian who is a licensed driver eighteen years of age or older.











   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00),
imprisoned not less than three nor more than thirty days, or both.  (ORC
4519.44)











CIVIL PENALTIES FOR AUTOMATED





RED LIGHT AND SPEEDING





SYSTEM VIOLATIONS










72.130 AUTOMATED RED LIGHT AND SPEEDING SYSTEM/CIVIL VIOLATION - GENERAL.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Traffic Code, the
City of West Carrollton hereby adopts a civil enforcement system for red
light and speeding camera system violations as outlined in this section. 
Said system imposes monetary liability on the owner of a vehicle for failure
of an operator thereof to comply with traffic control indications in the City
of West Carrollton in accordance with the provisions of this Section.



 




   (B)   The City of West Carrollton Service Division, the West
Carrollton Police Department, and the West Carrollton Law Director shall be
responsible for administering the Automated Red Light and Speeding System. 
Specifically, the West Carrollton Service Division and the West Carrollton
Police Department shall be empowered to install and operate red light and
speeding camera systems within the City of West Carrollton.  And, the West
Carrollton Service Division and the West Carrollton Police Department shall
maintain a list of system locations where red light and speeding camera
systems are installed.  Said departments will make the determination as to
which locations will be utilized.





(Ord. 3387.  Passed 7-8-08.)











   (C)   Offense.





      (1)   The owner of a vehicle shall be liable for a penalty
imposed pursuant to this section if such vehicle crosses a marked stop line
or the intersection plane at a system intersection when the traffic signal
for that vehicle’s direction is emitting a steady red light.





      (2)   The owner of a vehicle shall be liable for a penalty
imposed pursuant to this section if such vehicle is operated at a speed in
excess of those set forth in Section 72.47.





      (3)   It is prima facie evidence that the person registered as
the owner of the vehicle with the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles (or with any
other State vehicle registration office) was operating the vehicle at the
time of the offense set out in subsection (C)(1) above.





      (4)   Notwithstanding subsection (C)(3) above, the owner of
the vehicle shall not be responsible for the violation if, within twenty-one
(21) days from the date listed on the “Notice of Liability”, as set forth
in subsection (D)(3) below, he furnishes the Hearing Officer:





         a.   An affidavit, stating the name and address of the
person or entity who leased, rented or otherwise had the care, custody and
control of the vehicle at the time of the violation; OR





         b.   At the time of the infraction, the vehicle was in
the custody of someone other than its owner pursuant to a written lease or
rental agreement and the owner, or agent, submits, to the address listed on
the ticket, either a copy of the lease or rental agreement along with the
name and address of the lessee or renter; OR





         c.   A law enforcement incident report/general offense
report from any state or local law enforcement agency/record bureau stating
that the vehicle involved was reported as stolen before the time of the
violation.





      (5)   An imposition of liability under the section shall not
be deemed a conviction as an operator and shall not be made part of the
operating record upon whom such liability is imposed.





      (6)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
liability of an operator of a vehicle for any violation of subsection (C)(1)
or (C)(2) herein.





      (7)   This section shall not apply to violations involving
vehicle collisions.











   (D)   Penalty; Administrative Appeal:





      (1)   Any violation of subsection (C)(1) herein shall be
deemed a noncriminal violation for which a civil penalty of ($100.00) shall
be assessed and for which no points authorized by Ohio R.C. 4507.021
(“Point system for license suspension”) shall be assigned to the owner or
driver of the vehicle.





      (2)   Any violation of subsection (C)(2) herein shall be
deemed a noncriminal violation for which a civil penalty of ($100.00) shall
be assessed and for which no points authorized by Ohio R.C. 4507.021
(“Point system for license suspension”) shall be assigned to the owner or
driver of the vehicle.





      (3)   The City of West Carrollton, via its Service Division,
Police Department, Law Department and Court Clerk may establish procedures
for the collection of the civil penalties imposed herein, and may enforce the
penalties by a civil action in the nature of a debt.





      (4)   A notice of appeal shall be filed with the Hearing
Officer within twenty-one ( 21) days from the date listed on the “Notice of
Liability”.  The failure to give notice of appeal or pay the civil penalty
within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the
citation and will be considered an admission.





         a.   A person who received a Notice of Liability may
appeal the Notice of Liability by making a written request for a hearing to
the address listed on the Notice of Liability.  Said request shall be
accompanied by a monetary deposit in the form of a Money Order or Personal
Check made payable to Red Flex for an amount equal to the amount of the
administrative fine listed on the Notice of Liability.





         b.   If the Hearing Officer determines that the person
who received the Notice of Liability is not responsible, then the monetary
deposit will be returned to them at the time of the hearing.





         c.   If the Hearing Officer determines that the person
who received the Notice of Liability is responsible then the monetary deposit
will be forwarded to Red Flex via the proper payment channels.





      (5)   Appeals shall be heard through an administrative process
established by the City of West Carrollton Police Department.  A decision in
favor of the City of West Carrollton may be enforced by means of a civil
action or any other means provided by the Ohio Revised Code.





      (6)   Members of the Police Department are authorized to
impound, immobilize, remove, or direct the removal of a vehicle as authorized
by Section 70.12.





         (Ord. 3495.  Passed 12-27-11.)










72.131  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   “Automated red light and speeding system” is the
equivalent of “Traffic control signal monitoring device” or “Traffic
control photographic system”.  Said system/device is an electronic
system  consisting of a photographic, video or electronic camera and a
vehicle sensor installed to work alone or in conjunction with an official
traffic controller and to automatically produce photographs, video or digital
images of each vehicle violating a standard traffic control.



 



   (B)   “In operation” means operating in good working condition.



 



   (C)   “System location” is the approach to an intersection or a
street toward which a photographic, video or electronic camera is directed
and is in operation.  It is the location where the automated camera system
is installed to monitor offenses under this Section.



 



   (D)   “Vehicle owner” is the person or entity identified by the
Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles, or registered with any other State vehicle
registration office, as the registered owner of a vehicle.  (Ord. 3387. 
Passed 7-8-08.)









72.132  OFFENSE.



   (A)   The owner of a vehicle shall be liable for a penalty imposed
pursuant to this Section if such vehicle crosses a marked stop line or the
intersection plane at a system location when the traffic signal for that
vehicle’s direction is emitting a steady red light.



 



   (B)   The owner of a vehicle shall be liable for a penalty imposed
pursuant to this Section if such vehicle is operated at a speed in excess of
those set forth in Section 72.47.



 



   (C)   It is prima facie evidence that the person registered as the
owner of the vehicle with the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles (or with any
other State vehicle registration office) was operating the vehicle at the
time of the offense set out in subsection (A) above.



 



   (D)   Notwithstanding subsection (C) above, the owner of the vehicle
shall not be responsible for the violation if, within twenty-one (21) days
from the date listed on the “Notice of Liability”, as set forth in
Section 72.133(C) below, he furnishes the Hearing Officer:




      (1)   An affidavit, stating the name and address of the person
or entity who leased, rented, or otherwise had the care, custody and control
of the vehicle at the time of the violation; or





      (2)   A law enforcement incident report/general offense report
from any state or local law enforcement agency/record bureau stating that the
vehicle involved was reported as stolen before the time of the violation.




 



   (E)   An imposition of liability under the Section shall not be
deemed a conviction as an operator and shall not be made part of the
operating record upon whom such liability is imposed.



 



   (F)   Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the
liability of an operator of a vehicle for any violation of subsection (A) or
(B) herein.



 



   (G)   This Section shall not apply to violations involving vehicle
collisions.



(Ord. 3387.  Passed 7-8-08.)









72.133 PENALTY; ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL.



   (A)   Any violation of Section 72.132(A) herein shall be deemed a
non-criminal violation for which a civil penalty of ($100.00) shall be
assessed and for which no points authorized by Ohio R.C. 4507.021 (“Point
system for license suspension”) shall be assigned to the owner or driver of
the vehicle.



 



   (B)   Any violation of Section 72.132(B) herein shall be deemed a
non-criminal violation for which a civil penalty of ($100.00) shall be
assessed and for which no points authorized by Ohio R.C. 4507.021 (“Point
system for license suspension”) shall be assigned to the owner or driver of
the vehicle.



 



   (C)   The City of West Carrollton, via its Service Division, Police
Department, Law Department, and Court Clerk may establish procedures for the
collection of the civil penalties imposed herein, and may enforce the
penalties by a civil action in the nature of a debt.



 



   (D)   A notice of appeal shall be filed with the Hearing Officer
within twenty-one (21) days from the date listed on the “Notice of
Liability”.  The failure to give notice of appeal or pay the civil penalty
within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the
citation and will be considered an admission.  Appeals shall be heard
through an administrative process established by the City of West Carrollton
Police Department.  A decision in favor of the City of West Carrollton may
be enforced by means of a civil action or any other means provided by the
Ohio Revised Code. 
(Ord. 3387.  Passed 7-8-08.)


























Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 73
PARKING









Section










Parking Generally










73.01   Police may remove unattended vehicle which obstructs traffic





73.02   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking





73.03   Prohibited standing or parking places





73.04   Parking near curb; privileges for handicapped





73.05   Maximum 72 hour parking





73.06   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway





73.07   Unattended vehicle:  duty to stop engine, remove key, set brake
and turn wheels





73.08   Opening vehicle door on traffic side





73.09   Truck loading zones





73.10   Bus stops and taxicab stands





73.11   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions





73.12   Prohibition against parking on streets or highways





73.13   Truck, trailer, and semitrailer parking





73.14   Authority to suspend or vary parking violations










Parking Meters










73.15   Definitions





73.16   Parking within marked lines of meter space; exceptions





73.17   Deposit of coin required; illegal parking





73.18   Parking prohibited in meter space





73.19   Defacing meter; use of slugs





73.20   Parking meter hours, location and coin deposit




 




PARKING GENERALLY




 



73.01  POLICE MAY REMOVE UNATTENDED  VEHICLE WHICH OBSTRUCTS TRAFFIC.




   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a
highway in violation of § 4511.66 of the Revised Code, the officer may move
the vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle
to move the same, to a position off the paved or improved or main traveled
part of the highway.










   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon
any highway, bridge, or causeway, or in any tunnel, where the vehicle
constitutes an obstruction to traffic, the officer may provide for the
removal of the vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.





(R.C. § 4511.67)










73.02  REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.




   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle,
testimony that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully
parked as prohibited by the provisions of this title, and further  testimony
that the record of the registrar of motor vehicles shows that the license
plate was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the
vehicle which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant.  A
certified registration copy, showing the fact, from the registrar shall be
proof of his ownership.









73.03  PROHIBITED STANDING OR PARKING  PLACES.



   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
Traffic Code, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a
traffic control device, in any of the following places:



      (1)   On a sidewalk, curb or street lawn area, except as
provided in subsection (b) hereof;



      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;



      (3)   Within an intersection;



      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;



      (5)   On a crosswalk;



      (6)   Within twenty feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;



      (7)   Within thirty feet of, and upon the approach to, any
flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control device;




      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within
thirty feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety
zone, unless a different length is indicated by a traffic control device;





      (9)   Within fifty feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing;





      (10)   Within twenty feet of a driveway entrance to any fire
station and, on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire
station, within seventy-five feet of the entrance when it is properly posted
with signs;





      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such standing or parking would obstruct traffic;





      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;





      (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a
street, or within a street tunnel;





      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping, standing or
parking, or where the curbing or street is painted yellow, or at any place in
excess of the maximum time limited by signs;





      (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;





      (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway or
thruway.




 



   (B)   A person shall be permitted, without charge or restriction, to
stand or park on a sidewalk, a motor- driven cycle or motor scooter that has
an engine not larger than one hundred and fifty cubic centimeters, or a
bicycle, provided that the motor-driven cycle, motor scooter, or bicycle does
not impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic.  This division does not
authorize any person to operate a vehicle in violation of Section 331.37.



 



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.




(ORC 4511.68)  Penalty, see § 70.99









73.04  PARKING NEAR CURB; PRIVILEGES FOR HANDICAPPED.




   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is
an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the curb side wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than twelve inches from the curb, unless
it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop
shall be as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary to
discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise.










   (B)   (1)   This subsection does not apply to streets or parts
thereof where angle parking is lawfully permitted.  However, no angle
parking shall be permitted on a state route unless an unoccupied roadway
width of not less than twenty-five feet is available for free-moving traffic.





      (2)   a.   No angled parking space that is located on a
state route within a municipal corporation is subject to elimination,
irrespective of whether there is or is not at least twenty-five feet of
unoccupied roadway width available for free-moving traffic at the location of
that angled parking space, unless the municipal corporation approves of the
elimination of the angled parking space.





         b.   Replacement, repainting or any other repair
performed by or on behalf of the municipal corporation of the lines that
indicate the angled parking space does not constitute an intent by the
municipal corporation to eliminate the angled parking space.










   (C)   (1)   a.   Except as provided in subsection (C)(1)(b)
hereof, no vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the
vehicle facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side
of the road or highway.





         b.   The operator of a motorcycle may back the
motorcycle into an angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked
it is facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on the side of
the road or highway.





      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle
into a parking space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road
or highway.  The motorcycle may face any direction when so parked.  Not
more than two motorcycles at a time shall be parked in a parking space as
described in subsection (C)(2) of this section irrespective of whether or not
the space is metered.










   (D)   Notwithstanding any provision of this Code or any rule, air
compressors, tractors, trucks and other equipment, while being used in the
construction, reconstruction, installation, repair or removal of facilities
near, on, over or under a street, may stop, stand or park where necessary in
order to perform such work, provided a flagperson is on duty, or warning
signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the Ohio Director of
Transportation.










   (E)   Special parking locations and privileges for persons with
disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known as
handicapped parking spaces or disability parking spaces shall be provided and
designated by the Municipality and all agencies and instrumentalities thereof
at all offices and facilities, where parking is provided, whether owned,
rented or leased, and at all publicly owned parking garages.  The locations
shall be designated through the posting of an elevated sign, whether
permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international symbol of
access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators and
ramps.  All elevated signs posted in accordance with this subsection and
Ohio R.C. 3781.111 (C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the
distance from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not
less than five feet.  If a new sign or a replacement sign designating a
special parking location is posted on or after October 14, 1999, there also
shall be affixed upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the
designating sign a notice that states the fine applicable for the offense of
parking a motor vehicle in the special designated parking location if the
motor vehicle is not legally entitled to be parked in that location.










   (F)   (1)   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park any
motor vehicle at special parking locations provided under subsection (E)
hereof, or at special clearly marked parking locations provided in or on
privately owned parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and
designated in accordance with subsection (E) hereof, unless one of the
following applies:










            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for
the transport of a person with a disability that limits or impairs the
ability to walk and is displaying a valid removable windshield placard or
special license plates;










            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for
the transport of a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card or
special handicapped license plates.










         (b)   Any motor vehicle that is parked in a special
marked parking location in violation of subsection (F)(1)(a) of this section
may be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the Police
Department.  A motor vehicle that is so towed or removed shall not be
released to its owner until the owner presents proof of ownership of the
motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the
Municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles.  If the motor vehicle is
a leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the lessee
presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and pays
all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the Municipality for towing
and storing motor vehicles.










         (c)   If a person is charged with a violation of
subsection (F)(1)(a) of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the
charge that the person suffered an injury not more than seventy-two hours
prior to the time the person was issued the ticket or citation and that,
because of the injury, the person meets at least one of the criteria
contained in Ohio R.C. 4503.44(A)(1).










      (2)   No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle in
an area that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by
diagonal stripes and is located immediately adjacent to a special parking
location provided under subsection (E) of this section or at a special
clearly marked parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking
lot, parking garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with
that subsection.










   (G)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport
of a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and
is displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary removable
windshield placard or special license plates, or when a motor vehicle is
being operated by or for the transport of a handicapped person and is
displaying a parking card or special handicapped license plates, the motor
vehicle is permitted to park for a period of two hours in excess of the legal
parking period permitted by local authorities, except where local ordinances
or police rules provide otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in such a
manner as to be clearly a traffic hazard.










   (H)   No owner of an office, facility, or parking garage where
special parking locations must be designated in accordance with division (E)
of this section shall fail to properly mark the special parking locations as
required by that division or fail to maintain the markings of the special
locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or movable
signs.










   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person
or organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or special
license plates if the parking card or special license plates issued to the
person or organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered
or revoked.










   (J)   As used in this section:





      (1)   HANDICAPPED PERSON means any person who has lost the use
of one or both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or so severely
handicapped as to be unable to move without the aid of crutches or a
wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a permanent cardiovascular,
pulmonary, or other handicapping condition.





      (2)   PERSON  WITH  A  DISABILITY THAT LIMITS OR IMPAIRS
THE ABILITY TO WALK has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.





      (3)   SPECIAL LICENSE PLATES and REMOVABLE WINDSHIELD PLACARD
mean any license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary
removable windshield placard issued under R.C. § 4503.41 or R.C. § 4503.44,
and also mean any substantially similar license plates or removable
windshield placard or temporary removable windshield placard issued by a
state, district, country, or sovereignty. 





(R.C. § 4511.69)










   (K)   At the request of a handicapped person, as defined in division
(J) above, the city may designate specific areas on any street, alley, or
other public property exclusively for the parking of vehicles operated or
used for the transportation of handicapped persons, to facilitate the ingress
and egress of that handicapped person to his place of residence.  Any
non-handicapped person found parking or standing a vehicle in an area
designated solely for parking by handicapped persons, shall be guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2353, passed 12-14-82)










   (L)   Whoever violates divisions (A), (C), or (F) above, shall be
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(R.C. § 4511.99(F))










   (M)   Whoever violates division (H) of this section shall be
punished as follows:





      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (M)(2) of this
section, the offender shall be issued a warning;





      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of division (H) if this section, or a state law
or municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to this section, the
offender shall not be issued a warning  but  shall  be  fined  $25 
for  each  parking location that is not properly marked or whose markings
are not properly maintained.





(R.C. § 4511.99(L)) Penalty, see § 70.99









73.05  MAXIMUM 72 HOUR PARKING.




   Except as provided in § 73.13 hereof, no person shall park a vehicle
on any street, alley, or other public property in excess of 72 consecutive
hours.  Due notice to move the vehicle shall be given to the owner if his
identity can be reasonably ascertained.  If not moved within a reasonable
time after the expiration of 72 hours, any police officer may move the
vehicle or have it moved, and any expenses incurred in moving the vehicle
shall be assessed against the owner of the vehicle. 





(Ord. 2080, passed 4-25-78)









73.06  SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.




   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:





   (A)   Displaying any vehicle for sale;










   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing any vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.









73.07  UNATTENDED VEHICLE: DUTY TO STOP ENGINE, REMOVE KEY, SET BRAKE, AND
TURN WHEELS.




   (A)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the
ignition, removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking
brake, and, when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the
front wheels to the curb or side of the highway.





   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:





      (1)   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;





      (2)   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it
is parked;





      (3)   An emergency vehicle;





      (4)   A public safety vehicle.










   (B)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of
the engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition
of a motor vehicle shall not apply to an emergency vehicle or a public safety
vehicle. 
(R.C. § 4511.661)  Penalty, see § 70.99









73.08  OPENING VEHICLE DOOR ON TRAFFIC SIDE.




   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be
done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic
for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(R.C. § 4511.70 (C))  Penalty, see § 70.99









73.09  TRUCK LOADING ZONES.




   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length
of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours
when the provision applicable to the zones are in effect.  In no case shall
the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
Penalty, see § 70.99









73.10  BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.




   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a
bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any stop
or stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that
the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when
the stopping does not interfere with any bus or  taxicab waiting to enter or
about to enter the zone, and then only for a period not to exceed 3 minutes,
if the stopping is not prohibited there in by posted signs.










   (B)   The operator of a bus shall not stop, stand, or park the
vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted
as such, except in case of an emergency.










   (C)   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop on a public
street in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right front wheel of
the vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus
approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of
other vehicular traffic.










   (D)   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle
upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated and
posted as such.  This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab
from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking
provisions at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. Penalty, see § 70.99









73.11  PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW  STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.




   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street,
other than an alley, in a manner or under such conditions as to leave
available less than 10 feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of
vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the
actual loading or unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police
officer or traffic control signal.










   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and
unloading, and then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.





Penalty, see § 70.99









73.12  PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON  STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.




   (A)   Upon any street or highway outside a business or residence
district, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part of the street or
highway if it is practicable to stop, park or so leave the vehicle off the
paved or main traveled part of the street or highway.  In every event, a
clear and unobstructed portion of the street or highway opposite the standing
vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear
view of the stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in
each direction upon the street or highway.










   (B)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which
is disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a
street or highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to
avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.





(R.C. § 4511.66)










   (C)   No recreational vehicle exceeding 19 feet in total length, or
8 feet in width, or 8 feet 6 inches in height shall park in a public street
or city right-of-way for more than 12 hours. 
(Ord. 2640, passed 1-26-88)  Penalty, see § 70.99









73.13  TRUCK, TRAILER, AND SEMITRAILER  PARKING.




   Parking on any public street, alley, or other public property for more
than one hour by trucks, trailers, or semitrailers so designed as to be
dependent upon commercial tractors for motive power is prohibited, other than
temporary parking for the purpose of and while actually involved in loading
or unloading.  This section shall not apply to those trucks commonly known
as pick-up trucks.





(Ord. 2080, passed 4-25-78)  Penalty, see § 70.99









73.14  AUTHORITY TO SUSPEND OR VARY  PARKING VIOLATIONS.




   The City Manager shall have the authority, after obtaining approval
from Council, to suspend or vary the requirements of these parking
regulations to accommodate persons attending special events in the city.
(Ord. 2713, passed 6-19-89)










PARKING METERS









73.15  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.





   (A)   PARKING METER.  A mechanical device installed for the
regulation of parking by lawful authority.  Each parking meter shall contain
a slot for the deposit of lawful coin of the United States and a receptacle
for receiving and storing the coin.  Each parking meter shall display brief
directions as to its operation and the value of lawful coin required to be
deposited.  Each parking meter shall contain a timing mechanism which shall
indicate either a balance of legal parking time or overtime parking by an
appropriate signal at the expiration of the lawful time.










   (B)   PARKING METER SPACE.  A space within a parking meter area,
which is designated for the parking of a single vehicle by marked lines on
the curb or paved surface area adjacent to a parking meter. Posted notice on
the meter or on signs shall indicate the maximum consecutive parking time
limit during which a vehicle may be legally parked in a particular parking
meter space and the days and hours when the requirement to deposit lawful
coin shall apply.









73.16  PARKING WITHIN MARKED LINES OF METER SPACE; EXCEPTIONS.




   No person shall park a vehicle in a parking meter space in a way that
the vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so
designated by marked lines, except for trucks, trailers or semitrailers which
are parked only during loading or unloading operations. 
Penalty, see § 70.99









73.17  DEPOSIT OF COIN REQUIRED;  ILLEGAL PARKING.




   (A)   No person shall cause, allow or permit a vehicle to occupy a
parking meter space during the hours when the provisions applicable to the
space are in effect, unless he shall deposit a lawful coin of the United
States of appropriate denomination in the adjacent parking meter, as required
by directions on the meter.  The person is not required to deposit a coin in
a meter which indicates a balance of unused legal parking time left by the
previous occupant of the space, so long as his occupancy of the space does
not exceed the indicated unused parking time.  The parking meter space may
be lawfully occupied by the vehicle during the balance of legal parking time
shown on the meter provided the occupancy does not exceed the established
maximum time limit.










   (B)   No person shall fail to comply with directions displayed on
the parking meter or fail to set the timing mechanism in operation when so
required.










   (C)   No person shall cause, allow or permit a vehicle to occupy a
meter space beyond the maximum consecutive parking time limit lawfully
prescribed, for the particular space, occupied, by appropriate notice on the
meter or on posted signs, irrespective of the number or amount of coin
deposited in such meter. 
Penalty, see § 70.99









73.18  PARKING PROHIBITED IN METER SPACE.




   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, no person shall park in
a parking meter space when otherwise directed by a police officer or fireman
or when parking is prohibited by properly posted signs.





Penalty, see § 70.99









73.19  DEFACING METER; USE OF SLUGS.




   No person shall:





   (A)   Deface, injure, tamper, open or willfully break, destroy or
impair the usefulness of any parking meter.










   (B)   Cause, allow or permit any token, slug, false or counterfeited
coin, device or other substance to be deposited in a parking meter.









73.20  PARKING METER HOURS, LOCATION AND COIN DEPOSIT.




   The director of safety by regulation shall establish the hours that
parking meters are required to be operated, the location of parking meters
and the amount of lawful coin required to be deposited therein for legal
occupancy of a parking meter space by a vehicle.
























CHAPTER 74
PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES, AND MOTORCYCLES









Section





Pedestrians










74.01   Right-of-way in crosswalk





74.02   Right-of-way of blind person





74.03   Crossing roadway outside crosswalk; diagonal crossings at
intersections





74.04   Moving upon right half of crosswalk





74.05   Walking along highways





74.06   Use of highway for soliciting; riding on outside of vehicles





74.07   Right-of-way on sidewalk





74.08   Yielding to public safety vehicle





74.09   Walking on highway while under the influence





74.10   On bridges or railroad crossings





74.11   Electric personal assistive mobility devices










Bicycles and Motorcycles










74.15   Code application to bicycles





74.16   Riding upon seats; handle bars; helmet and glasses





74.17   Attaching bicycle or sled to vehicle





74.18   Riding bicycles and motorcycles abreast





74.19   Signal devices on bicycle





74.20   Lights and reflector on bicycle; brakes





74.21   Riding bicycle on right side of roadway; obedience to traffic
rules; passing





74.22   Reckless operation; control, course and speed





74.23   Parking of bicycle





74.24   Riding on sidewalks





74.25   Impounding for violation; revocation





74.26   Operation of motorized bicycles





74.27   License and equipment requirements





   for operation of motorized bicycles




 




PEDESTRIANS




 



74.01  RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALK.




   (A)   When traffic control signals are not in place, not in
operation, or are not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to
so yield or if required by R.C. § 4511.132, to a pedestrian crossing the
roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the
roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is
approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in
danger.










   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of
safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard.










   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply under the
conditions stated in § 74.03 (B).










   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at
any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
(R.C. § 4511.46)  Penalty, see § 70.99









74.02  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF BLIND PERSON.




   (A)   As used in this section BLIND PERSON or BLIND PEDESTRIAN means
a person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses or visual acuity greater than 20/200 but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20°.










   (B)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to
every blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominately white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.










   (C)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public
highway, street, alley or other public thoroughfare shall carry a white or
metallic cane, with or without a red tip. 
(R.C. § 4511.47) Penalty, see § 70.99









74.03  CROSSING ROADWAY OUTSIDE  CROSSWALK; DIAGONAL CROSSINGS AT 
INTERSECTIONS.




   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than
within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.










   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a
pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall
yield the right-of-way to all traffic upon the roadway.










   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control
signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in
a marked crosswalk.










   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally
unless authorized by official traffic control devices; and, when authorized
to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the
official traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.










   (E)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.





(R.C. § 4511.48)  Penalty, see § 70.99









74.04  MOVING UPON RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK.




   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks. 
(R.C. § 4511.49) Penalty, see § 70.99









74.05  WALKING ALONG HIGHWAYS.




   (A)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use if practicable, no
pedestrian shall walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.










   (B)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking
along and upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable
from the edge of the roadway.










   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any
pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable
to an outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk
only on the left side of the roadway.










   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in §§ 71.07 and 74.01, any
pedestrian upon a roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon
the roadway.





(R.C. § 4511.50)  Penalty, see § 70.99









74.06  USE OF HIGHWAY FOR SOLICITING; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLES.




   (A)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall
solicit a ride from the driver of any vehicle.










   (B)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of
soliciting employment, business or contributions from the occupant of any
vehicle.










   (C)   No person shall hang onto, or ride on the outside of any motor
vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers
making repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or
street maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.










   (D)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto, or
ride on the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway,
except mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.










   (E)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall knowingly
permit any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the
unenclosed or unroofed cargo storage area of his vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the following
applies:





      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a
properly secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in
compliance with federal standards for an occupant restraining device as
defined in R.C. § 4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were
installed at the time the vehicle was originally assembled, and the person
riding in the cargo storage area is in the seat and is wearing the seat
safety belt;





      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the
driver or the person being transported in the cargo storage area of the
truck, trailer, or semitrailer.










   (F)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall permit any
person, except for those workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in
the cargo storage area or on a tailgate of his vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched. 
(R.C. § 4511.51)










   (G)   No person shall leave or enter a vehicle which is in motion
except in an emergency necessitating such action.  Penalty, see § 70.99









74.07  RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALK.




   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
on a sidewalk.





(R.C. § 4511.441)  Penalty, see § 70.99









74.08  YIELDING TO PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.




   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle as
stated in § 72.21, every pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the
public safety vehicle.










   (B)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety
vehicle from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian.





(R.C. § 4511.452)  Penalty, see § 70.99









74.09  WALKING ON HIGHWAY WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.




   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug of
abuse, or any combination thereof, to a degree which renders himself a hazard
shall not walk or be upon a highway.





(R.C. § 4511.481) Penalty, see § 70.99









74.10  ON BRIDGES OR RAILROAD CROSSINGS.




   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or
approach thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge
operation signal indication has been given.










   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the
gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.





(R.C. § 4511.511)  Penalty, see § 70.99









74.11  ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.




   (A)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be
operated on the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions
of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with
this section.





      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those
sections of this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an
electric personal assistive mobility device apply to the device and the
person operating it whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway,
sidewalk, or path or upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.










   (B)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device
shall do any of the following:





      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of- way to all pedestrians and
human-powered vehicles at all times;





      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and
passing a pedestrian;





      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its
operator is equipped with or wearing both of the following:





         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white
light visible from a distance of not less than five hundred feet;





         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible
from all distances from one hundred feet to six hundred feet when directly in
front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.





      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway
that has an established speed limit of fifty-five miles per hour or more;





      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate
sign giving notice of the specialized use is posted on the path;





      (6)   If under eighteen years of age, operate the device
unless wearing a protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap
properly fastened;





      (7)   If under sixteen years of age, operate the device
unless, during the operation, the person is under the direct visual and
audible supervision of another person who is eighteen years of age or older
and is responsible for the immediate care of the person under sixteen years
of age.










   (C)   No person who is under fourteen years of age shall operate an
electric personal assistive mobility device.










   (D)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal
assistive mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written
statement that is substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO
REDUCE THE RISK OF SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE
EQUIPMENT - HELMET, WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS”. 
(ORC 4511.512)










   (E)   “Electric personal assistive mobility device” means a
self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to transport
only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of seven
hundred fifty watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator
who weighs one hundred seventy pounds has a maximum speed of less than twenty
miles per hour. 
(ORC 4501.01)










   (F)   Whoever violates subsection (B) or (C) hereof is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:





      (1)   The offender shall be fined ten dollars ($10.00).





      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of Ohio R.C. 4511.512 or
a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to
imposing the fine required under subsection (F)(1) hereof, shall do one of
the following:





         (a)   Order the impoundment for not less than one day
but not more than thirty days of the electric personal assistive mobility
device that was involved in the current violation of that section.  The
court shall order the device to be impounded at a safe indoor location
designated by the court and may assess storage fees of not more than five
dollars ($5.00) per day, provided the total storage, processing, and release
fees assessed against the offender or the device in connection with the
device’s impoundment or subsequent release shall not exceed fifty dollars
($50.00).





         (b)   If the court does not issue an impoundment order
pursuant to subsection (F)(2)(a)  hereof, issue an order prohibiting the
offender from operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on
the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways
set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not
more than thirty days.










   (G)   Whoever violates subsection (D) hereof is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.





(ORC 4511.512)










BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES









74.15  CODE APPLICATION TO BICYCLES.




   (A)   The provisions of this Traffic Code that are applicable to
bicycles apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any
path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 










   (B)   Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, a
bicycle operator who violates any section of this Traffic Code described in
subsection (A) of this section that is applicable to bicycles may be issued a
ticket, citation or summons by a law enforcement officer for the violation in
the same manner as the operator of a motor vehicle would be cited for the
same violation.  A person who commits any such violation while operating a
bicycle shall not have any points assessed against the person’s driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
probationary license under Ohio R.C. 4510.036.










   (C)   Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, in the
case of a violation of any section of this Traffic Code described in
subsection (A) of this section by a bicycle operator or by a motor vehicle
operator when the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle
operator endangered the lives of bicycle riders at the time of the violation,
the court, notwithstanding any provision of this Traffic Code to the
contrary, may require the bicycle operator or motor vehicle operator to take
and successfully complete a bicycling skills course approved by the court in
addition to or in lieu of any penalty otherwise prescribed by the Traffic
Code for that violation.









   (D)   Subsections (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to
violations of Section 72.45 of this Traffic Code. 
(ORC 4511.52)









   (E)   The provisions of this Traffic Code shall apply to bicycles
except those which by their nature are not applicable.









74.16  RIDING UPON SEATS; HANDLE BARS;  HELMETS AND GLASSES.



   (A)   For purposes of this section "snowmobile" has the same meaning
as given that term in Ohio R.C 4519.01.



 



   (B)   No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, or carry any other
person upon such bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat
thereon, and no person shall ride upon a bicycle other than upon such a
firmly attached and regular seat.



 



   (C)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry
any other person upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and
regular seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle
other than upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.



 



   (D)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.



 



   (E)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
seat other than while sitting upon the seat.



 



   (F)   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle
or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the
handle bars.



 



   (G)   No bicycle or motorcycle shall be used to carry more persons
at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.  No
motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher
than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the
operator's seat or saddle.



 



   (H)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (h)(2) of this
section, no person shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or
motorcycle without using safety glasses or other protective eye device. 
Except as provided in subsection (I)(3) of this section, no person who is
under the age of eighteen years, or who holds a motorcycle operator's
endorsement or license bearing "novice" designation that is currently in
effect as provided in Ohio R.C. 4507.13, shall operate a motorcycle on a
highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless wearing a United States
Department of Transportation-approved protective helmet on the person's head,
and no other person shall be a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a
person unless similarly wearing a protective helmet.  The helmet, safety
glasses or other protective eye device shall conform with rules adopted by
the Ohio Director of Public Safety.  The provisions of this subsection or a
violation thereof shall not be used in the trial of any civil action. 



 



      (2)   Subsection (H)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person operating an autocycle or cab-enclosed motorcycle when the occupant
compartment top is in place enclosing the occupants.



 




   (I)   (1)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid
temporary permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4507.05 unless
the person, at the time of such operation, is wearing on the person's head a
protective helmet that has been approved by the United States Department of
Transportation that conforms with rules adopted by the Director.










      (2)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid
temporary instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification
card issued by the Registrar pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4507.05 in any of the
following circumstances:










         (a)   At any time when lighted lights are required by
Section 72.71(A)(1);










         (b)   While carrying a passenger;










         (c)   On any limited access highway.










      (3)   Subsections (H) and (I)(1) of this section do not apply
to a person who operates or is a passenger in a cab-enclosed motorcycle when
the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the occupants.










   (J)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the
carrying of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying
children and is firmly attached to the bicycle.










   (K)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.




(ORC 4511.53)








74.17  ATTACHING BICYCLE OR SLED TO  VEHICLE.




   (A)   No person riding upon any motorcycle, bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle
upon a roadway.










   (B)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any
motorcycle, bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle to attach
the same or himself to any vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway.  This
section does not apply to the towing of a disabled vehicle. 
(R.C. § 4511.54)  Penalty, see § 70.99









74.18  RIDING BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES ABREAST.




   Persons riding bicycles or motorcycles upon a roadway shall ride not
more than 2 abreast in a single lane, except on paths or parts of roadways
set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or motorcycles.





(R.C. § 4511.55(B))  Penalty, see § 70.99









74.19  SIGNAL DEVICES ON BICYCLE.




   A bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of giving an audible
signal, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person
use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.





(ORC 4511.56)









74.20  LIGHTS AND REFLECTOR ON BICYCLE; BRAKES.



   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at the times specified in Section
72.21, shall be equipped with the following:




      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or the
operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
five hundred feet to the front; and three hundred feet to the sides.  A
generator-powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle is moving may
be used to meet this requirement.





      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from
all distances from one hundred feet to six hundred feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.





      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light
visible from a distance of five hundred feet to the rear shall be used in
addition to the red reflector;





         If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is
visible as specified in subsection (A)(2) of this section, the red lamp may
serve as the reflector and a separate reflector is not required.










   (B)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to
those required under subsection (A) of this section, except that red lamps
and red reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle and white
lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the bicycle.










   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate brake when
used on a street or highway.  (ORC 4511.56)









74.21  RIDING BICYCLE ON RIGHT SIDE OF  ROADWAY; OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC
RULES;  PASSING.




   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as
near to the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all traffic
rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a standing
vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 










   (B)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle to
ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to do so. 
Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway include
when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles,
surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do so,
including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle and an overtaking vehicle
to travel safely side by side within the lane. 
(ORC 4511.55(A))









74.22  RECKLESS OPERATION; CONTROL, COURSE AND SPEED.




   No person shall operate a bicycle:





   (A)   Without due regard for the safety and rights of pedestrians
and drivers and occupants of all other vehicles, and so as to endanger the
life, limb or property of any person while in the lawful use of the streets
or sidewalks or any other public or private property;










   (B)   Without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such
bicycle;










   (C)   In a weaving or zigzag course unless the irregular course is
necessary for safe operation in compliance with law;










   (D)   Without both hands upon the handle grips except when necessary
to give the required hand and arm signals or as provided in § 74.16 (D);










   (E)   At a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the
conditions then existing. 
Penalty, see § 70.99









74.23  PARKING OF BICYCLE.




   No person shall park a bicycle upon a sidewalk in a manner so as to
unduly interfere with pedestrian traffic or upon a roadway so as to unduly
interfere with vehicular traffic. 
Penalty, see § 70.99









74.24  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.




   No person shall operate a bicycle upon a sidewalk where signs are
erected prohibiting the operation. 
Penalty, see § 70.99









74.25  IMPOUNDING FOR VIOLATION; REVOCATION.




   Any police officer shall have the authority to remove the license from
any bicycle and impound the same, together with the license, for a period of
not more than 5 days if the bicycle is being operated in an unsafe manner or
contrary to the regulations of this title. Repetitions of successive
violations shall be sufficient cause for complete revocation of the
license.  Removal of the license and impounding of bicycles may be in
addition to other penalties provided for by this title. 
Penalty, see § 70.99









74.26  OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLES.




   In addition to those requirements set forth in § 74.27 hereof, no
person shall operate a motorized bicycle, commonly known as a MOPED as such
term is defined in R.C. § 4511.01 (H), on lands, paved walks, or paths on
any property owned or controlled by the  city, except within those areas
specifically designated for motorized vehicular traffic.





(Ord. 2033, passed 7-26-77; amend. Ord. 2262, passed 6-9-81)  Penalty, see
§ 70.99





Cross-reference:





   Moped regulations, see Ch. 76









74.27  LICENSE AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR OPERATION OF MOTORIZED
BICYCLES.




   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle, commonly known as a MOPED
as such term is defined in R.C. § 4511.01 (H) on a highway of any public or
private property used by the public for purpose of vehicular traffic or
parking unless both of the following conditions are met:










   (A)   The person is 14 years of age or older and holds either a
valid operator's license issued under R.C. Ch. § 4507 or a valid motorized
bicycle license issued after the person has passed a test provided for in
R.C. § 4511.521;










   (B)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under R.C. § 4511.521 (B) and is in proper working order.





(Ord. 2266, passed 6-9-81)  Penalty, see § 70.99
























CHAPTER 75
RAILROADS









Section










75.01   Obstructing streets by railroad agents; exceptions





75.02   Climbing upon railroad cars





75.03   Approaching crossings, etc.





75.04   Construction and maintenance requirements





75.05   Notifications





75.99   Penalty




 



75.01  OBSTRUCTING STREETS BY RAILROAD  AGENTS, EXCEPTIONS.




   (A)   No person having charge of or operating any railroad engine or
locomotive, railroad car, train or other property or equipment in the city
shall obstruct unnecessarily any street by permitting the property or devices
to remain upon or across any street for longer than 5 minutes, or permit
other obstructions to remain upon or across any street to the hindrance or
inconvenience of users of the street.










   (B)   No person having the supervision or control of any railroad
train, car, engine or locomotive, or any other person assisting the person,
shall cause or allow to be made with the train, car, engine, or locomotive,
across any of the street in the city any switch or connection, commonly
called a “running switch”.










   (C)   No person having the supervision or control of any railroad
train, car, locomotive or other rolling stock and equipment shall permit the
property to stand or remain either on the streets or on the right-of-way or
property of the railway for a period longer than 5 minutes in duration, so as
to prevent or hamper a full view of the tracks for at least 500 feet in both
directions from the intersection of the public street and the railroad
crossing, by any person in lawful use of the public streets, unless an
electric signaling device is in operation at the time to warn of approaching
trains or other rolling stock, or unless a watchman is on duty at the time.










   (D)   However, this section shall not be construed to prohibit or
interfere with the operation of the railroad equipment when continuous and
proceeding uninterrupted in one direction, at a lawful rate of speed, and
composed of not more than one standard unit traveling on the same track.










   (E)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. 
('70 Code § 521.01) Penalty, see § 70.99









75.02  CLIMBING UPON RAILROAD CARS.




   (A)   No person shall climb, jump, step or stand upon or cling or
attach himself to a locomotive, engine or car upon the track of a railroad,
unless in compliance with law or by permission under the rules and
regulations of the corporation managing the railroad.
(R.C. § 4999.02)










   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. 
('70 Code, § 521.02) Penalty, see § 70.99









75.03  APPROACHING CROSSINGS, ETC.




   (A)   No person in charge of a locomotive shall do the following:





      (1)   Fail to bring the locomotive to a full stop at least 200
feet before arriving at a crossing with another track, or proceed through the
crossing before signaling to do so or before the way is clear.





      (2)   When approaching a grade crossing fail to sound the
locomotive whistle at frequent intervals, beginning not less than 1500 feet
from the crossing and continuing until the locomotive has passed the crossing.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.  If violation of this section causes physical harm to any
person,  whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree. 
('70 Code, § 521.03)  Penalty, see § 70.99









75.04  CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)   The owner or operator of every railroad track or railroad spur
which intersects, at grade, a public street in the city, shall be and hereby
is required to install and maintain a good smooth and level crossing at the
intersections.  The crossing shall be paved with wood ties and/or steel
rails, in combination with asphalt or concrete; or with reinforced concrete
slabs or rubber slabs or other suitable and durable materials approved by the
service director of the city.  The crossing shall be constructed so that its
width extends at least 2 feet outside the curb lines of both sides of the
intersected street, and so that its length extends the full width of the
railroad right-of-way.  When more than one track intersects a street and the
nearest rails of the tracks are less than 15 feet apart, the paving or
material herein required shall extend between the tracks as well as between
the rails and 2 feet outside the outermost rails.  The crossing shall be
constructed and maintained so as to facilitate safe and speedy vehicular
traffic over the crossing at all times.










   (B)   The owner or operator shall also install, maintain and provide
safe sidewalks of asphalt or concrete to be laid outside the curb lines of
the intersected street for the full width of the railroad right-of-way.  The
sidewalks shall be of the same width as, and shall align with, any existing
or proposed sidewalks intersected by the railroad track right-of-way.  The
service director may, however, at his option, waive the above described
sidewalk requirements at those crossings which are infrequently used by
pedestrians, until such time that the service director determines the
sidewalks are necessary. 
(Ord. 1664, passed 5-11-70)  Penalty, see § 75.99









75.05  NOTIFICATION.




   The service director shall serve a written notice upon the nearest
station agent or section foreman having charge of that portion of the
railroad where the intersection occurs at the crossing or sidewalk, described
in § 75.04, stating that the crossing must be constructed, rebuilt or
repaired.  The notice shall fully describe the work to be done and the time
and manner of constructing it and shall state the consequences of failure to
comply with the notice.  Upon receipt of the notice, the owner or operator
shall commence construction, repair or rebuilding of the specified crossing
within 30 days and shall prosecute it in good faith until completion.  Upon
failure or refusal of any owner or operator or his officer or agent to comply
with the notice, the city shall cause summons to be issued in accordance with
law. 
(Ord. 1664, passed 5-11-70)  Penalty, see § 75.99









75.99  PENALTY.




   Any owner, operator, station agent or section foreman failing to comply
with §§ 75.04 and 75.05 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a
fine of not less than $1 nor more than $50.  Each day's violation shall
constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1664, passed 5-11-70)
























CHAPTER 76
MOPED REGULATIONS









Section










76.01   Code application and definition





76.02   Riding upon seats; handlebars; helmets and glasses





76.03   Attaching a moped to another motor vehicle





76.04   Riding mopeds on right side of roadway and abreast





76.05   Lights, signals, devices, brakes on mopeds





76.06   Safe riding regulations for mopeds





76.07   Parking of moped





76.08   Impounding of moped





76.09   Penalty




 




Cross-reference:




License and equipment requirements for motorized bicycles, see § 74.27



Operation of motorized bicycles, see § 74.26



 



76.01  CODE APPLICATION AND DEFINITION.




   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code which are applicable to
mopeds apply whenever a moped is operated upon any street, or any public or
private property used by the public for pedestrian or recreational purposes,
or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of mopeds.










   (B)   Every person riding a moped upon a roadway shall be granted
all the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
driver of a vehicle under the provisions of this traffic code, except as to
special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of this
traffic code which by their nature can have no application.










   (C)   MOPED means any vehicle having either two tandem wheels or one
wheel in front and two wheels in the rear, that is capable of being peddled
and is equipped with a helper motor and that otherwise complies with R.C. §
4511.01(H)





(Ord. 2407, passed 8-9-83)









76.02  RIDING UPON SEATS; HANDLEBARS; HELMETS AND GLASSES.




   (A)   A person operating a moped shall not ride other than upon the
permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor carry any other person upon
the moped; nor shall any person ride upon a moped other than upon such firmly
attached regular seat.










   (B)   A person shall ride upon a moped only while sitting astride
the seat, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the moped.










   (C)   No moped shall be used to carry more than one person, nor
shall any moped  be operated on a highway when the handlebars or grips are
more than 15 inches higher than the seat or saddle for the operator.










   (D)   No person shall operate a moped without using safety glasses
or other protective eye device.  No person who is under the age of 18 years,
or who holds a motorized bicycle license as provided in R.C. § 4511.521,
shall operate a moped on a highway unless wearing a protective helmet on his
head.  The helmet, safety glasses or other protective eye device shall
conform with regulations prescribed and promulgated by the Department of
Highway Safety.  The provisions of this division or a violation thereof,
shall not be used in the trial of any civil action.





(Ord. 2407, passed 8-9-83)  Penalty, see § 76.09









76.03  ATTACHING A MOPED TO ANOTHER MOTOR VEHICLE.




   (A)   No person riding upon any moped shall attach it or himself to
any vehicle upon a roadway.










   (B)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any
moped to attach it or himself to any vehicle while it is moving upon a
roadway. This section does not apply to the towing of a disabled vehicle.





(Ord. 2407, passed 8-9-83)  Penalty, see § 76.09









76.04  RIDING MOPEDS ON RIGHT SIDE OF  ROADWAY AND ABREAST.




   (A)   Every person operating a moped upon a roadway shall ride as
near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, obeying all traffic
rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a standing
vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.










   (B)   Persons riding mopeds shall ride not more than two abreast in
a single lane, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of mopeds.





(Ord. 2407, passed 8-9-83)  Penalty, see § 76.09









76.05  LIGHTS, SIGNALS, DEVICES, BRAKES ON MOPEDS.




   (A)   Every moped, when in use during the times when lights are
necessary shall be equipped with a lamp on the front that shall emit a white
light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front; and with a
red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Director of Public Safety
that shall be visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the
rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle, and a lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet
to the rear shall be used in addition to the red reflector.










   (B)   Every moped shall be equipped with an adequate brake when used
on a street or highway.





(Ord. 2407, passed 8-9-83)  Penalty, see § 76.09









76.06  SAFE RIDING REGULATIONS FOR  MOPEDS.




   (A)   No person operating a moped shall remove both feet from the
pedals or practice or perform any acrobatic riding on any of the streets or
public places in the city.










   (B)   The operator of a moped emerging from an alley, driveway, or
building, shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon
entering the roadway yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on
the roadway.










   (C)   No person shall operate a moped on a sidewalk or any public or
private property used by the public for pedestrian or recreational purposes.










   (D)   No person shall operate a moped:





      (1)   Without due regard for the safety and rights of
pedestrians and drivers and occupants of all other vehicles, and so as to
endanger the life, limb, or property of any person while in the lawful use of
the streets, sidewalks, or any other public or private property.





      (2)   Without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over
the moped.





      (3)   In a weaving or zigzag course, unless the irregular
course is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.





      (4)   Without both hands upon the handle grips except when
necessary to give the required hand and arm signals.





      (5)   At a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under
the conditions then existing.
(Ord. 2407, passed 8-9-83)  Penalty, see § 76.09









76.07  PARKING OF MOPED.




   No person shall park a moped upon a street or sidewalk in such a manner
so as to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.





(Ord. 2407, passed 8-9-83)









76.08  IMPOUNDING OF MOPED.




   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to seize and
impound any moped which is parked in violation of § 76.07.  Any moped so
seized and impounded shall be held by the Department until the owner thereof,
or, if the owner is a minor, the owner and such owner's parent or guardian,
shall appear at the Department and give assurance that the violation shall
not be repeated.





(Ord. 2407, passed 8-9-83)









76.09  PENALTY.




   See § 70.99 for misdemeanor classifications and penalties.
(Ord. 2407, passed 8-9-83)
























CHAPTER 77
MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX









Section










77.01   Purpose





77.02   Rate





77.03   Term





77.04   Payment procedure




 



77.01  PURPOSE.




   (A)   There is hereby levied an annual license tax upon the
operation of motor vehicles on the public roads or highways pursuant to R.C.
§ 4504.172 for the purposes of paying the costs and expenses of enforcing
and administering the tax provided for in this chapter;  to provide
additional revenue for the purposes set forth in R.C. § 4504.06; and to
supplement revenue already available for such purposes.










   (B)   All moneys derived from this tax shall be used by the city for
the purposes specified herein.





(Ord. 2659, passed 5-24-88)









77.02  RATE.




   Such tax shall be at the rate of $5 per motor vehicle on each and every
motor vehicle the district of registration of which, as defined in R.C. §
4503.10, is in this city.





(Ord. 2659, passed 5-24-88)









77.03  TERM.




   The tax imposed by this chapter shall apply to and be in effect for
every registration year commencing January 1 of each year.





(Ord. 2659, passed 5-24-88)









77.04  PAYMENT PROCEDURE.




   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid to the State Registrar of
Motor Vehicles or to a Deputy Registrar at the time application for
registration of a motor vehicle is made, as provided in R.C. § 4503.10.





(Ord. 2659, passed 5-24-88)
























CHAPTER 79
COMMERCIAL DRIVERS









Section










79.01   Definitions





79.02   Prerequisites to operation of a commercial motor vehicle





79.03   Prohibitions





79.04   Criminal offenses





79.05   Employment of drivers of commercial vehicles




 



79.01  DEFINITIONS.




   As used in this chapter:





   (A)   "Alcohol concentration" means the concentration of alcohol in
a person's blood, breath or urine.  When expressed as a percentage, it means
grams of alcohol per the following:





      (1)   One hundred milliliters of whole blood, blood serum, or
blood plasma;





      (2)   Two hundred ten liters of breath;





      (3)   One hundred milliliters of urine.










   (B)   "Commercial driver's license" means a license issued in
accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 that authorizes an individual to drive
a commercial motor vehicle.










   (C)   "Commercial motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle designed or
used to transport persons or property that meets any of the following
qualifications:





      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight
or combined gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided
the gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or
vehicles being towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;





      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross
vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;





      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is
not a class A or class B vehicle, but is designed to transport sixteen or
more passengers including the driver;





      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross
vehicle weight rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to
transport fewer than sixteen passengers including the driver;





      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding
is required under subpart F of 49 C.F.R. part 172, as amended;





      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is
designed to be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is
considered by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a
commercial motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, a motorized crane, a
vehicle whose function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a
portable crane.










   (D)   "Controlled substance" means all of the following:





      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under
the "Controlled Substances Act," 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C.A. 802(6), as
amended;





      (2)   Any substance included in schedules I through V of 21
C.F.R. part 1308, as amended;





      (3)   Any drug of abuse.










   (E)   "Disqualification" means any of the following:





      (1)   The suspension, revocation, or cancellation of a
person’s privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle;





      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a
commercial motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law
relating to motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight,
or vehicle defect violations;





      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. 391.










   (F)   "Drive" means to drive, operate or be in physical control of a
motor vehicle.










   (G)   "Driver" means any person who drives, operates or is in
physical control of a commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a
commercial driver's license.










   (H)   "Driver's license" means a license issued by the Ohio Bureau
of Motor Vehicles that authorizes an individual to drive.










   (I)   "Drug of abuse" means any controlled substance, dangerous drug
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4729.01 or over-the-counter medication that, when
taken in quantities exceeding the recommended dosage, can result in
impairment of judgment or reflexes.










   (J)   "Employer" means any person, including the Federal Government,
any state and a political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a
commercial motor vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.










   (K)   “Endorsement” means an authorization on a person’s
commercial driver’s license that is required to permit the person to
operate a specified type of commercial motor vehicle.










   (L)   “Farm truck” means a truck controlled and operated by a
farmer for use in the transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not
more than one hundred fifty miles, of products of the farm, including
livestock and its products, poultry and its products, floricultural and
horticultural products, and in the transportation to the farm, from a
distance of not more than one hundred fifty miles, of supplies for the farm,
including tile, fence, and every other thing or commodity used in
agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock and poultry production,
and livestock, poultry and other animals and things used for breeding,
feeding, or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm, when the
truck is operated in accordance with this subsection and is not used in the
operations of a motor transportation company or private motor carrier, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4923.01.










   (M)   “Fatality” means the death of a person as the result of a
motor vehicle accident occurring not more than three hundred sixty-five days
prior to the date of a death.










   (N)   "Felony" means any offense under federal or state law that is
punishable by death or specifically classified as a felony under the law of
this State, regardless of the penalty that may be imposed.










   (O)   "Foreign jurisdiction" means any jurisdiction other than a
state.










   (P)   "Gross vehicle weight rating" means the value specified by the
manufacturer as the maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination
vehicle.  The gross vehicle weight rating of a combination vehicle is the
gross vehicle weight rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight
rating of each towed unit.










   (Q)   "Hazardous materials" means any material that has been
designated as hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103 and is required to be placarded
under subpart F of 49 C.F.R. part 172 or any quantity of a material listed as
a select agent or toxin in 42 C.F.R. part 73, as amended.










   (R)   "Motor vehicle" means a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or
semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except
that such term does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or
semitrailer operated exclusively on a rail.










   (S)   “Out-of-service order” means a declaration by an
authorized enforcement officer of a federal, state, local, Canadian or
Mexican jurisdiction declaring that a driver, commercial motor vehicle or
commercial motor carrier operation is out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R.
390.5.










   (T)   “Public safety vehicle” has the same meaning as in
divisions (E)(1) and (3) of Ohio R.C. 4511.01.










   (U)   “Recreational vehicle” includes every vehicle that is
defined as a recreational vehicle in Ohio R.C. 4501.01 and is used
exclusively for purposes other than engaging in business for profit.










   (V)   “School bus” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.










   (W)   "State" means a state of the United States and includes the
District of Columbia.










   (X)   “Tester” means a person or entity acting pursuant to a
valid agreement entered into pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4506.09.










   (Y)   "United States" means the fifty states and the District of
Columbia.










   (Z)   "Vehicle" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.





(ORC 4506.01)









79.02  PREREQUISITES TO OPERATION OF A COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.




   (A)   Except as provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section,
the following shall apply:





      (1)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a
highway in this Municipality unless the person holds, and has in the person's
possession, any of the following:





         (a)   A valid commercial driver's license with proper
endorsements for the motor vehicle being driven, issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles, or by another jurisdiction recognized by this State;





         (b)   A valid examiner's commercial driving permit
issued under Ohio R.C. 4506.13;





         (c)   A valid restricted commercial driver's license and
waiver for farm-related service industries issued under Ohio R.C. 4506.24;





         (d)   A valid commercial driver's license temporary
instruction permit issued by the Registrar, provided that the person is
accompanied by an authorized state driver's license examiner or tester or a
person who has been issued and has in the person's immediate possession a
current, valid commercial driver's license and who meets the requirements of
Ohio R.C. 4506.06(B).





      (2)   No person who has been a resident of this State for
thirty days or longer shall drive a commercial motor vehicle under the
authority of a commercial driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction.










   (B)   Nothing in subsection (A) of this section applies to any
qualified person when engaged in the operation of any of the following:





      (1)   A farm truck;





      (2)   Fire equipment for a fire department, volunteer or
nonvolunteer fire company, fire district, or joint fire district;





      (3)   A public safety vehicle used to provide transportation
or emergency medical service for ill or injured persons;





      (4)   A recreational vehicle;





      (5)   A commercial motor vehicle within the boundaries of an
eligible unit of local government, if the person is employed by the eligible
unit of local government and is operating the commercial motor vehicle for
the purpose of removing snow or ice from a roadway by plowing, sanding, or
salting, but only if either the employee who holds a commercial driver’s
license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 and ordinarily operates a
commercial motor vehicle for these purposes is unable to operate the vehicle,
or the employing eligible unit of local government determines that a snow or
ice emergency exists that requires additional assistance;





      (6)   A vehicle operated for military purposes by any member
or uniformed employee of the armed forces of the United States or their
reserve components, including the Ohio national guard.  This exception does
not apply to United States reserved technicians.





      (7)   A commercial motor vehicle that is operated for
nonbusiness purposes.  “Operated for nonbusiness purposes” means that
the commercial motor vehicle is not used in commerce as “commerce” is
defined in 49 C.F.R. 383.5, as amended, and is not regulated by the Public
Utilities Commission pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4905, 4921, or 4923.





      (8)   A motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the
transportation of goods and not persons, while that motor vehicle is being
used for the occasional transportation of personal property by individuals
not for compensation and not in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise.





      (9)   A police SWAT team vehicle.





      (10)   A police vehicle used to transport prisoners.










   (C)   Nothing contained in subsection (B)(5) of this section shall
be construed as preempting or superseding any law, rule, or regulation of
this State concerning the safe operation of commercial motor vehicles.










   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.





(ORC 4506.03)









79.03  PROHIBITIONS.




   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:





      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the
person’s possession or otherwise under the person’s control more than one
valid driver's license issued by this State, any other state or by a foreign
jurisdiction;





      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this
Municipality in violation of an out-of-service order, while the person’s
driving privilege is suspended, revoked or canceled, or while the person is
subject to disqualification;





      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in this Municipality
under authority of a commercial driver's license issued by another state or a
foreign jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this State for thirty
days or longer.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.





(ORC 4506.04)









79.04  CRIMINAL OFFENSES.




   (A)   No person who holds a commercial driver's license, commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor
vehicle for which a commercial driver's license is required shall do any of
the following:





      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a
measureable or detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in
the person's blood, breath or urine;





      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of four-hundredths of one per cent or more by whole blood or
breath;





      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of forty-eight-thousandths of one per cent or more by blood
serum or blood plasma;





      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of fifty-six-thousandths of one per cent or more by urine;





      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a
controlled substance;





      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19
or a municipal OVI ordinance as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.181;





      (7)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony;





      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under Ohio R.C. 4506.17 or
4511.191;





      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person's
commercial driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving
privileges are revoked, suspended, canceled, or disqualified;





      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a
commercial motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, the offenses of
aggravated vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide, and vehicular manslaughter;





      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of
Sections72.66 to 72.68;





      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any
provision of Ohio R.C. 4511.61 to 4511.63 or any federal or local law or
ordinance pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings;





      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony
involving the manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled
substance as defined in Ohio R.C. 3719.01 or the possession with intent to
manufacture, distribute, or dispose a controlled substance.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.





(ORC 4506.15)









79.05  EMPLOYMENT OF DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.




   (A)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as
a driver of a commercial motor vehicle to provide the applicant’s
employment history for the ten years preceding the date the employment
application is submitted to the prospective employer.  The following
information shall be submitted:





      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s
previous employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial
motor vehicle;





      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;





      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.










   (B)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver
employed by the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any
period in which any of the following apply:





      (1)   The driver's commercial driver's license is suspended,
revoked or canceled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;





      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently
is disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or
foreign jurisdiction;





      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is
driving, or the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order
in any state or foreign jurisdiction;





      (4)   The driver has more than one driver's license.









   (C)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to
operate a commercial motor vehicle in violation of Section 79.04.









   (D)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to
operate a commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid,
current commercial driver's license or commercial driver's  license
temporary instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the
vehicle.  No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to
operate a commercial motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the
driver's commercial driver's license or commercial driver's license temporary
instruction permit.










   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (A), (B) or (D) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.










      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (C) of this section may be
assessed a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars.  (ORC 4506.20)



































TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS









    Chapter










Chap. 90.   ANIMALS










Chap. 91.   LIQUOR CONTROL










Chap. 92.   STREET AND SIDEWALK EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS










Chap. 93.   TREES, WEEDS, AND GRASSES  (Repealed)










Chap. 94.   INCOME TAX










Chap. 94.5.   INCOME TAX EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2016










Chap. 95.   PARKS AND RECREATION










Chap. 96.   LOST OR ABANDONED PROPERTY










Chap. 97.   RIGHTS OF WAY










Chap. 98.     EMERGENCY SERVICES





























CHAPTER 90
ANIMALS









Section










90.01   Definitions.





90.02   Animals, cats and dogs running at large.





90.021   Tethering and trolleying of dogs.





90.03   Impounding and disposition; records.





90.04   Abandoning animals.





90.05   Killing, injuring or poisoning animals.





90.06   Cruelty to animals generally.





90.061   Cruelty to companion animals.





90.07   Nuisance conditions prohibited.





90.08   Registration of dogs; tags to be worn.





90.09   Hindering capture of an  animal.





90.10   Animal bites; quarantine and reporting.





90.11   Hunting prohibited.





90.12   Animal owners liable for damage to property.





90.13   Birds and animals constituting a nuisance; abatement.





90.14   Outdoor feeding prohibited.





90.15   Marketing wild, dangerous or exotic animals.





90.16   Keeping wild, dangerous or exotic animals.





90.17   Compliance with orders from the City Manager.





90.18   Escape of animal; notification.









 



90.01   DEFINITIONS.




   For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.





 





   (A)     ANIMAL. Means any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or
wild.










   (B)   ANIMAL WARDEN. Means any Officer with the Montgomery County
Animal Resource Center, Dayton Humane Society or Police Officer.










   (C)   AT LARGE.  Means off the premises of the owner and/or not
under control or restrained.










   (D)   CAT. Means any animal of the felis catus species, male or
female.










   (E)   DANGEROUS. Means any wild animal, reptile, or fowl which is
carnivorous and is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or
disposition; and which because of its size, vicious nature, or other
characteristics would constitute a danger to humane life or property if it is
not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters.










   (F)   DOG. Means any member of the canis lupus familiaris species,
male or female.










   (G)   DOMESTICATED. Means any animal which is accepted by the
general public as tamable and bred as a tamed animal for the purposes of man.










   (H)   EXOTIC ANIMAL. Means any animal foreign, including a hybrid
offspring thereof, not indigenous to the State of Ohio and all animals
defined under Ohio R.C. 935.01 (C).










   (I)   IN LEASH.  Means the animal is securely attached to a leash
of size, type and strength necessary to control the behavior of the animal to
which the leash is attached, and the leash is securely attached to a physical
restraint of size and strength to maintain the animal within the restrained
physical area of the leash, or the leash is securely held at all times in the
hand of a person with reasonable judgment and the physical size to control
the behavior of the leashed animal. The leash shall be no longer than six
feet (6 ft.) in length.










   (J)   OWNER. Means any person, firm, corporation, business, or any
affiliated or unaffiliated group of persons owning, keeping, possessing,
harboring, maintaining or having the care, custody and control of one or more
animals. Any entity shall be presumed to be the owner, keeper or harborer of
an animal for purposes of this chapter if such entity causes or does the
following:










      (1)   Knowingly allows any animal to remain upon his or her
property;










      (2)   Knowingly or recklessly feeds such animal food or water;










      (3)   Knowingly restrains such animal from leaving his or her
property.










     (K)    PUBLIC NUISANCE. Means any animal which:










      (1)   Molests passersby or passing vehicles; or










      (2)   Attacks other animals; or










      (3)   Trespasses on school grounds; or










      (4)   Is repeatedly at large; or










      (5)   Damages private or public property; or










      (6)   Vocally disturbs the peace.










   (L)   RESTRICTED SNAKE. Means any snake as defined in Chapter 935 of
the Ohio Revised Code.










   (M)   SERIOUS INJURY. Means any of the following:










      (1)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of
death;










      (2)   Any physical harm that involves a permanent incapacity,
whether partial or total, or a temporary substantial incapacity;










      (3)   Any physical harm that involves a permanent
disfigurement or a temporary, serious disfigurement;










      (4)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration
that results in substantial suffering or any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.










   (N)   SHELTER. Means a man-made enclosure, windbreak, sunshade, or
natural windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth's contour,
tree development, or vegetation, a structure or device sufficient to protect
any animal from direct contact with the elements (sun, wind, rain snow, ice,
etc.)










   (O)   STRAY. Means any animal running at large without
identification.










   (P)   WILD ANIMAL.  Means any animal which generally lives in its
original, natural state and habitat, including a hybrid offspring thereof,
which is not naturally tamed or domesticated.










   (Q)   TROLLEY SYSTEM. Means a cable and pulley system with a tether
attached to two (2) stationary points no shorter than seven (7) feet in
height and fifteen (15) feet in length between fixed points.










   (R)   TETHER. Means a rope, cable or chain of adequate size and
strength to effectively restrain the dog. Tethers shall be no shorter than
fifteen (15) feet in length nor shall they weigh more than one-eighth (1/8)
of the dog’s weight.





(Ord. 3562.  Passed 6-9-15.)









90.02 ANIMALS, CATS AND DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE.




   (A)     No person being the owner, keeper, harborer of or having
charge of horses, mules, goats, swine, bison, llamas, alpacas, cattle, sheep,
geese, ducks, turkeys, chickens or other fowl or animals shall permit them to
run at large upon any unenclosed lands, or upon the premises of another.










   (B)     No person being the owner, keeper, harborer of or having
charge of dogs shall permit them to run at large upon any unenclosed lands,
or upon the premises of another, nor shall they fail at any time to do either
of the following:










      (1)   Keep the dog physically confined or restrained upon the
premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer by a leash, tether, adequate
fence, supervision, or secure enclosure to prevent escape; or










      (2)   Keep the dog under the reasonable control of some
person; or










      (3)   Keep the dog in leash when not on the premises of the
owner, keeper or harborer.










   (C)     Exception to subsection (B) above shall be when the dog is
lawfully engaged in hunting and accompanied by the owner, keeper, harborer,
or handler of the dog.










   (D)  No owner, keeper, harborer of or having charge of any cat shall
permit them to run at large upon any unenclosed lands, or upon the premises
of another, nor shall they fail at any time to do either of the following:










        (1)     Keep the cat physically confined or restrained
upon the premises of the owner, keeper, harborer of or having charge of by an
adequate fence or secure enclosure to prevent escape; or





     





      (2)     Keep the cat under the control of some responsible
person so the cat does not roam unsupervised off the premises of the owner.










   (E)     No owner, keeper, or harborer of any female dog or cat
shall permit it to go beyond the premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer
at any time the dog or cat is in heat unless the dog or cat is properly in
leash and under the reasonable control of a person.










   (F)    Enclosures. Any dog or cat enclosed in a pen or a fenced yard
must have adequate space for exercise based on a dimension of not less than
one hundred fifty (150) square feet per dog or one hundred (100) square feet
per cat. The fence or enclosure shall be of sufficient height not to exceed
six (6) feet to prevent the dog or cat from escaping from the enclosed area.
If the enclosed area has a cover, such cover must be at least two (2) feet
above the height of the dog or cat standing on its hind legs. Dogs and cats
in an enclosed area must have continuous unrestricted access to food, water
and shelter.










   (G)     Penalty.





     





      (1)     Whoever violates any provision of this section as a
first time offense is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.





     





      (2)     Whoever violates any provision of this section in a
second or subsequent offense shall be guilty of a fourth degree
misdemeanor.  (Ord. 3562.  Passed 6-9-15.)









90.021  TETHERING AND TROLLEYING OF DOGS.




   (A)    Dogs age six (6) months or older may be restrained by means
of a trolley system or fixed point tethering system if the following
conditions are met:





      (1)    Only one fixed point tethering or trolley system shall
be permitted per each addressed property and only one dog may be tethered to
said system at any one time.





      (2)    Tethers must have swivels on both ends and be of
adequate size and strength to effectively restrain the dog.





      (3)    The tether must be attached to a properly fitted collar
or harness worn by the dog. There shall be enough room between the collar and
dog's throat for two average adult fingers to fit or approximately one and
one-half (1½) to two (2) inches.





      (4)    Collars and harnesses shall be made of leather or nylon
and be a minimum of one (1) inch wide.





      (5)    Choke, prong, and pinch collars used in conjunction
with tethering are strictly prohibited.





      (6)    The dog shall be tethered at a sufficient distance from
any object to (a) prevent tangling of the tether, (b) to prevent extending
the tether over an object or edge that could result in strangulation, and (c)
to prevent the dog access to any fence.





      (7)    Tethered or trolleyed dogs shall have unrestricted
access to sufficient shelter.





      (8)    No dog shall be tethered (a) between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., (b) outside in periods of extreme weather i.e. extreme
heat or cold, thunderstorms, lightning, or tornadoes, (c) outside if
classified as a nuisance or dangerous dog by the court.





      (9)    No dog shall be tethered to a stationary point for more
than two (2) consecutive hours in a twelve (12) hour period.





      (10)    No dog shall be tethered for more than twelve (12)
consecutive hours in a twenty-four (24) hour period. 










   (B)    Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit owners
or others from walking dogs while in-leash.










   (C)    Penalty.





      (1)    Whoever violates any provision of this section as a
first time offense is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.





      (2)    Whoever violates any provision of this section in a
second or subsequent offense shall be guilty of a fourth degree
misdemeanor.  (Ord. 3562.  Passed 6-9-15.)









90.03   IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSITION; RECORDS.




   (A)     The Police Department or Animal Warden may impound every
cat, dog, wild, dangerous or exotic animal found in violation of this code of
ordinances, county or state laws pertaining to animals. If the dog is found
not wearing a valid dog license tag, the dog shall forthwith be turned over
to an officer in charge by law with the custody and disposal of such dogs. If
the dog is wearing a valid dog license tag or the identity of the owner or
custodian is otherwise established, the Animal Warden shall immediately cause
notice to be given to the licensee, owner or custodian that the dog has been
impounded. The notice may be by telephone or by posting the property of the
licensee, owner or custodian or by certified mail to the last known address
of the licensee, owner or custodian. The dog shall not be released except
upon payment of reasonable expenses for its taking and keeping. Any properly
licensed dog remaining unclaimed within fourteen (14) days of mailing or
written notice or of actual notice thereof, shall be sold or otherwise
disposed of as provided by law. Any impounded unlicensed dog unclaimed within
two (2) days of impoundment shall be sold or otherwise disposed of as
provided by law.










   (B)   A record of all dogs impounded, the disposition of the same,
the owner’s name and address, where known, and a statement of any costs or
receipts against the dog shall be kept and furnished monthly to the City
Manager.










   (C)   Animals impounded by the Animal Warden that are healthy and do
not pose a danger to other animals or humans at the shelter will be kept for
two (2) days. Unclaimed animals or cats that do not pose a danger to other
animals or humans at the shelter shall be sold or otherwise disposed of as
provided by law. Animals, cats or dogs may be immediately euthanized if
deemed unhealthy or dangerous by the Animal Warden.










   (D)   Wild animals are the property of the state and can be disposed
of at the discretion of the Animal Warden or Chief of Police.










   (E)   The City Manager is authorized to enact agreements with the
Montgomery County Animal Resource Center or other parties necessary for the
enforcement of this section. On the execution of a certain agreement by the
City of West Carrollton and the Montgomery County Animal Resource Center or
other party the Animal Warden authorized under the terms of such agreement is
authorized to impound any stray animal, cat or dog found in violation of this
chapter or Ohio R.C. §§ 955.21 and 955.22, and to issue citations for the
purpose of giving notice to the owners of the animals as provided in § 90.03
of this Code.










     (F)     Process of citations issued by either the City of West
Carrollton Police Department or the Montgomery County Animal Resource Center
shall be as follows:





      (1)  West Carrollton Police Department.  The citation shall
direct the owner to appear and to present the citation to the Clerk of
Courts, on or before the date and hour specified thereon; that upon such
presentation of the citation to the Clerk of Courts , the owner may file a
written plea of guilty with the Clerk and pay the bond duly established for a
violation of this section the owner may be cited under, or the owner may
register the citation for court and receive at that time a date for their
appearance in the Mayor's Court for a hearing upon the charge.





            (2)     Montgomery County Animal Resources Center.
  Shall follow the procedures as established by the Miamisburg Municipal
Courts.  (Ord. 3562.  Passed 6-9-15.)









90.04   ABANDONING ANIMALS.




   (A)   No person who is the owner, keeper, harborer of or have charge
of a cat, dog or other domestic animal shall abandon such animal.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the second degree on the first offense and a misdemeanor of the first degree
on each subsequent offense.





(Ord. 3533.  Passed 10-8-13.)









90.05 KILLING, INJURING OR POISONING ANIMALS.




   (A)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully, kill, or injure any
animal that is the property of another. This section does not apply to a
licensed veterinarian, police officer or Animal Warden acting in an official
capacity.










   (B)   No person shall, maliciously or willfully place any poisoned
food where it may be easily found and eaten by children or animals, either
upon his own lands or the lands of another. No person shall maliciously or
willfully and without consent of the owner, administer poison to any animal
that is the property of another. This section does not apply to a licensed
veterinarian acting in an official capacity.










   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section, if the value of
the animal killed or the injury done amounts to less than $150, is guilty of
a second degree misdemeanor; if the value of the animal killed or the injury
done amounts to $150 or more, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Whoever violates division (B) of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.





(Ord. 3533.  Passed 10-8-13.)









90.06 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS GENERALLY.




   (A)    No person shall torture an animal, deprive one of necessary
sustenance, unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or
impound or confine an animal without supplying it during such confinement
with a sufficient quantity of good wholesome food and water.  No person
shall carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner, or keep animals
other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep, or goats in an enclosure
without wholesome exercise and change of air, or feed cows on food that
produces impure and unwholesome milk.  No person shall detain livestock in
railroad cars or compartments longer than 28 hours after they are so placed
without supplying them with necessary food, water, and attention, nor permit
such stock to be so crowded as to overlie, crush, wound, or kill each other.










   (B)       No person shall impound or confine an animal without
affording it, during confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow, or
excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected that the animal
would otherwise become sick or in some other way suffer.  This provision
does not apply to animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter. 










   (C)       Upon the written request of the owner or person in
custody of any particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall
be separate and apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form,
the length of time in which such livestock may be detained in any cars or
compartments without food, water, and attention, may be extended to 36 hours
without penalty therefore.  This section does not prevent the dehorning of
cattle.










   (D)     All fines collected for violations of this section shall be
paid to the society or association for the prevention of cruelty to animals,
if there be such in the county, township, or Municipal Corporation where such
violation occurred.










   (E)       Whoever violated this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree. 





(Ord. 3533.  Passed 10-8-13.)









90.061 CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.



   (A)   As used in this section:



 



      (1)   "Companion animal" means any animal that is kept inside
a residential dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept,
including a pet store as defined in Ohio R.C. 956.01.  "Companion animal"
does not include livestock or any wild animal.



 



      (2)   "Cruelty", "torment" and "torture" have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 1717.01.



 



      (3)   "Residential dwelling" means a structure or shelter or
the portion of a structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for
the purpose of a habitation.



 



      (4)   "Practice of veterinary medicine" has the same meaning
as in Ohio R.C. 4741.01.



 



      (5)   "Wild animal" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
1531.01.



 



      (6)   "Federal animal welfare act" means the "Laboratory
Animal Act of 1966", Pub.  L.  No.  89-544, 80 Stat.  350 (1966), 7
U.S.C.A. 2131 et seq., as amended by the "Animal Welfare Act of 1970", Pub. 
L.  No.  91-579, 84 Stat.  1560 (1970), the "Animal Welfare Act Amendments
of 1976", Pub. L.  No.  94-279, 90 Stat.  417 (1976), and the "Food
Security Act of 1985", Pub.  L.  No.  99-198, 99 Stat.  1354 (1985), and
as it may be subsequently amended.



 



      (7)   "Dog kennel" means an animal rescue for dogs that is
registered under Ohio R.C. 956.06, a boarding kennel or a training kennel.



 



   (B)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly
mutilate or maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of
cruelty against a companion animal.



 



   (C)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of
a companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:



 



      (1)   Torture, torment or commit an act or cruelty against the
companion animal;



 



      (2)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance, or
confine the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water, if it can reasonably
be expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any
other way as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;



 



      (3)   Impound or confine the companion animal without
affording it, during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter
from heat, cold, wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can
reasonably be expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer
in any other way as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.



 



   (D)   No owner, manager or employee of a dog kennel who confines or
is the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any
of the following:



 



      (1)   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against
the companion animal;



 



      (2)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance, or
confine the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water, if it can reasonably
be expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any
other way as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;



 



      (3)   Impound or confine the companion animal without
affording it, during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter
from heat, cold, wind, rain, snow or excessive direct sunlight if it can
reasonably be expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer
in any other way as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.



 



   (E)   Subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:



 



      (1)   A companion animal used in scientific research conducted
by an institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act and
related regulations;



 



      (2)   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person
who has been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate
to do so under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4741;



 



      (3)   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field
trial purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with
usual and commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;



 



      (4)   The use of common training devices, if the companion
animal is being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted
practices for the training of animals;



 



      (5)   The administering of medicine to a companion animal that
was properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary
permit, or registration certificate under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4741.  (ORC
959.131)



 



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (B) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense.  On each subsequent
offense such person is guilty of a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate State law.



 



      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (C) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.



 



      (3)   Whoever violates subsection (D) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



 



      (4)   A.   A court may order a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this section to forfeit to an impounding
agency, as defined in Ohio R.C. 959.132, any or all of the companion animals
in that person's ownership or care.  The court also may prohibit or place
limitations on the person's ability to own or care for any companion animals
for a specified or indefinite period of time.



 



         B.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a violation of this section to reimburse an impounding
agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred by the agency for the care
of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a result of the
investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the costs were
not otherwise paid under Ohio R.C. 959.132.



 



      (5)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a
mental or emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may
impose as a community control sanction or as a condition of probation a
requirement that the offender undergo psychological evaluation or
counseling.  The court shall order the offender to pay the costs of the
evaluation or counseling. 



(ORC 959.99)








90.07 NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.




   (A)   No person being the owner, keeper, harborer of or having
charge of any cat, dog or other animal shall permit such cat, dog or other
animal to become a public nuisance as defined in 90.01(K).










   (B)   No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl in the
Municipality so as to create offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which
are a menace to the health, comfort or safety of the public.










   (C)   No person being the owner, keeper, harborer of or having
charge of any cat, dog or other animal shall permit such cat, dog or other
animal to excrete upon any public property or the premises of another. In the
event this occurs, the person being the owner, keeper, harborer of or having
charge of such cat, dog or other animal shall cause the excrement to be
completely removed forthwith.










   (D)   No person being the owner, keeper, harborer of or having
charge of any cat, dog or other animal shall permit such cat, dog or other
animal to intentionally or un-intentionally bark, whine, yelp, howl, screech,
create any offensive excessive noise, molest passersby, chase vehicles,
attack other domestic animals, or damage property of another.










   (E)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.





(Ord. 3533.  Passed 10-8-13.)









90.08   REGISTRATION OF DOGS; TAGS TO BE WORN.




   (A)   Excluding guide dogs registered under Ohio R.C. 955.011 and
dogs kept by an institution or organization for teaching and research
purposes under Ohio R.C. 955.16, no owner, keeper or harborer of or having
charge or control of any dog over three months of age after January 31st of
any year, or brought from outside the state at any time during the year,
shall fail to register such dog with the Montgomery County Auditor as
required by Ohio R.C. 955.01. Any dog at any time not wearing or having
securely affixed to a collar or other attire worn by the dog, a valid
registration tag shall be prima-facie evidence of lack of registration and
subject such dog to impoundment and disposition as provided by Ohio R.C.
955.16.










   (B)   All dogs in the city over six months of age shall be properly
immunized against rabies by their owner, keeper, harborer of or having charge
or control of. The current rabies immunization tag must be displayed on the
dog whenever the dog leaves the premises of the owner.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.





(Ord. 3533.  Passed 10-8-13.)









90.09   HINDERING CAPTURE OF AN ANIMAL.




   (A)   No person shall obstruct or interfere with anyone lawfully
engaged in capturing a stray or at-large animal










   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.





(Ord. 3533.  Passed 10-8-13.)









90.10 ANIMAL BITES; QUARANTINE AND REPORTING.




   (A)   No person shall remove an animal that has bitten any person
from the county in which the bite occurred until a quarantine period as
specified in subsection (B) of this section has been completed. No person
shall transfer any animal that has bitten any person until the quarantine
period as specified in subsection (B) of this section has been completed,
except a person may transfer an animal to the Animal Warden or any other
animal control authority.





      (1)   Subject to (A)(2) of this subsection, no person shall
kill an animal  that has bitten any person until the quarantine period as
specified in subsection (B) of this section has been completed.





      (2)   Subsection (A)(1) of this section does not apply to the
killing of an animal in order to prevent further injury or death or if the
animal is diseased or seriously injured.





      (3)   No person who has killed an animal that has bitten any
person in order to prevent further injury or death or if the animal is
diseased or seriously injured shall fail to do both of the following:





         (a)   Immediately after the killing of the animal,
notify the Montgomery County Health Department or Police Department and
convey the facts relative to the bite and the killing. If the Police
Department receives a call advising of the killing of an animal that has
bitten any person, they shall notify the Montgomery County Health Department.





         (b)   Hold the body of the dead animal until the
Montgomery County Health Department claims the animal to perform tests for
rabies.










   (B)   The quarantine period for an animal that has bitten any person
shall be ten (10) days or another period that the Montgomery County Health
Department determines is necessary to observe the animal for rabies.










   (C)   This section does not apply to a police dog that has bitten a
person while the police dog is under the care of a licensed veterinarian or
has bitten a person while the police dog is being used for law enforcement,
correction, prison or jail security, or investigative purposes. If after
biting the person, a police dog exhibits any abnormal behavior, the law
enforcement agency and the law enforcement officer the police dog assists,
within a reasonable time after the person is bitten, shall make the police
dog available for the Montgomery County Health Department to perform tests
for rabies.










   (D)   As used in this section, "police dog" has the same meaning as
in section 2921.321 of the Ohio Revised Code.










   (E)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for the first offense, and guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree for a subsequent offense.





(Ord. 3533.  Passed 10-8-13.)









90.11 HUNTING PROHIBITED.




   (A)    The hunting of animals or fowl within the municipality is
prohibited. No person shall hunt, kill, or attempt to kill any animal or fowl
by the use of firearms or any other means.










   (B)    Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. 





(Ord. 3533.  Passed 10-8-13.)









90.12 ANIMAL OWNER LIABLE FOR DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.




   The owner, keeper, or harborer of any animal which damages or destroys
public or private property shall be held liable for the full value of the
property damaged or destroyed in addition to any penalty imposed for a
violation of this chapter.





(Ord. 3533.  Passed 10-8-13.)









90.13 BIRDS AND ANIMALS CONSTITUTING A NUISANCE; ABATEMENT.




   Whenever any starlings, sparrows, pigeons, rodents, or other birds
constitute a nuisance in any part of the city, the Police Chief is authorized
to use all reasonable means necessary to abate the nuisance.





(Ord. 3533.  Passed 10-8-13.)









90.14   OUTDOOR FEEDING PROHIBITED.




   (A)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly leave food or any
other type of feed outdoors so to attract animals running at large or wild
animals. The feeding of one's own animal(s) or birds on their premises shall
be the exception so long as the feed does not attract animals whether running
at large or wild from public property, public ways or private property not
owned by the feeding person. The feeding of one's own animals shall take
place during daylight hours only so to minimize the potential risk of rabies
exposure between domestic-wild animals.





   It shall be prima facie evidence of willful violation of this section
if a person shall knowingly or recklessly:





      (1)    Leave food or any other type of feed outdoors after
daylight hours; or





      (2)   Leave food or any other type of feed outdoors unattended
not in the presence of the owner's animal; or





      (3)   Allow animals running at large, stray or wild animals to
feed on one's own property.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section as a first time offender is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.










   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of this section in a second or
subsequent offense shall be guilty of a fourth degree misdemeanor.





(Ord. 3533.  Passed 10-8-13.)









90.15   MARKETING WILD, DANGEROUS OR EXOTIC ANIMALS.




   (A)   No person shall market in any form wholesale, barter or trade
any wild, exotic or dangerous animal or restricted snake. Exception to the
above include those animals native to the farm and sold at auction or by
private sale, to-wit: horses, cattle, swine or poultry; and those animals
sold by pet dealers or by private sale to-wit: domestic cats, domestic dogs,
domestic rabbits, guinea pigs, chinchilla, mice, hamsters, gerbils, and
non-poisonous snakes and non-man-eating fish.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and each day's violation shall be considered a separate offense.





(Ord. 3533.  Passed 10-8-13.)









90.16   KEEPING WILD, DANGEROUS OR EXOTIC ANIMALS.




   (A)   No person shall own, keep, harbor or otherwise have control of
any wild, dangerous or exotic animal or restricted snake within the corporate
limits of the city.










   (B)   Exceptions to subsection (A) above are those who have received
approval from the State of Ohio Director of Agriculture and the City of West
Carrollton.










   (C)   Animals which may be owned, kept or harbored those animals
native to the farm, to-wit: horses, cattle swine or poultry, provided the
place of harborage is zoned agriculture or farm use; as well as domestic
cats, domestic dogs, domestic rabbits, guinea pigs, chinchillas, mice,
hamsters, gerbils, birds, non-poisonous snakes and non-man-eating fish.










   (D)   Persons who presently own, keep or harbor a dangerous, exotic
or wild animal or restricted snakes on or after January 1, 2014, shall abide
by the rules and regulations as outlined in chapter 935 of the Ohio R.C.










   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and each day's violation shall be considered a separate offense.





(Ord. 3533.  Passed 10-8-13.)









90.17    COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS FROM THE CITY MANAGER.




   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with any order issued by the
City Manager or his/her designee under the terms of this chapter within
fifteen (15) days of the order.










   (B)   Whoever fails to comply with or violates this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each day's violation shall be considered a
separate offense.





(Ord. 3533.  Passed 10-8-13.)









90.18   ESCAPE OF ANIMAL; NOTIFICATION.




   (A)   If a dangerous, wild, exotic animal or restricted snake
escapes, the person that possesses the animal or snake shall notify both the
following immediately upon discovery of the escape:





      (1)   The sheriff of the county and the chief law enforcement
officer of the municipality of where the escape occurred;





      (2)   The division of animal health in the department of
agriculture by means of the twenty-four-hour telephone number that is
maintained by the division.










   (B)   Destruction of a dangerous, wild, exotic animal or restricted
snake.





      (1)    A law enforcement officer or natural resources law
enforcement officer may destroy a dangerous, wild, exotic animal or
restricted snake that has escaped and that poses a threat to public safety.





      (2)   A law enforcement officer or natural resources law
enforcement officer that destroys an escaped dangerous, wild, exotic animal
or restricted snake pursuant to (B)(1) of this section is not liable for
damages in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to personal property
that allegedly arises from the destruction of the animal or snake.










   (C)   The person that possesses a dangerous, wild, exotic animal or
restricted snake that escapes is responsible for all reasonable costs
associated with the capture or destruction of the animal or snake. The person
shall reimburse the political subdivision that employs the law enforcement
officer who captured or destroyed the dangerous, wild, exotic animal or
restricted snake for the cost incurred in the capturing or destroying the
animal or snake. However, if the law enforcement officer is a state highway
patrol trooper or if a natural resources law enforcement officer captured or
destroyed the dangerous, wild, exotic animal or restricted snake, the person
shall reimburse the state highway patrol or department of natural resources,
as applicable, for those costs.










   (D)   Whoever fails to comply with or violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  (Ord. 3533.  Passed 10-8-13.)





























CHAPTER 91
LIQUOR CONTROL









Section










91.01   Definitions





91.02   Sales to and use by underage persons; securing public
accommodations





91.021   Purchase by minor;  misrepresentation.





91.03   Sales to intoxicated persons





91.04   Liquor consumption in motor vehicle





91.05   Permit required





91.06   Posting liquor age warning signs





91.07   Open container prohibited





91.08   Sale, consumption, or possession of beer or intoxicating liquors
on city property prohibited; exception





91.09   Hours of sale or consumption.





91.99   Penalty




 



91.01  DEFINITIONS.




   As used in the Codified Ordinances:





   (A)   "Alcohol" means ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted
with water or not, whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl
alcohol.  Such term excludes denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.










   (B)   "Intoxicating liquor" and "liquor" include all liquids and
compounds, other than beer as defined in subsection (c) hereof, containing
one half of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to
use for beverage purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process
produced, by whatever name called and whether they are medicated, proprietary
or patented.  Such phrase includes cider and alcohol and all solids and
confections which contain one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by
volume.









   (C)   (1)   "Beer" includes all beverages brewed or fermented
wholly or in part from malt products and containing one-half of one percent
(0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume.  (ORC 4301.01)



 




      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is
not intoxicating liquor for purposes of this chapter.  (ORC 4301.244)










   (D)   "Person" includes firms and corporations.










   (E)   "Low-alcohol beverage” means any brewed or fermented malt
product, or any product made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or
other agricultural products, that contains either no alcohol or less than
one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume.  The beverages
described in subsection (E) hereof do not include a soft drink such as root
beer, birch beer, or ginger beer. 





(ORC 4301.01)









91.02  SALES TO AND USE BY UNDERAGE PERSONS; SECURING PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS.




   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4301, no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage
person, or shall buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or
shall furnish it to, an underage person, unless given by a physician in the
regular line of his practice or given for established religious purposes, or
unless the underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an
underage person or legal guardian.





   In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission, no permit holder,
or no employee or agent of a permit holder, charged with a violation of this
subsection shall be charged, for the same offense, with a violation of Ohio
R.C. 4301.22(A)(1).










   (B)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or
private place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on
the place while possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless
the intoxicating liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or
consuming it by that person's parent, spouse who is not an underage person or
legal guardian and the parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal
guardian is present at the time of the person's possession or consumption of
the beer or intoxicating liquor.





   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or
omissions in violation of this subsection that are committed by a lessee of
that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee's acts or
omissions.










   (C)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn,
cabin, campground or restaurant when he knows or has reason to know either of
the following:





      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an
underage person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages
or uses, unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse
of the underage person and is not an underage person, or is the parent or
legal guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or
intoxicating liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all
times when beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage
person;





      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of
the accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of
abuse pursuant to a prescription issued by a practitioner and has the drug of
abuse in the original container in which it was dispensed to the person.










   (D)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by an underage person
or for an underage person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or
has reason to know that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the
underage person possesses any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not
supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal
guardian who is or will be present at all times when the beer or intoxicating
liquor is being consumed by the underage person.





      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to
engage accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is twenty-one
years of age or older for the purpose of violating this section.










   (E)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the
cost of, attempt to purchase, possess, or consume any beer or intoxicating
liquor, in any public or private place.  No underage person shall knowingly
be under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public
place.  The prohibitions set forth in this subsection (E) hereof against an
underage person knowingly possessing, consuming, or being under the influence
of any beer or intoxicating liquor shall not apply if the underage person is
supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian, or the beer or intoxicating liquor is given by a physician in the
regular line of the physician’s practice or given for established religious
purposes.










   (F)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal
guardian of a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section
or Section 91.021(A) to (C).










   (G)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin or campground shall make
the provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or
using accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin or campground.










   (H)   As used in this section:





      (1)   "Drug of abuse" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
3719.011.





      (2)   "Hotel" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3731.01.





      (3)   “Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs” and “prescription” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
4729.01.





      (4)   “Minor” means a person under the age of eighteen
years.





      (5)   "Underage person" means a person under the age of
twenty-one years.





(ORC 4301.69)




 




   (I)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  In addition, whoever violates subsection (A) hereof shall
be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(ORC 4301.99)




 



91.021 PURCHASE BY MINOR; MISREPRESENTATION.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4301, no person under the age of twenty-one years shall purchase beer
or intoxicating liquor.  (ORC 4301.63)



 



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4301, no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to
the name, age or other identification of any person under twenty-one years of
age for the purpose of obtaining or with the intent to obtain, beer or
intoxicating liquor for a person under twenty-one years of age, by purchase,
or as a gift. 



(ORC 4301.633)



 



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4301, no person under the age of twenty-one years shall knowingly
show or give false information concerning the person's name, age or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or
intoxicating liquor in any place where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold
under a permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control or sold by the
Division of Liquor Control. 



(ORC 4301.634)



 




   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this section for
which no other penalty is provided is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.





      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof, shall be fined
not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00).  The court imposing a fine for a violation of subsection (A)
hereof may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a
reasonable hourly rate established by the court.  The court shall designate
the time within which the public work shall be completed.





      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates subsection (C) hereof is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If, in committing a first
violation of that subsection, the offender presented to the permit holder or
the permit holder's employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered
identification card, a false or fictitious driver's license purportedly
issued by any state, or a driver's license issued by any state that has been
altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and
shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000) and may be sentenced to a term of
imprisonment of not more than six months.





         (b)   On a second violation in which, for the second
time, the offender presented to the permit holder or the permit holder's
employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months.  The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from
the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).




 



         (c)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for
the third or subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or
the permit holder's employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered
identification card, a false or fictitious driver's license purportedly
issued by any state, or a driver's license issued by any state that has been
altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and
shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000), and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
not more than six months.  Except as provided in this subsection, the court
also may impose a class six suspension of the offender's driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from
the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that
the suspension or denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age
of twenty-one years.  The court, in lieu of suspending the offenders
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license or driver's
license, instead may order the offender to perform a determinate number of
hours of community service, with the court determining the actual number of
hours and the nature of the community service the offender shall perform. 
(ORC 4301.99)



 



91.03  SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.



   (A)    No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder
shall sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.



(ORC 4301.22)



 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree. 



(ORC 4301.99)



 



91.04  LIQUOR CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR  VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a
motor vehicle.  This section does not apply to persons described in Section
91.07(D).  (ORC 4301.64)



 



   (B)   Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 



 



   (C)   If an offender who violates this section was under the age of
eighteen years at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any
other penalties it imposes upon the offender, shall suspend the offender's
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license, or driver's
license for a period of not less than six months and not more than one
year.  In lieu of suspending the offender's temporary instruction permit,
probationary driver's license or driver's license, the court may instead
require the offender to perform community service for a number of hours to be
determined by the court.  If the offender is fifteen years and six months of
age or older and has not been issued a temporary instruction permit or
probationary driver's license, the offender shall not be eligible to be
issued such a license or permit for a period of six months.  If the offender
has not attained the age of fifteen years and six months, the offender shall
not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit until the
offender attains the age of sixteen years.  (ORC 4301.99)



 



91.05  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person personally or by the person’s clerk, agent or employee
shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep or possess for sale,
furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or intoxicating
liquor in this Municipality, or transport, import or cause to be transported
or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol on or into this
Municipality for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully complied
with Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued by
the Division of Liquor Control and in force at the time. 
(ORC 4303.25) Penalty, see § 91.99



 



91.06  POSTING LIQUOR AGE WARNING SIGNS.



   (A)   Every place in the municipality where beer, intoxicating
liquor, or any low-alcohol beverage is sold for beverage purposes shall
display at all times, in a prominent place on the premises thereof, a printed
card, which shall be furnished by the Department of Liquor Control and which
shall read substantially as follows:



 



 


WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE


 


If you are under the age of 21


 

   Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share
the cost of, or attempt to purchase or possess or consume any beer or
intoxicating liquor in any public place, or furnish false information as to
name, age, or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to
$1,000, or imprisonment up to six months, or both.

 


If you are under the age of 18


   Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share
the cost of, or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume, any type of beer
or wine that contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one percent
of alcohol by volume in any public place, or furnish false information as to
name, age, or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to two
hundred fifty dollars or to imprisonment up to thirty days, or both.



 



   (B)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Department or Liquor Control Commission for failing to
display this card.  No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended,
revoked, or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to display
this card.



 



   (C)   Every place in this state for which a D permit has been issued
under R.C. Ch. 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the Department of
Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:



 



 


WARNING






If you are carrying a firearm


 

   Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in
which liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been
issued under Chapter 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony
and may be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.



 



   (D)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Department of Liquor Control or the Liquor Control
Commission for failing to display this card.  No permit  issued by the
Department shall be suspended, revoked, or canceled because of the failure of
the permit holder to display this card.



(R.C. § 4301.637)  ('70 Code, § 525.06)  (Ord. 2345, passed 9-14-82)



 



91.07  OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED.



   (A)   As used in this section:




      (1)   “Chauffeured limousine” means a vehicle registered
under Ohio R.C. 4503.24.





      (2)   "Street," "highway" and "motor vehicle" have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.




 



   (B)   No person shall have in the person’s possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following
circumstances:




      (1)   In a State liquor store;





      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (C) hereof, on the
premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control;





      (3)   In any other public place;





      (4)   Except as provided in subsection (D) or (E) hereof,
while operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street,
highway or other public or private property open to the public for purposes
of vehicular travel or parking;





      (5)   Except as provided in subsection (D) or (E) hereof,
while being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway or
other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking.




 



   (C)   (1)   A person may have in the person's possession an
opened container of any of the following:



 




         (a)   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully
purchased for consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an
A-1-A, A-2, A-2(f), A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b,
D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j,  D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n,
D-5o, D-7, D8, E, F, F-2, F-5, F-7 or F-8 permit;





         (b)   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a
tasting sample by an A-2 permit holder or S permit holder for consumption on
the premises of a farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued, or
wine served for consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6
permit;





         (c)   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the
premises of a convention facility as provided in Ohio R.C. 4303.201;





         (d)   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during
tastings and samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission.





         (e)   Spirituous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a
tasting sample, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4301.171.





      (2)   A person may have in the  person’s possession on an F
liquor permit premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for
which the F permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F
permit grants permission for that possession on the premises during the
period for which the F permit is issued.  As used in this section, “music
festival” means a series of outdoor live musical performances, extending
for a period of at least three consecutive days and located on an area of
land of at least forty acres.





      (3)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession
on a D-2 liquor permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that
was not purchased from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which
the D-2 permit is issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is
attending an orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants
permission for the possession and consumption of wine in certain
predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the D-2
permit is issued.





         (b)   As used in subsection (C)(3)(a) of this section:





            1.   “Orchestral performance” means a concert
comprised of a group of not fewer than forty musicians playing various
musical instruments.





            2.   “Outdoor performing arts center” means an
outdoor performing arts center that is located on not less than eight hundred
acres of land and that is open for performances from the first day of April
to the last day of October of each year.





      (4)   A person may have in the person's possession an opened
or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location
at which the person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in
subsection (C)(3)(b)(1. hereof if the person with supervision and control
over the performance grants permission for the possession and consumption of
beer or intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor
location.





      (5)   A person may have in the person's possession on an F-9
liquor permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit
if the person is attending either of the following:





         A.   An orchestral performance and the F-9 permit holder
grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating
liquor in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the period for
which the F-9 permit is issued;





         B.   An outdoor performing arts event or orchestral
performance that is free of charge and the F-9 permit holder annually hosts
not less than twenty-five other events or performances that are free of
charge on the permit premises.





         As used in subsection (C)(5) hereof, "orchestral
performance" has the same meaning as in subsection (c)(3)B. of this section.





      (6)   (a)   A person may have in the person's possession on
the property of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the
owner of the facility if both of the following apply:





            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the
facility; and





            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission
for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the
property of the facility;





         (b)   As used in subsection (C)(6)(a) of this section:





            1.   "Racing event" means a motor vehicle racing
event sanctioned by one or more motor racing sanctioning organizations.





            2.   "Outdoor motorsports facility" means an
outdoor racetrack to which all of the following apply:





               a.   It is two and four-tenths miles or more
in length.





               b.   It is located on two hundred acres or
more of land.





               c.   The primary business of the owner of
the facility is the hosting and promoting of racing events.





               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2 or D-3 permit
is located on the property of the facility.





      (7)   (a)   A person may have in the person's possession an
opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within
an outdoor refreshment area created under Ohio R.C. 4301.82, if the opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from a qualified
permit holder to which both of the following apply:





            1.   The permit holder's premises is located
within the outdoor refreshment area.





            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an
outdoor refreshment area designation.





         B.   Subsection (C)(7) of this section does not
authorize a person to do either of the following:





            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within
an outdoor refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor acquired elsewhere;





            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor
refreshment area, unless the motor vehicle is stationary and is not being
operated in a lane of vehicular travel or unless the possession is otherwise
authorized under subsection (D) or (E) of this section.





      (8)   (a)   A person may have in the person's possession on
the property of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit
premises that is located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the
following apply:





            1.   The market grants permission for the
possession and consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined
F-8 permit premises;





            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an
F-8 permit and the market has notified the Division of Liquor Control about
the event in accordance with division (A)(3) of Ohio R.C. 4303.208.





         (b)   As used in subsection (C)(8) of this section,
market means a market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in
operation since 1860.




 



   (D)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a
portion of the fee imposed for the use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to
a prearranged contract, or the guest of such a person, when all of the
following apply:




      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine;





      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is
not occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the
operator of the limousine is located;





      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway, or
other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking.




 



   (E)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of
a permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises
where sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if
both of the following apply:




      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the
permit holder or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is
removed from the premises.  The bottle shall be secured in such a manner
that it is visibly apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or
tampered with.





      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance
with subsection (E)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor
vehicle or, if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last
upright seat or in an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers
and not easily accessible by the driver. 




 




   (F)   (1)   Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or
adopted under subsection (F)(2) of this section, this section does not apply
to a person who, pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on
a commercial quadricycle when all of the following apply:





         (a)   The person is not occupying a seat in the front of
the commercial quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking.





         (b)   The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a
street, highway or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking.





         (c)   The person has in their possession on the
commercial quadricycle an opened container of beer or wine.





         (d)   The person has in their possession on the
commercial quadricycle not more than either thirty-six ounces of beer or
eighteen ounces of wine.





      (2)   The legislative authority of a municipal corporation or
township may enact an ordinance or adopt a resolution, as applicable, that
prohibits a passenger riding on a commercial quadricycle from possessing an
opened container of beer or wine.





      (3)   As used in this section, "commercial quadricycle" means
a vehicle that has fully-operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human
power and that meets all of the following requirements:




         (a)   It has four wheels and is operated in a manner
similar to a bicycle.



         (b)   It has at least five seats for passengers.



         (c)   It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of
the operator and the passengers.



         (d)   It is used for commercial purposes.



         (e)   It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee
of the owner.



 



   (G)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the
person's possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor on the
premises of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been purchased
from a D liquor permit holder that is located in the market.



   As used in subsection (G) of this section, "market" means an
establishment that:




      (1)   Leases space in the market to individual vendors, not
less than fifty percent of which are retail food establishments or food
service operations licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3717;




      (2)   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than
twenty-two thousand square feet;



      (3)   Hosts a farmer's market on each Saturday from April
through December.



(ORC 4301.62)



 



   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(ORC 4301.99(A))



 



91.08  SALE, CONSUMPTION, OR POSSESSION OF BEER OR INTOXICATING LIQUORS ON
CITY PROPERTY; EXCEPTION.




   (A)   No person shall sell, consume, or possess any intoxicating
liquor or beer in or upon any city owned or controlled park, playground,
buildings, or other premises.










   (B)   No person shall possess or have control over any intoxicating
liquor or beer in or upon any city owned or controlled park, playground,
buildings, or other premises. 
(Ord. 1843, passed 5-14-74; Amend. Ord. 2034, passed 7-26-77)  Penalty, see
§ 91.99










   (C)   This section does not apply to festivals or special events for
which a permit has been issued by the City Manager granting special
permission for the serving of alcoholic beverages, nor to other properties
contractually leased to individuals, non-profit or corporate entities where
the lease provides for the sale or consumption of alcohol.  (Ord. 3546. 
Passed 7-8-14.)









91.09 HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.




   (A)   This rule shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed
beverages, or spirituous liquor.










   (B)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be
sold or delivered by an A-1, A-1c, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X,
D-1, D-2, D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8,
F, F-1, F-2, F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G or I permit holder:





      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of one a.m.
and five thirty a.m.





      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of one a.m. and Sunday
midnight, unless statutorily authorized otherwise.





      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor is also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises
of the above permit holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer,
wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.










   (C)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquid shall be
sold or delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A,
D-5B, D-5C, D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G,  D-5I, D-5J, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, or
D-7 permit holder:





      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of two thirty
a.m. and five thirty a.m.





      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of two thirty a.m. and
Sunday midnight, unless statutorily authorized otherwise.





      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor is also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises
of the above permit holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer,
wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.










   (D)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in
subsection (B) or (C) above shall be subject to the provisions of subsection
(B), unless statutorily authorized otherwise.










   (E)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery, or
consumption of alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute,
but in no event shall they begin prior to five thirty a.m.  (OAC 4301:1-1-49)










   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.









91.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
























CHAPTER 92
STREET AND SIDEWALK EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS









Section










92.01   Permit required; exceptions





92.02   Application and plan





92.03   Permit fees





92.04   General conditions





92.05   Safety and protection of property





92.06   Backfilling trenches in pavements





92.07   Replacement of pavement





92.08   Notification of completion of work and maintenance





92.09   Cleanup





92.10   Backfill settlement





92.11   Inspection and supervision





92.12   Bond





92.13   Sewer and water taps





92.14   Violations





92.15   Notice





92.16   Prosecution of violation





92.17   Abatement





92.18   Ditch or culvert obstruction prohibited





92.19   Blocking of utility and public access easements in private drives
prohibited.





92.20   Encroachments upon public rights-of-way





92.99   Penalty




 



92.01  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.




   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall enter upon or occupy any
street, alley, sidewalk, public way, or place for the purpose of making any
sidewalk replacement or excavations in or under streets, alleys, sidewalks,
public ways, or places for ditches, trenches, tunnels, vaults, and the like,
or the laying therein of pipes, wires, cables, conduits, and the like, or for
the purpose of the erection of poles, or for any other purpose whereby the
use thereof by the public shall be obstructed, without first obtaining a
permit from the building inspector.  No person, firm, or corporation shall
enter upon or occupy such street, alley, sidewalk, public way,  or  place 
for  any  such purpose, except at such times and in such manner as the
building inspector shall prescribe.  In case of emergency where an opening
is made when the city offices are closed, a permit shall be taken out as soon
as the city offices are opened.










   (B)   The building inspector is charged with the construction,
maintenance, and repair of streets, sidewalks, alleys, public ways, and
places, and no person, firms, or corporation, whether an abutting owner or
not, shall do or permit to be done by his or its agents, servants, or
employees any act described in division (A) of this section without first
having obtained from the building inspector a permit to do so.










   (C)   However:





      (1)   No permit shall be required for planting shade trees or
grading or sodding tree lawn space located between the property line and the
curb, or for the repair of sidewalks;





      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall control as against the
express terms of a franchise granted to a public utility to occupy the
streets and public ways of the city; and





      (3)   Nothing herein shall control in the improvement of
streets or building sewers or other public improvements by or under contract
with the city. 
('70 Code, § 903.01)  Penalty, see § 92.99









92.02  APPLICATION AND PLAN.




   (A)   The application shall give the location and dimensions of the
proposed opening, the purpose for which the opening is to be made, the kind
of pavement or surface to be opened, and the approximate time when the cut
will be made.  Permits will be issued only for cuts to be made within one
week of the date of issue, unless special arrangements for a longer period of
time have been approved.  The period of time allowed for closing the opening
will be governed by its  size  and  nature.  It will also be required
that all applications for mains, conduits, manholes, and other major
subsurface structures be accompanied by a plan and typical cross-section,
which will show as accurately as possible the location of the existing
underground structures, the location of the proposed structure, a
cross-section of the existing paving through which the cut is to be made and
the location of all construction joints and dummy joints in the existing
paving.  These plans shall be submitted in duplicate.  The issuance of a
permit will be based on the approved plans.  No deviation from the approved
plans will be permitted until such deviation has been approved.










   (B)   When changes in plans have been authorized, “as built”
plans showing all details as actually constructed shall be filed, upon
completion of the work.










   (C)   The building inspector shall require the applicant to furnish
satisfactory evidence that he is keeping in full force and effect a liability
insurance policy, furnishing to himself and the city protection against
claims arising out of the performance of the work covered under the permit
applied for, or in any way connected therewith, in an amount of $25,000 for
any one person injured in any accident, and with a total liability of $50,000
for all persons injured in any one accident, and the amount of $10,000 for
each accident with an aggregate of $25,000 as compensation for damage caused
to the property of any person other than that belonging to the applicant. 
('70 Code, § 903.02)









92.03  PERMIT FEES.




   Permit fees are prescribed and set forth in Section 37.18 of Chapter
37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West
Carrollton.





(Ord. 3262.  Passed 2-24-04; amend. Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)









92.04  GENERAL CONDITIONS.




   (A)   Procedure.  Travel upon the street or upon any intersecting
street or alley shall not be hindered or inconvenienced needlessly. No
opening shall be made before all materials, parts, and special fittings
necessary to complete the work are on hand and available.  No opening shall
be kept open longer than is necessary to properly execute the work for which
the opening was made.










   (B) Trenching.





      (1)   The length, width, and location of the trench and also
the manner in which the work is done shall conform to good construction
practices and shall be under the control of the building inspector.  Every
precaution shall be taken to safeguard the work and to inconvenience the
public as little as possible.  All services and laterals shall be
constructed as nearly as possible at right angles to the property line of the
street.





      (2)   The pavement surface along the edges of the trench shall
first be cut as neatly as possible.  The concrete and other paving materials
shall then be carefully broken out.  Only methods and equipment which will
insure no damage to the adjoining pavement shall be used.





      (3)   With any street less than 3 years old, a concrete saw
has to be used, regardless of the length of the opening.  In case of
emergencies, the sawing can be done before the opening is closed up.





      (4)   The use of a “headache ball” or “pear” to remove
pavements, walks, or driveways is prohibited.










   (C)   Excavated materials.  Excavated materials shall  be promptly
removed and disposed of as excavated.  Where pitrun gravel is encountered in
the excavation, it may be used in the backfill, provided it meets the
approval of the building inspector.  The maximum size will be 3 inches. 
When the storing of the pitrun gravel is permitted at the site of work, the
same shall be compactly piled using plank bins or retaining walls, if
necessary to prevent the gravel from spreading over the pavement.










   (D)   Hydrants and drainings not to be blocked.  Access to fire
hydrants must be provided, and no dirt or material shall be piled within 10
feet of a hydrant.  Gutters and catch basins  must  be  kept 





open  and drainage maintained.  When it is necessary to close a gutter or
cut off a catch basin, drainage must be maintained by the use of pumps or a
flume.










   (E)   Maintenance of traffic.





      (1)   The permittee must carry on the work authorized by the
permit in such manner as to cause a minimum of traffic flow interference. 
On main thoroughfares and in the congested district there must be, at all
times, sufficient traffic lanes open to permit a substantially normal traffic
flow.  Unless this can be accomplished, it will be necessary that the work
be confined to the hours between 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.  Exceptions to
these hours are when arrangements can be made with the police department,
which will permit a change in the hours.  The traffic lanes shall have a
minimum width of 10 feet unless lanes of lesser width are approved by the
building inspector.  In case of a special emergency such as a serious leak
or a major impairment of service, it will be necessary to make special
arrangements with the police so that they may be assigned to handle traffic.





      (2)   Walks, driveways, and entrances to buildings must not be
blocked.  Street intersections must be kept open to traffic, sufficient
space being left for 2 lanes of traffic wherever possible. Steel plates or
bridging of sufficient size shall be furnished to cover paving cuts and to
provide crossings over trenches on main thoroughfares and at important
intersections.  The plates or bridging shall be securely fastened in place
to prevent their movement under traffic.





      (3)   Tools, tool boxes, shanties, and materials shall be
stored at locations where they will cause the least inconvenience to traffic
and adjoining property.










   (F)   Night and Sunday work.  Work shall be performed at night, on
Sundays and holidays, both day and night or for 7 days per week when in the
opinion of the building inspector the location or nature of the work so
requires.










   (G)   Closing streets.  If at any time it becomes necessary to
close a street, a special permit must be obtained from the building
inspector.  The permittee shall notify the police department and fire
department, where they are involved, of the closing of the street. The
building inspector will establish a detour. 
('70 Code, § 903.04) Penalty, see § 92.99









92.05  SAFETY AND PROTECTION OF PROPERTY.




   (A)   Lights and barricades.  All openings in streets, alleys,
sidewalks, public ways, or places shall be protected by suitable barricades,
fences, or railings.  Where necessary, the openings shall be covered at
night, preferably with steel plates or with planks. Sufficient red lights,
bombs, or flares shall be provided to clearly indicate all openings,
equipment, materials, or any other hazard that might cause an accident.










   (B)   Temporary walks and crossings.  Safe temporary walks with
guard rails or fences shall be provided when it is necessary to block or
close a sidewalk to pedestrian traffic.  Bridges across a trench shall be
built of sound materials with substantial guard rails and of sufficient width
and strength to accommodate the pedestrian traffic without danger.  When it
is necessary to provide bridges for vehicular traffic across openings too
large to permit the use of steel plates, the same shall be substantially
constructed of sufficient width and strength to permit the safe passage of
traffic.  Temporary structures, fences, bridges, etc., shall be maintained
in a safe passage condition at all times.










   (C)   Protective bracing.





      (1)   All openings shall be properly sheeted and braced where
necessary to protect the public, workmen, and private property.  This
bracing and sheeting shall be sufficient to protect all surface and
subsurface structures and to prevent the undermining of adjacent pavement,
curb, sidewalks, and other structures.  Existing house connections, sewers,
water mains, gas mains, conduit lines, drain pipe, and other utilities shall
be supported across trenches until the backfill is completed.





      (2)   Sheeting and bracing used to support the sides of the
openings shall be carefully removed as the backfilling progresses, but if
considered by the building inspector to be necessary for the protection of
the banks, the sheeting shall be cut off 2 feet below the surface of the
street and left in place.  If the pavement along the sides of the opening is
or becomes undermined and unsupported, the permittee shall, at his own cost
and expense, break down and remove such undermined pavement and the
foundation thereof, and shall also remove all loose earth and replace it with
earth properly compacted in the manner provided under § 92.06 (A).










   (D)   Protection of trees and shrubs.  Lawns and trees shall be
protected from damage.  Trees in the line of the trench must not be removed
or disturbed except with the approval of the building inspector.










   (E)   Use of hydrants.  A permit issued by the building inspector
must be obtained for the use of fire hydrants.  Fire department hydrant
wrenches must be provided and no other type of wrench shall be used for
opening or closing the hydrants.  No person shall use a fire hydrant unless
a permit is issued.










   (F)   Public utilities to be notified.  Whenever it becomes
necessary to excavate under or adjacent to utility installations such as
tracks, mains, ducts, pipes, etc., notification must be given to that utility
and it shall be the duty of the permittee to properly protect the other
utility property in a safe condition so that the public may not be endangered
or unnecessarily inconvenienced.  At no time will the permittee be permitted
to build on top of other utility property or be permitted to use backfill
materials that have a deleterious effect upon subsurface, pipes, and
structures, which might damage the other property. 
('70 Code, § 903.05)  Penalty, see § 92.99









92.06  BACKFILLING TRENCHES IN PAVEMENTS.




   (A)   Backfill





      (1)   Backfill on





         Class 1 -   Concrete pavement,





         Class 2 -   Brick pavement on concrete base,





         Class 3 -   Asphaltic concrete pavement on concrete base,





         Class 4 -   Asphaltic concrete pavement on stone or
gravel base,





         Class 5 -   Gravel roadway (plain or oiled) and





         Class 6 -   Concrete sidewalks, shall be as follows:





         (a)   Material to be used for backfill shall be pitrun
gravel with a maximum size of 3 inches.  It is not necessary for the
gravel  to  be  40% crushed.  Also, it is permissible to use washed
gravel from sizes Number 3 to Number 9.





         (b)   The granular material shall be tamped solidly
under and around the structure to a height of 6 inches above the structure. 
In the case of gas mains, suitable material such as loam or stand may be
substituted up to a point 6 inches above the pipe. This material shall be
carefully thrown in with shovels and not dumped directly into the trench from
barrows, trucks, etc.





         (c)   Pitrun gravel shall be compacted with water. 
When compacting with water, the granular material may be deposited in ponded
water, or it may be placed in layers not exceeding 3 feet loose depth, and
each layer shall be thoroughly saturated with water.





         (d)   In openings less than 25 feet, the pitrun gravel
can be backfilled by tamping with a pneumatic tamper in layers of not more
than 6 inches.





         (e)   The backfill shall be brought to a plane parallel
to and a uniform depth to the subgrade below the finished pavement.





      (2)   Backfill on sodded areas and unimproved areas shall be
as follows:  materials acceptable for use in backfilling shall be free from
lumps and frozen or frosted materials.  Lumps larger than 3 inches in
diameter shall be broken up before placing in the fill.  The material shall
contain sufficient moisture to permit compacting, but wet, soggy material is
not to be used.  All water and soft mushy material shall be removed from the
openings before starting the fill. Unsatisfactory backfill material shall be
replaced with pitrun gravel. The backfill shall be compacted thoroughly.










   (B)   Tunnels under pavements.  Tunneling is often necessary where
a pipe or conduit passes under the curb, tracks, or other conduits. Where
tunneling extends more than 5 feet from an opening, special permission shall
be obtained.  Where tunneling has been done, the permittee shall bed the
conduit being installed in fine material to a height of one foot above the
top thereof.  This fine material shall be wetted and tamped under, around,
and over the pipe or conduit in the most thorough and careful manner.  The
balance of the space from the top of this filling to the roof of the tunnel
shall be completely filled with 1-12 concrete of suitable consistency,
thoroughly tamped to fill the entire space and to afford a rigid support for
the tunnel roof for its entire area.  The concrete shall contain not less
than 3.0 sacks of cement per cubic yard.  In the installation of small
service pipes, it is suggested that the pipe be jacked through and under
tracks, curbs, etc., or that a hole be bored of sufficient size for the pipe.










   (C)   Temporary restoration.  When the pavement is to be repaired
temporarily, the fill above the bottom of the paving slab shall be made with
stabilized crusher-run gravel, Grade “A”, B-32 Base Course, well tamped
into place.  This gravel shall be topped with a minimum of 2 inches of
bituminous mixture which is suitable to maintain the opening in good
condition until permanent restoration can be made. The temporary restoration
shall be level with the adjoining pavement. The permittee must exercise
special care in making temporary restoration and must maintain this temporary
restoration in safe travelable condition until such time as permanent
restoration is made.





('70 Code, § 903.06)  Penalty, see § 92.99









92.07  REPLACEMENT OF PAVEMENT.




   (A)   General.  The materials to be used and the method of
replacement of all pavement disturbed in the making of openings in streets or
alleys shall be done in accordance with the general construction and material
specifications for streets and sewers of the city.  Special precautions
shall be taken to prevent all concrete from freezing after it is placed in
position until the concrete has thoroughly hardened.  Any concrete showing
injury by freezing shall be removed and replaced.  In no case shall concrete
be deposited upon frozen subgrade.  Every effort shall be made to open to
traffic all cuts on main thoroughfares and in intersections at the earliest
possible moment.  As far as it is physically possible to do so, steel plates
or wood planks of sufficient size shall protect newly placed concrete.  All
locations shall be properly protected by barricades and red lights, flares,
or bombs until such time that they are safe to open to traffic.










   (B)   Asphaltic concrete pavement on stone or gravel base.





      (1)   The asphaltic concrete wearing surface shall be cut with
a concrete saw.  All material shall be removed out of the trench to a depth
of 6 inches below  the  existing  surface.  There  shall  then  be
placed 3 inches of Grade “B” base course as specified under Item B-32
crushed aggregate base course in the general specifications of the city. 
This base course shall be thoroughly tamped and compacted.





      (2)   The 1-1/2 inch binder course of asphaltic concrete
(T-35) shall then be placed and the street can be opened to traffic and the
asphaltic wearing surface applied at a later date.










   (C)   Gravel roadway (plain or oiled).





      (1)   All material shall be removed from the trench to a depth
of 5 inches below the existing surface.  There shall then be placed 3 inches
of Grade “B” base course as specified under Item B-32 crushed aggregate
base course in the general specifications of the city.  This base course
shall be thoroughly tamped and compacted.





      (2)   On this base course there shall be placed 2 inches of
oil aggregate surface course, B-52 well compacted, and the street can be
opened to traffic.










   (D)   Restoration of sidewalks and driveways.





      (1)   All sidewalks, curbs, and driveways that have been cut,
removed, damaged, tilted, or settled shall be replaced.  Cuts in driveways
over 10 feet in width will be considered the same as cuts in pavement, and
may be repaved as such.  All replacement of sidewalks and driveways shall be
done in accordance with the general construction and material specifications
for streets and sewers of the city.





      (2)   With the restoration of concrete walks, in addition to
the question of serviceability and durability of restoration, the matter of
appearance will be considered in determining the area to be restored,
regardless of the size of the opening.  The restoration of complete blocks
will be required in all cases and the walk shall be cut at the joints with a
concrete saw and the new work shall be joined up with the old work in a neat
and workmanlike manner.  The finish shall be the same as the surrounding
area.  Expansion joints shall be restored where required, regardless of
whether they existed in the original walk.










   (E)   Restoration of sodded areas.  For this type of cut, every
effort must be made to replace not only the  actual  disturbed  area, 
but  any 





adjacent  area which may have been injured or destroyed by the permittee's
work.  If the existing sod can be removed and is not injured thereby, it may
be replaced, but any damaged sod must be replaced by new sod.  Restoration
will not be considered complete until restored sod shall have knitted with
the subgrade.  Any maintenance necessary, such  as watering, shall be
considered a part of the restoration. 
('70 Code, § 903.07)  Penalty, see § 92.99









92.08  NOTIFICATION OF COMPLETION OF WORK AND MAINTENANCE OF CUTS.




   The person, firm, or corporation causing an opening to be made in any
street or alley shall notify the building inspector, upon completion of the
work, that the tunnel, cut, or trench is ready for backfilling or repaving so
that an inspection can be made, and shall maintain the cut until the opening
has been repaved with a permanent pavement when the cut is located in a paved
street or alley or until the backfill is completely settled, if located back
of the curb or in an unpaved street or alley, keeping the same suitable,
safe, and convenient for traffic. 
('70 Code, § 903.08)  Penalty, see § 92.99









92.09  CLEANUP.




   Upon completion of the work, all equipment, materials, tools, tool
boxes, temporary buildings, excavated materials, and such, shall be promptly
removed from the street, alley, or public place.  The surface of the street,
sidewalk, lawns, and private property shall be cleaned, leaving the same in
as neat, clean, and usable condition as originally found.  Trees damaged or
removed shall be replaced.  Lawns damaged by the work shall be repaired to
the satisfaction of the building inspector. 
('70 Code, § 903.09)  Penalty, see § 92.99









92.10  BACKFILL SETTLEMENT.




   (A)   Any settlement of the trench during a period of one year after
permanent restoration shall be considered conclusive evidence of defective
backfilling by the permittee, and the permittee agrees, in accepting and
acting under the permit, that he will make good any such settlement during
the period of one year after the completion of the permanent restoration.










   (B)   If a dangerous condition is created by reason of the work
under the permit, the city will make temporary repairs and the cost of such
repairs will be billed to the permittee. 
('70 Code, § 903.10) Penalty, see § 92.99









92.11  INSPECTION AND SUPERVISION.




   All work in streets, alleys, and other public places, for which a
permit is issued by the building inspector shall be subject to such
supervision and inspection as necessary.  The expense of such city
inspection and supervision shall be borne by the person, firm, or corporation
to whom the permit is issued. 
('70 Code, § 903.11)









92.12  BOND.




   A cash deposit surety bond or certified check, payable to the city,
shall accompany such application to insure proper repair of the excavation. 
The cash deposit or certified check will be required for any excavation less
than 25 feet in length and will be computed at the rate of $10 per lineal
foot of excavation.  Fifty percent of the deposit or certified check will be
released upon application after the excavation has been filled and pavement
replaced.  The 50% balance shall be retained for a period of 6 months to
insure the city against additional expense due to settlement.  On larger
projects, a surety bond, based upon approved estimates of the project, shall
be posted until the project has been completed and approved by the city
engineer. 
('70 Code, § 903.12)









92.13  SEWER AND WATER TAPS.




   (A)   Trenches for water and sewer taps shall be at least 30 inches
wide at the water main to allow room to make tap.  Copper line attaching to
the corporation valve shall have a sharp radius “S” shape to permit the
service line to contact the unexcavated trench within 18 inches of the
main.  This radius shall be bent before attaching to the main.  No lines
are to be attached to a corporation valve unless a water division inspector
is present.  Copper shall be attached as soon as the tap is made and
extended to the property line.  At this point a Mueller Oriseal (or equal)
curb valve will be installed with cast iron Buffalo type curb box over.










   (B)   Sewer mains shall be entered with a short saddle so as to
allow no protrusion inside the main.  The contractor assumes all
responsibility and furnishes all labor to make this tap.  In the event of a
broken sewer main tile resulting from the tap or excavation, replacement is
required and no cement patches will be permitted.  The water division will
inspect all sewer lines.  Inspections will be made during the work day,
Monday through Friday.  The above does not prohibit the excavation and
laying of house lines (except the tap into the main) if left open for later
inspections. 
('70 Code, § 903.13) Penalty, see § 92.99









92.14  VIOLATIONS.




   Any person, firm, or corporation which performs work for which a permit
is required by this chapter without first having secured a permit therefor,
and every person, firm, or corporation which violates or assists in the
violation of any provision of this chapter shall also be responsible and
liable for such violation and subject to the penalty provided by this
chapter.  Any person who mispresents a material fact in securing a permit
under the provisions of this chapter shall be in violation thereof and
subject to the penalties provided therefor. 
('70 Code, § 903.14)









92.15  NOTICE.




   The service director or building inspector shall serve written notice
of violation of the provisions of this chapter or of violation of a detailed
statement or a plan approved thereunder, or of violation of a permit or
certificate issued under the chapter, on the person(s) responsible for such
violation or for its remedy; and the service director or building inspector
shall order the discontinuance of illegal action, or condition, or the
abatement or correction of any such violation, or the taking of such action
as may be necessary to achieve compliance with this chapter, and either shall
serve written notice of such order on such responsible person(s). 
('70 Code, § 903.15)









92.16  PROSECUTION OF VIOLATION.




   If such violation is not corrected or such order is not complied with
promptly after service of such notice, the service director or building
inspector shall request the law director to institute appropriate proceedings
at law or in equity  to  restrain,  correct, abate, or punish such
violation of the chapter or of such order.
('70 Code, § 903.16)









92.17  ABATEMENT.




   The imposition of any penalty shall not preclude the appropriate
official provided for in § 92.99 from instituting an appropriate action or
proceeding in a court of proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful
excavation, erection, construction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance, or use; or to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to
prevent an illegal act, conduct, or use, or to require compliance with
provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules, or
regulations, or the orders or determinations of the service director or
building inspector. 
('70 Code, § 903.17)  Penalty, see § 92.99









92.18  DITCH OR CULVERT OBSTRUCTION  PROHIBITED.




   No person shall obstruct or cause the obstruction of any ditch, drain,
or watercourse of any kind, natural or artificial, within the city. 
('70 Code, § 903.18)  Penalty, see § 92.99









92.19  BLOCKING OF UTILITY AND PUBLIC  ACCESS EASEMENTS IN PRIVATE DRIVES 
PROHIBITED.




   (A)   Utility and public access easements designated within private
drives in the city shall be kept open and accessible to fire, police, other
emergency vehicles, and utility maintenance vehicles at all times.  These
easements shall be maintained by the owner and kept in good repair and free
from all obstructions such as ice, snow, and parked vehicles which would
impede the free movement of traffic. Whenever necessary, and in accordance
with a traffic control plan submitted by the owner and approved by the city
safety director, traffic control devices such as signs and other markings
shall be provided by the owner at no cost to the city.  To insure compliance
with traffic control devices and public access easements, the city shall have
full power and authority to enforce the controls and to prosecute violators
in accordance with the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city.










   (B)   No public access easements shall be blocked for any purpose
whatsoever, without prior  approval from the city safety director.










   (C)   In the event that the owner of a public access easement fails
to fulfill the obligations set out herein, the city shall have the right to
take appropriate corrective action and to charge the owner for the entire
cost thereof, and to collect the costs through an assessment against the
property, if necessary. 
(Ord. 1959, passed 3-23-76)









92.20  ENCROACHMENTS UPON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.




   (A)   No encroachment of any kind, type, or nature shall be
permitted or maintained, nor caused to be permitted or maintained, by any
person, persons, partnership, or corporation upon any public right-of-way for
streets, alleys, or sidewalks.










   (B)   (1)   The city manager may issue a revocable permit
authorizing an encroachment upon a public right-of-way for streets, alleys,
or sidewalks for those encroachments which exist on the effective date of
this ordinance, provided such encroachment does not interfere with the public
use of the right-of-way.





      (2)   The revocable permit shall provide and be issued upon
the condition that it shall terminate and be void 30 days after the holder,
his heirs, administrators, executors, successors, or assigns, receives
written notice from the city manager to remove the encroachment for the
reason that the same is interfering with the public use of the right-of-way.





      (3)   The permit holder, his heirs, administrators, executors,
successors, or assigns shall remove or cause the encroachment upon a public
right-of-way for streets, alleys, or sidewalks to be removed from the
right-of-way within 30 days after receipt of the notification from the city
manager that the permit has been revoked, and upon the expiration of the 30,
day period the city may cause the encroachment to be removed at the owner's
expense.










   (C)   Encroachments upon public rights-of-way for streets, alleys,
and sidewalks for which a permit has been obtained as herein provided and
which exist on the effective date of this ordinance, shall also be removed if
more than 50% of the encroachment is destroyed by fire, wind, or storm, or
the encroachment is demolished or removed.  Upon the occurrence of  any 
one  of  these  contingencies,  the encroachments shall be removed from
the public right-of-way within 30 days as herein provided. 
(Ord. 1940, passed 12-11-75)  Penalty, see § 92.99









92.99  PENALTY.




   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 92.01 through 92.19,
or fails to comply with any of its requirements or do any work upon or in
connection with the same, in violation of a plan therefor or directive
relating thereto approved or made by the service director or building
inspector, or of a permit or certificate issued under this chapter, shall be
fined not more than $50.  Each day's continued violation after notice to
correct shall constitute a separate offense. 
('70 Code, § 903.99)










   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of § 92.20 shall be deemed
guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100. Each day
that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1940, passed 12-11-75)
























CHAPTER 93
TREES, WEEDS, AND GRASSES














   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  Former Chapter 93 was repealed by Ordinance 3421,
passed May 26, 2009.  See Chapter 158, Property Maintenance Code, of the
Codified Ordinances for relevant legislation.)
























CHAPTER 94
INCOME TAX









EDITOR’S NOTE: See Chapter 94.5 for income tax effective January 1, 2016.










Section










94.01   Definitions





94.02   Income tax levy





94.03   Income tax return and payment of tax





94.04   Collection of tax at the source





94.05   Exemptions/deductions





94.06   Consolidated returns





94.07   Declarations





94.08   Duty to retain records





94.09   Credit for tax paid to other municipalities





94.10   Apportionment of taxable income





94.11   Loss carry-forward





94.12   Refunds; overpayments





94.13   Extensions.





94.14   Amending an income tax return.





94.15   Failure to file/estimating returns





94.16   Collection of unpaid taxes





94.17   Penalties, interest, and fees





94.18   Criminal penalties





94.19   Allocation of funds





94.20   Board of Appeal





94.21   Board of Review





94.22   Reports by landlords, condominium associates  and other
organizations





94.23   Duties of the Finance Director





94.24   Investigative powers of the Finance Director





94.25   Confidentiality





94.26   Saving clause





94.27   Effective period




 



   EDITOR’S NOTE:  The City of West Carrollton hereby declares its
intent and resolve to enact uniform provisions in its tax ordinances in
accordance with the proposals stated in Exhibit A attached to Resolution
24-2012 upon revision of Chapter 718 of the Ohio Revised Code as recommended
in Exhibit A.



   The City encourages the Ohio General Assembly to be expeditious in
revising Chapter 718 of the Ohio Revised Code in accordance with the
proposals stated in Exhibit A and maintaining revenue neutrality.



   The City further encourages other  municipalities in southwestern Ohio
to declare their intent and resolve to enact the uniform tax provisions
proposed in Exhibit A upon revision of Chapter 718 of the Ohio Revised Code.



 



94.01  DEFINITIONS.




   As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section, except as and if the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:










   ASSOCIATION.  A Partnership, limited partnership, limited liability
partnership/company, or any other form of unincorporated enterprise or
business entity, owned by two or more persons.










   BOARD OF APPEAL. A board consisting of three appointed West Carrollton
citizens in charge of reviewing penalty and/or interest abatement appeals and
then rendering an impartial decision.










   BOARD OF REVIEW. A board consisting of the City Manager, the Finance
Director, or their respective designees, and a third individual appointed by
the membership in charge of reviewing and making minor revisions to,
additions to, interpretations of, and/or clarifications of the income tax
chapter.










   BUSINESS/BUSINESS ENTITY. An enterprise, venture, activity, profession
or undertaking of any nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit; including but not limited to the renting or leasing of property,
real, personal or mixed; whether by an individual, partnership, fiduciary,
trust, association, corporation, or any other entity.










   CORPORATION.  A corporation, Subchapter S corporation, or joint stock
association organized under the laws of the United States, State of Ohio, or
any other state, territory or foreign country or dependency. 










   EMPLOYEE.  One who works for wages, salary, commission, or other type
of compensation in the service of an employer.










   EMPLOYER. An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, unit, or agency, whether or not organized for profit, or
any other entity that employs one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis.










   FINANCE DIRECTOR.  The individual responsible for managing the fiscal
affairs of the City of West Carrollton, including collection of all tax 
imposed by this chapter.










   FISCAL YEAR.  An accounting period of twelve months (12) or less
ending on any other day than December 31.










   FORM 2106. The Internal Revenue Service Form 2106 filed by a taxpayer
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.










   GENERIC FORM. An electronic or paper form designed for reporting
estimated municipal income taxes and annual municipal income tax liability
that is not prescribed by a particular municipal corporation for the
reporting of that municipal corporation's tax on income.










   GROSS RECEIPTS. The total income for any source before any deductions,
exceptions or credits are claimed which are required to be included in the
tax return.










   INTANGIBLE INCOME.  Income of any of the following types: income
yield, interest, dividends, or other income arising from the ownership,
sale,  exchange, or other disposition of intangible property including, but
not limited to investments, deposits, money, or credits as those terms are
defined in Chapter 5701 of the Ohio Revised Code.










   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100 Stat.
2085,  26 U.S.C. 1, as amended.










   INTERNET.  The international computer network of both federal and
nonfederal interoperable packet switched data networks, including the 
graphical sub-network known as the world wide web.










   JOINT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (JEDD). Districts created under
Ohio Revised Code sections 715.70 through 715.83, as amended. 










   NET PROFITS.  The net gain from the operation  of a business,
profession,  enterprise, or other activity, after provision for all ordinary
and  necessary expenses either paid or accrued in accordance with the
accounting system used by the taxpayer for Federal income tax purposes
without deduction of taxes imposed by this chapter, Federal, State, or other
taxes based on income; and in the case of an association, without deduction
of wages paid to partners, and other owners; and otherwise adjusted to the
requirements of this chapter.










   NON-RESIDENT.  An individual domiciled outside the City of West
Carrollton.










   OTHER PAYER.  Any person that pays an individual any item included in
the taxable income of the individual, other than the individual's employer or
that employer's agent.










   PERSON. A human being, partnership, fiduciary, association, or
corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty,
"person" as applied to any unincorporated entity means the parties or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the office thereof; and any employee
having control, supervision, or responsibility of tax law compliance on
behalf of a human being, partnership, fiduciary, association, or corporation.










   RESIDENT.  An individual domiciled in the City of West Carrollton.










   RETURN PREPARER.  Any person other than a taxpayer that is authorized
by a taxpayer to complete or file an income tax return, report, or other
document for or on behalf of the taxpayer.










   SCHEDULE C.  The Internal Revenue Service Schedule C filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.










   SECTION 1231 PROPERTY. Business real estate/land or any depreciable
business property excluded from the definition of "capital assets" as defined
by the Internal Revenue Code.










   SECTION 1245 PROPERTY.  Property that is or has been depreciable such
as personal property or other tangible property (i.e. fixed assets/property,
plant, and equipment) used as an integral part cf the business operations as
defined by the Internal Revenue Code.










   SECTION 1250 PROPERTY.  Any real property that is or has been
depreciable but not subject to recapture under Section 1245 as defined by the
Internal Revenue Code. Examples include buildings and their structural
components and tangible real property.










   TAXABLE YEAR.  Calendar year or the fiscal year on the basis of which
the net profits are to be computed under this chapter and in the case a
return for a fractional part of a year, the period for which such return is
required to be made. Assume calendar year for all individuals.










   TAXPAYER. Any person, as defined, required filing a return or paying
tax pursuant to this chapter.










The singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter.





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.02  INCOME TAX LEVY.




   To provide funds for the purpose of general municipal operations, there
is levied a tax at the rate of two and one-fourth percent (2.25%), except for
those under the minimum age, upon the following:





(Ord. 3523.  Passed 1-22-13.)





   (A)   All qualified wages, sick and vacation pay, commissions, and
other compensation earned, received, accrued, rental income, or in any other
taxable income set apart unto residents of the City of West Carrollton.





      (1)   On all income derived anywhere by residents or derived
in West Carrollton by non-residents from prizes, awards, gaming,  wagering,
lotteries, or games of chance as permitted by Ohio law including, but not
limited to, reporting on IRS form W-2G, form 5754 and/or other form required
by the IRS for reporting such income.





         (Ord. 3466.  Passed 12-14-10.)










   (B)   All qualified wages, sick and vacation pay, commissions,
rental income and other compensation earned, received, accrued, or in any
other way set apart unto non-residents for work done or services rendered in
the City of West Carrollton.










   (C)   (1)   On all of the taxable net profits of resident
associations, unincorporated businesses, professions, or other entities,
derived from sales made, work done, services performed/rendered, business
conducted, or other activities performed. The tax levied on these
associations or other business entities are primarily liable for the tax with
the owners/officers being secondarily liable. Credit will be given for
appropriate municipal income tax paid to other cities allowable by this
chapter for work performed outside the City of  West Carrollton limits.





      (2)   On a resident partner/owner's share of the taxable net
profits earned from a business entity or association. Credit will be given
for allowable municipal income tax paid to other cities for work  performed
outside the City of West Carrollton limits.










   (D)   (1)   On the portion attributable to the City of West
Carrollton of the net profits of all non-resident associations,
unincorporated businesses, professions, or other entities, derived from sales
made, work done, services performed/rendered, business conducted, or other
activities performed in West Carrollton whether or not such an association or
other business entity has an office or place of business in the City of West
Carrollton. The tax levied on these associations or other business entities
are primarily liable for the tax with the  owners/officers being secondarily
liable.





      (2)   On a non-resident partner/owner's share of the net
profits earned in the City of West Carrollton from a business  entity or 
association.










   (E)   On the payments made to current and former employees by an
employer as accrued benefits and/or vacation wages for services performed in
West Carrollton; on the payments made to current or former employees by an
employer under a wage continuation plan during periods of disability or
sickness earned for service performed in West Carrollton.










   (F)   12-Day Occasional Entry Rule: the City of West Carrollton
shall not tax the compensation of an individual if all of the following apply:





      (1)   The individual does not reside in the City of West
Carrollton;





      (2)   The compensation is paid for personal services performed
by the individual in the City of West Carrollton on twelve (12) or fewer days
during the calendar year;





      (3)   In the case of an individual who is an employee, the
principal  place of business of the individual's employer is located outside
the City of West Carrollton and the individual pays tax on compensation
described in this chapter to the taxing entity the employer's principal place
of business is located in, and no portion of the tax is refunded to the
individual.





      (4)   The individual is not a professional entertainer or
professional athlete, the promoter of a professional
entertainment/entertainer  or sports event, or an employee of such a
promoter, all as may be reasonably defined by the City of West Carrollton.





(Ord. 3275.  Approved by the voters 11-2-04.)









94.03 INCOME TAX RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.




   (A)   Each person engaged in business or whose qualified wages,
commissions, and/or other compensation are subject to the income tax imposed
by this chapter, shall make and file, on or before April 15th of the
following year in each year they are subject to City  income tax, a return
with the City of West Carrollton Income Tax Department, whether or not tax is
due. A taxpayer on a fiscal year accounting basis for Federal income tax
purposes shall, beginning  with the first fiscal year in which any part of
such year falls within the effective period of this chapter, file a return on
or before the fifteenth day of the fourth (4) month after the close of fiscal
year-end or period.










   (B)   All City of West Carrollton residents at the minimum age or
older, are required to file a City of West Carrollton income tax return. This
mandatory filing requirement is in effect whether or not income tax is due.
The Tax Administrator may enforce a minimum age filing requirement.










   (C)   A husband and wife, in any taxable year, may elect to file
separate or joint returns.










   (D)   The taxpayer making a return shall, at the time of filing
thereof, pay to the City of West Carrollton Income Tax Department, the amount
of taxes due thereon, provided, however, that where any portion of the tax
due shall have been deducted at the source pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, or where any portion of said tax shall have been paid by the
taxpayer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or where an income tax
has been properly paid to another municipality, credit for the amount so paid
in accordance with this chapter hereof, shall be deducted from the amount
shown to be due and only the balance, if any, shall be due and payable at the
time of filing said return. The Tax Administrator may determine a reasonable
minimum balance due limit. If the balance due is at or below this limit,
payment may not be required.










   (E)   The Finance Director or his delegate may provide by regulation
to  accept that the return of an employer(s) showing the correct tax
deducted by said employer(s) from qualified wages, commissions, or other
compensation of and paid by the employer(s) to  the City of West Carrollton
Income Tax Department shall be accepted as the return required of any
employee whose sole income, subject to the tax under this chapter, is such
qualified wages, commissions, or other compensation.










   (F)   A taxpayer who has overpaid the amount of tax to which the
City is entitled under the provisions of this chapter may have the
overpayment applied against any subsequent liability hereunder, or  at his
election indicated on the return, such overpayment or part  hereof, shall be
refunded provided that no additional unpaid liability exists, and that such
refund is in compliance with this chapter, and is within  three years after
tax for that year was initially due. The Tax Administrator may determine a
reasonable minimum refund due limit. If the balance due is at or below this
limit, the refund  will not be required.










   (G)   The net loss from an unincorporated business activity
(example:  Federal schedule C) may not be used to offset qualified wages,
commissions, or other compensation. However, if a taxpayer is engaged in two
or more taxable business activities to be included in the same return, the
net loss of one unincorporated business activity (except any portion of a
loss that is separately reportable for municipal tax purposes to another
similar municipal taxing entity) may be used to offset the profits of another
for purposes of arriving at overall net profits. A profit or loss from any
entity required by this chapter to file as a separate entity cannot be offset
in any manner. A net operating loss sustained in any taxable year may not be
carried backward to any other taxable year but may be carried forward for
three (3) years.










   (H)   The City of West Carrollton shall accept a generic form of any
return, report, or document required to be filed if the generic form once
completed and filed, contains all of the information required to be submitted
with the City of West Carrollton's prescribed returns, reports or documents,
and, if the taxpayer or return preparer filing the generic form otherwise 
complies with the rules or ordinances of the City of West Carrollton
governing the filing of returns, reports or documents.





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.04  COLLECTION OF TAX AT THE SOURCE.




   (A)   Each resident employer and/or employers doing business within
the City who employs one or more persons on a qualified wage, commission, or
other compensation basis,  shall deduct at the time of payment of such
qualified wage, commission, or other compensation, the income tax at the rate
of two and one-fourth percent (2.25%) on the gross qualified wages,
commissions, or other compensation due by the employer to such employee and
shall, following the schedules  as specified in this section, make a return
showing the amount of taxes so deducted and a record of payments showing that
all taxes deducted during the periods required have been paid to the City
in  accordance with the payment schedule prescribed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 3523.  Passed 1-22-13.)










   (B)   Such employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax
required to be deducted and withheld, whether or not such taxes have in fact
been withheld. Every employer or officer(s) of a business entity is deemed to
be a trustee for this Municipality in collecting and holding the tax required
under this chapter to be withheld. The funds so collected by such withholding
are deemed to be trust funds. The officer(s) and/or employee(s) having
control, supervision, and/or charged with the responsibility of filing the
return and making payment is personally liable for failure to file the
return  or pay the tax due as required by this chapter. The officer(s) or
employee(s) shall be personally liable for the tax he failed to  return or
pay as well as any related interest and penalties. The dissolution of a
business entity does not discharge an officer's or employee's liability for
failure of the business  entity to pay the tax due.










   (C)   Employers shall pay to the City all income tax withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld on a quarterly or monthly basis. If the
employers City of West Carrollton withholding tax due is consistently
averaging $500 or more per month or over $6,000 for the year, they must file
on a monthly basis. The monthly withholding return (W-1) is due on or before
the fifteenth day of each following month. All other employers may elect to
file quarterly. The quarterly withholding tax due must be paid  on or before
the end of the month following the reporting period (i.e. due dates of
April  30, July 31, October 31, and January 31) with the proper withholding
tax return (W-1). 










   (D)    Each employer, on or before the corresponding IRS due date,
shall file with the Income Tax Department of the City of West Carrollton an
information return, City of West Carrollton Reconciliation of Tax  Withheld
(W-3), for each employee from whom income tax has  been or should have been
withheld showing the name, address and social security number of the
employee, the total amount of qualified  wages, commissions, tips and other
compensation paid the employee during the year, and the amount of municipal
income tax withheld from each  employee (Form W-2). In lieu of submitting
form W-2's, an alternative method of reporting must be approved by the
Finance Director or his delegate. The Finance Director or his delegate may,
by regulation, provide for the use of  electronic media by employers for
reporting of annual wage and tax data.










   (E)   In addition to the above wage reporting requirements, any
person who compensates an individual, contractor or subcontractor shall
report such payment. The information required includes the name, address and
social security number (or federal





identification number for business entities), and amount of compensation.
Federal form 1099 may be submitted in lieu of such listing. The information
must be filed annually with the Income Tax Department of the City of West
Carrollton on or before the corresponding IRS due date for form 1099.










   (F)   Failure to file any required documentation in a timely manner
as prescribed by this section will be subject to late filing penalty
assessment as prescribed in this chapter.





(Ord. 3275.  Approved by the voters 11-2-04.)









94.05  EXEMPTIONS/DEDUCTIONS.




   Exemptions.





   (A)   Military pay or allowance of active members of the Armed
Forces of the United States.










   (B)   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary, non- profit, educational institutions, and/or other organization
specified in the Ohio Revised Code, Section 718.01, to the extent that such
income is derived from tax exempt real estate, tax-exempt  tangible or
intangible property or tax exempt activities.










   (C)   Personal earnings of any natural person under the minimum age
filing requirement (Section 94.03(B)), if applicable. The entire year of
taxable income becomes taxable if the person exceeds that minimum age by the
end of the year (no proration).










   (D)   Any natural person 65 or older by the end of the taxable year
is entitled to an exemption to be determined by the Tax  Administrator.










   (E)   Social Security benefits, unemployment insurance benefits,
welfare benefits, and qualified pensions paid as a result of retirements.










   (F)   Most interest, dividends, and royalties.
(Ord. 3251.  Passed 11-11-03.)










   (G)   Poor relief, food stamps, unemployment compensation, aid to
dependent children, child support, alimony, capital gains and losses from
investment activity (Federal schedule D), gains or losses from Section 1231
property not defined as a capital asset, Worker’s Compensation, third-party
sick and disability pay, jury duty if turned over to employer, housing
allowances for clergy to the extent that the allowance is used to rent or
provide a home.





(Ord. 3466.  Passed 12-14-10.)










   (H)   Qualified wages, commissions and other compensation and net
profits, the taxation of which is prohibited by the United States
Constitution, the Constitution of the State of Ohio, any act of Congress, or
any act of the Ohio General Assembly limiting the City of West Carrollton to
impose income taxes on income.










   (I)   Compensation attributable to a plan or program described in
section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code.










   Deductions










   (J)   Form 2106 Employee Business Expense: A person who receives
qualified wages or compensation and who pays business expenses without
reimbursement from his employer or association, shall be entitled to a
deduction to the same extent that such expenses are allowable under The
Federal Income Tax Code without any adjusted gross income limitations.
However the  deduction will only be permitted to the extent the Finance
Director deems it ordinary, necessary, and it was incurred while earning the
income  and directly related to earning the income subject to the tax levied
by this chapter.










   (K)   Losses incurred from business activities such as
self-employment (Federal schedule C), rental (schedule E), and partnership 
interests (schedule E) losses may be carried forward for three (3) years to
offset similar business activity income. Such losses may not be used to
offset employee compensation such as qualified wages. If part or all of the
business loss was generated outside the City of West  Carrollton limits,
that portion of the loss must be allocated to other taxing districts
appropriately.










   (L)   Part-year residents can deduct the portion of their income
earned while they did not live in the City of West Carrollton. Other
deductions must be allocated on the same basis. A person will be considered a
resident if they live in West Carrollton a total of 30 days or more. 





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.06  CONSOLIDATED RETURNS.




   (A)   Filing of consolidated returns may be permitted, required or
denied in accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed by the Finance
Director or his delegate. The returns must be a fair representation of
business activity in the City. A  method of reporting should not be chosen
with the intent to minimize or decrease the entity’s tax liability. If the
Tax Administrator determines this intent, the consolidated return may be
denied.










   (B)   In the case of a corporation that carries on transactions with
its stockholders or with other corporations related by stock ownership,
interlocking directorates, or some other method, or  in case any person
operates a division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or other activity
within the City constituting a portion only of its total business, the
Finance Director or his delegate may require such additional information as
he may deem necessary to ascertain whether net profits are properly allocated
to the City. If the Finance Director or his delegate finds taxable income
not  being properly allocated to the City by reasons such as transactions
with stockholders or with other corporations related by stock ownership,
interlocking directorates, or transactions with  such division, branch,
factory, office, laboratory or activity or by some other method, he shall
make such allocation as he deems appropriate to produce a fair and proper
allocation of net profits to the City.





(Ord. 3251.  Passed 11-11-03.)









94.07  DECLARATIONS.




   (A)   Every person who anticipates any taxable income which is not
subject to this chapteror who engages in any business, profession,
enterprise, or other activity subject to the tax imposed by this chapter 
hereof, shall file a declaration setting forth such business activity
together with the estimated tax due thereon.










   (B)   Such declaration shall be filed on or before April 15th of
each year, or within the 15th day of the fourth (4th) month after the
taxpayer first becomes subject to the tax.





   Taxpayers who report on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
within the 15th day of the fourth month after the beginning of each fiscal
year or period.










   (C)   (1)   Such declaration shall be filed on a form furnished
or obtainable from the Income Tax Department. Credit shall be taken for West
Carrollton City Tax withheld, if any, from any portion of such income. In
addition, credit may be taken for tax paid or to be withheld and remitted to
other taxing  municipalities in accordance with this chapter.





      (2)   The original declaration (or any subsequent amendment
thereof)  may be increased or decreased on or before any subsequent
quarterly payment date as provided herein. A declaration may be amended at
any time, provided, however, that the unpaid balance due shall be paid in
equal installments on or before the remaining payment dates.










   (D)   (1)   Such declaration of estimated tax to be paid the City
shall be  accompanied by a payment of at least one-fourth of the estimated
annual tax, and at least an equal amount to be paid on or before the 15th day
of the fourth month and the last day of the 7th, 10th, and 13th months after
the beginning of the year. For a calendar-year taxpayer, the due dates are as
follows: April 15, July 31, October 31, and January 31 of the following year.





      (2)   On or before the 15th day of the fourth month of the
calendar year or  fiscal year following that for which such declaration or
amended declaration should be filed, an annual return shall be filed and any
balance which may be due the City shall be paid therewith in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.





      (3)   The final installment of estimated tax quarterly
payments need not be made if the taxpayer files his final return and pays the
balance of tax due thereon within forty-five (45) days of the end of his
chapter-complying taxable year.










   (E)   A declaration of estimated tax shall not be considered filed
in good faith if less than ninety percent (90%) of the total correct tax is
not paid by the final quarter declaration due date. The remaining tax due the
day after the final quarter due date is subject to a ten percent (10%)
interest charge. An exception will be made if one hundred percent (100%) or
more of the prior year tax  liability, after tax withheld is deducted, has
been paid in equal quarterly installments in the current year.










   (F)   Taxpayers that have a total correct tax due of less than two
hundred dollars ($200) before any estimated tax payments are made are not
required to file a declaration because they are exempt from declaration
interest. 
(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.08  DUTY TO RETAIN RECORDS.




   Every taxpayer shall retain all records necessary to compute tax
liability for a period not less than five (5) years from the date the return
is filed, or the taxes required to be withheld are paid. 





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.09  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.




   (A)   Every individual taxpayer who resides in the City but who
received net profits, qualified wages, commissions or other compensation for
work done or services performed or rendered outside of the City, if he has
paid a municipal income tax or Joint Economic Development District tax based
on income, on such net profits, qualified wages, commissions or other
compensation in another municipality, shall be allowed a credit for the
amount so paid by him or in his behalf in  such Municipality. The credit
shall not exceed the tax assessed by this chapter on such income earned in
such other municipality or municipalities where such tax is paid.










   (B)   Not withstanding the provisions contained in this chapter, or
any other provisions inconsistent herewith, a claim for refund or credit
under this section shall be made in such manner as the Finance Director or
his delegate may, by regulation, provide.





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.10  APPORTIONMENT OF TAXABLE INCOME.




   If the books and records of a taxpayer conducting a business or
profession both within and without the boundaries of the City of West
Carrollton shall disclose with reasonable accuracy what portion of its net
profit is attributable to that part of the business or profession conducted
within the boundaries of the City of West Carrollton, then only such portion
shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the City of West Carrollton
for purposes of municipal income taxation.  In the absence of such records,
net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without
the boundaries of the City of West Carrollton shall be considered as having a
taxable situs in the City of West Carrollton for purposes of municipal income
taxation in the same proportion as the average ratio of:










   (A)   (1)   The average original cost of the real and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the taxable period to the
average original cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned
or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period,
wherever situated.





      (2)   As used in the preceding paragraph, real property shall
include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the  value of such
property shall be determined by multiplying the  annual rental therein by
eight.










   (B)   (1)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during
the taxable period to persons employed in the business or profession for
services performed in the City of West Carrollton to wages, salaries, and
other compensation paid during the same period to persons employed in the
business or profession wherever their services are performed.





      (2)   As used in the preceding paragraph, persons employed
shall not be construed to mean any subcontractor or independent contractor.










   (C)   Gross receipts of the business or profession from sales made
and services performed during the taxable period in the City of West
Carrollton to gross receipts of the business or profession during the same
period from sales and services, wherever made or performed. In the event the
foregoing allocation formula does not produce an equitable result, the
Finance Director or his delegate may under uniform regulations, substitute
another basis so as to  produce such result. Changing to a basis to minimize
or manipulate  taxable income should not be a reason for making the change.
Once a basis is chosen, this basis should be consistently used unless the
Finance Director approves a change.





   As used in this chapter, "sales made in the City," means:





      (1)   All sales of tangible personal property which is
delivered within the City regardless of where title passes if shipped from a
stock of goods within the City;





      (2)   All sales of tangible personal property which is
delivered within the City regardless of where title passes even though 
transported from a point outside the City if the taxpayer is regularly
engaged through his own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales
within the City and the sales result from such solicitation or promotion;





      (3)   All sales of tangible personal property which is shipped
from a place within City to purchasers outside the City regardless of where
title passes if the taxpayer is not, through his own employees, regularly
engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery
is made.





      (4)   For West Carrollton resident business or business
entities, if sales are made outside the City but no municipal income was paid
to another municipality for that activity, then that corresponding taxable
income becomes taxable to the City of West Carrollton.





      (5)   If the sales department is physically located in the
City of West Carrollton limits, and substantially all the sales department's
activity occurs in West Carrollton, those sales shall be considered in West
Carrollton for allocation purposes regardless of where the purchaser is
located or the product/service is eventually shipped/rendered.





      (6)   If one or more of the apportionment factors
significantly distorts the  percentage of taxable income allocated to West
Carrollton, that factor(s) should be removed from the calculation. The
remaining factors will then be divided by the number of factors used. Even
one factor used is acceptable if the percentage fairly represents the
business activity in West Carrollton.










   (D)   Non-resident individual taxpayers working in and out of the
City of West Carrollton limits will calculate their tax liability based on
the formula of the total number of days worked in the City divided by the
total number of days worked for the year, excluding vacation, holiday, and
sick days during the year. The resulting percentage applies to the total
annual income from wages. Where no record can be substantiated for the total
number of days worked, two hundred and sixty (260) days will be used.
Employer  verification/certification of basis for refunding the tax is
required.





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.11  LOSS CARRY-FORWARD.




   (A)   The portion of net operating loss, based on income taxable
under this chapter, sustained in any taxable year allocable to the City  may
be applied against the portion of the profit of succeeding years allocable to
the City until fully utilized but, in no event, for more than three (3)
taxable years. No portion of a net operating  loss shall be carried back
against net profits of any prior year. On an individual return, such losses
may not be used to offset employee compensation such as qualified wages.










   (B)   In the event taxable income is properly allocated both within
and outside the City, the portion of net operating loss sustained shall be
allocated to the City in the same manner as provided in this chapter for
allocating net profits to the City as stated in this chapter. The portion of
net operating loss to be carried forward shall be determined in the year the
net operating loss is sustained, on the basis of the allocation factors
applicable to that year. The same method of accounting and allocation must be
used in the year to which an operating loss is carried as was used in the
year in which  the operating loss was sustained.










   (C)   The net operating loss of a business which loses its identity
through a merger, consolidation, etc. shall not be allowed as a carry-
forward loss deduction to the surviving business entity.





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.12  REFUNDS; OVERPAYMENTS.




   (A)   A taxpayer who has overpaid the amount of tax to which the
City of West Carrollton is entitled under the provisions of this chapter may
have the overpayment applied against any subsequent liability hereunder, or
at the taxpayer's election indicated on the return, such overpayment, or part
thereof, shall be refunded, if above the minimum refund due limit, provided
that no additional unpaid liability exists, all proper supporting
documentation was filed, and the refund is properly requested within three
years after that year's tax return was initially due before extensions.










   (B)   The Tax Administrator may determine a reasonable minimum
refund due limit. If the balance due is at or below this limit, the refund
will not be required.










   (C)   Refunds may be held for or applied against prior year
outstanding tax balances.










   (D)   All requests for refund of tax overpaid must be made in
writing, unless otherwise accepted/approved by the Finance Director, by one
of the following methods:





      (1)   Indicating a refund for tax overpaid on the space
indicated on the West Carrollton income tax return with proper supporting
documentation, or





      (2)   Written correspondence in the form of a refund request,
with all supporting documentation and/or information attached.










   (E)   When a taxpayer's return indicates that a refund is due and a
refund is not issued within a reasonable amount of time after the Income Tax
Department has received proper verification and substantiation  as to the
validity of the refund claim, interest shall be paid at the rate determined
by the Tax Administrator. A return, which indicates a claim for refund, is
not deemed to be filed until the Income Tax Department receives all proper
verification and substantiation validating the refund claim.





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.13  EXTENSIONS.




   (A)   The Finance Director or his delegate shall have the authority
to extend the time for filing of the annual return of the taxpayer for a
period not to exceed the last day of the month following the month of the
Internal Revenue Service extension due date for a Federal Income Tax Return.
Upon written request for extension and/or a copy of the Federal extension,
such extension will be considered, providing that notification,
documentation, and information are included, accompanied by a tentative
return and payment of tax shown to be due therein by the date the return is
normally due. No penalty shall be assessed in those cases in which the return
is filed and the final tax paid within the period as extended. Any portion of
tax unpaid after the original due date of the return, but paid within the
period as extended, will be subject to interest  charges as prescribed by
this chapter. If an extension request is denied, the subsequent filing of the
return and payment of tax due shall be subject to the applicable penalty and
interest charges as prescribed by this chapter.










   (B)   The City of West Carrollton may deny a taxpayers request for
extension if the taxpayer:





      (1)   Fails to timely file the request;





      (2)   Fails to file a copy of the federal extension request
(if applicable);





      (3)   Owes the City of West Carrollton any delinquent income
tax,  penalty, interest, assessment or other charge for the late  payment
of nonpayment of income tax;





      (4)   Has failed to file any required income tax return,
report, or other related document for a prior tax period.





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.14  AMENDING AN INCOME TAX RETURN.




   (A)   An amended return shall be filed in order to report
additional  income and pay any additional tax due, or claim a refund if
overpaid, subject to requirements and/or limitations contained in this
chapter. A taxpayer may not change the method of accounting or method of
apportionment of taxable income after the due date for filing the original
return if the original methods were consistent and correct.










   (B)   Within three (3) months from the final determination of any
federal tax liability affecting a taxpayer's City tax liability, such
taxpayer shall make and file an amended City return showing income subject to
City tax based upon such final determination of Federal  tax liability, and
pay any additional tax shown due  therein, or make claim for refund of
overpayment, according to regulations and/or limitations as set forth in this
chapter.





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.15  FAILURE TO FILE/ESTIMATING RETURNS.




   If a taxpayer fails to properly file an income tax return, and the
Finance Director has made a reasonable attempt to contact and inform the
taxpayer of the failure to file, the Finance Director can estimate the income
tax return based on prior year activity and/or other method the Finance
Director deems reasonable. If the taxpayer then files a return with the
actual data within a reasonable amount of time, the actual return would then
take precedence. If the taxpayer does not respond by filing an actual return
within a reasonable amount of time, the estimated figures will become
binding. The City of West Carrollton can pursue taxpayers who have not
properly filed their City income tax returns or properly provided sufficient
documentation to the City of West Carrollton Tax Department why no return was
required or six (6) years after the return was originally due.





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.16  COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAXES.




   All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collectible, together with
any interest, fees, and penalties thereon, by suit, as other debts of like
amounts are recoverable. All additional assessments shall be made and all
criminal and civil actions to recover municipal income taxes, and the
associated penalties, interest, and fees shall be brought within three years
after the tax was due, the return was filed, the bankruptcy was discharged,
or the City of West Carrollton payment agreement expected completion date,
whichever is later.





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.17  PENALTIES, INTEREST, AND FEES.




   (A)   (1)   All taxes imposed by this chapter and remaining
unpaid after they become due shall bear interest, in addition to the unpaid
tax, at the rate to be determined by the Tax Administrator.





      (2)   Declaration interest will be charged at a rate of ten
percent  (10%). A declaration of estimated tax shall not be considered filed
in good faith if it is less than ninety percent (90%) of the total correct
tax is not paid by the final quarter declaration due date. The remaining tax
due the day after the final quarter due date is subject to a ten percent
(10%) interest charge. An exception will be made if one hundred percent
(100%) or more of the prior year liability has been  paid in equal quarterly
installments in the current year.










   (B)   In addition to the interest as provided in subsection (A)(1)
hereof, penalties based on the unpaid tax are hereby imposed as follows:





      (1)   For failure to pay taxes cue, other than taxes withheld,
a  penalty of one and one half percent (1.5%) per month or ten percent (10%)
of the unpaid tax, whichever is greater, but not to exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the initial tax due.





      (2)   For failure to remit proper taxes withheld from
employees, the  corresponding employer is subject to a penalty of three
percent (3%) per month or ten percent (10%) of the unpaid tax, whichever is
greater, but not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the initial tax due.










   (C)   (1)   For failure to file a tax return when due as required
by this chapter,  a reasonable penalty to be determined by the Tax
Administrator shall be assessed per return.





      (2)   Filings are deemed to be made timely  postmarked by the
due date.










   (D)   Except in the case of fraud and excluding the late fee
discussed in the above subsections (A)(2) and (C), the total penalty can't
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the initial delinquent unpaid tax balance.










   (E)   A penalty shall not be charged on any additional City of West
Carrollton income tax assessment made by the Income Tax Department , when a
return has been filed in good faith and the tax paid thereon within the time
prescribed by this chapter, and provided further that in the absence of
fraud, neither penalty nor interest shall be assessed on any additional tax
assessment resulting from a Federal Audit providing an amended return is
filed and the additional tax is  paid within three months after the final
determination of the Federal Tax Liability.










   (F)   A fee deemed reasonable by the Finance Director will be
charged for each check returned to the City of West Carrollton marked as non-
sufficient funds or unpaid.





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.18  CRIMINAL PENALTIES.




   (A)   Any person who shall:





      (1)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to make any return or
declaration required by this chapter; or





      (2)   Make any substantially incomplete, false, or fraudulent
return; or





      (3)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax, penalties, or
interest imposed by this chapter; or





      (4)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to withhold the tax from his
employees or remit such withholdings to the City of West Carrollton; or





      (5)   Refuse to permit the Finance Director or his delegate or
any duly authorized agent or employee to examine his books, records, papers,
State, and Federal  income tax returns relating to the taxable income of a
taxpayer; or 





      (6)   Refuse to disclose to the Income Tax Department any
information with respect to the taxable income of a taxpayer; or





      (7)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or 
subpoena of the Income Tax Department; or





      (8)   Fail, as an individual charged with the responsibility
to withhold and remit from the wage of employees the City of West Carrollton
income tax in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or





      (9)   Attempt to do anything whatever to avoid the payment of
the whole or any part of the tax, penalties, interest, or fees  imposed by
this chapter.










   (B)   Whoever violates any provisions set forth above shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor in the first degree and may be assessed such
penalties, including fines and/or imprisonment as the same are set forth in
the Ohio Revised Code. 










   (C)   All prosecutions under this section shall be commenced within
the  time specified in Section 718.12 of the Ohio Revised Code. 










   (D)   The failure of any employer, taxpayer, or person to have
knowledge of this chapter or to receive or procure a return, declaration, or
other required form shall not  excuse such person from making any 
information return, return, or declaration, from filing such form, or from
paying the tax.





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.19  ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.



   (A)   The funds collected under the provisions of this chapter shall
be placed in a fund to be known as the Income Tax Receipts Fund and shall be
allocated in such a manner as prescribed by the City Council.



 




   (B)   However, of the 2.25% City Income Tax, monies received from
.50% City Income Tax is designated to the Capital Improvement Program Fund
(CIP) and shall be further allocated to various other funds by the City
Council through the annual appropriation ordinance for capital improvements,
related debt service and economic development purposes and the remaining
monies received from 1.75% City Income Tax are designated to the General
Fund.  (Ord. 3602.  Passed 1-24-17.)









94.20  BOARD OF APPEAL.




   (A)   A Board of Appeal, consisting of a Chairman and two other
individuals, each to be selected by Council, is hereby created. A majority of
members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The Board of Appeal shall
adopt its own procedural rules and shall keep a record of its transactions.
Such records are not public records available for inspection under Section
149.43 of the Ohio Revised Code. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a
Board of Appeal created pursuant to this section are not meetings of a public
body  subject to Section 121.22 of the Ohio Revised Code. Therefore any 
hearing by the Board of Appeal may be conducted privately with the tax
confidentiality provisions of this chapter applying to such matters.










   (B)   Any person dissatisfied with any ruling or decision of the
Finance Director, which is made under the authority conferred by this
chapter, may appeal therefrom to the Board of Appeal within thirty (30) days
from the announcement of the ruling or decision by the  Finance Director, or
the date the tax liability is paid in full, whichever is later, the Board of
Appeal shall, on hearing, have, jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify
any such ruling or  decision, or any part thereof pertaining to  penalty
and interest only. The Board shall schedule a hearing within forty-five (45)
days  after receiving the appeal, unless the taxpayer waives the hearing. 
The Board shall issue a decision on the appeal within Ninety (90)  days
after the Board's final hearing on the appeal, and send notice of its
decision by ordinary mail to the petitioner within fifteen (15) days after
issuing the decision.










   (C)   The imposition of penalty and interest as prescribed in the
Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton is not the sole basis for
an appeal. Interpretations of the legality of any provision of this chapter
by the City Law Director are not rulings or decisions of the Finance Director
and are not subject to appeal to the Board of Review. Any such legal
interpretations should be challenged through normal court proceedings.





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.21 BOARD OF REVIEW.




   (A)   A Board of Review consisting of the City Manager, the Finance
Director, or their respective designees, and a third individual to be
appointed by the membership, is hereby created. A majority of the members
shall constitute a quorum. The Board of Review shall adopt its own procedural
rules and shall keep a record of its transactions. Any hearing by the Board
of Review may be conducted  privately with the tax confidentiality
provisions of this chapter applying to such matters.










   (B)   The Board of Review may adopt, promulgate, and enforce rules
and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the
administration, operation, and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. 
(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.22  REPORTS BY LANDLORDS, CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATES AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONS.




   (A)   Every owner of two (2) or more rental units and every owner or
operator of a mobile home park is hereby directed and required to  furnish
to the Finance Director or his delegate a yearly roster of the names and
addresses of persons residing in the rental units or mobile home park. The
listing must include any changes during the  year. The yearly roster shall
be filed in the following year on or before January 31st. Larger entities may
be required to file or a quarterly or semi-annually basis at the Finance
Director's discretion.










   (B)   Every condominium association, owners' organizations of
condominium units, or other owners’/residents’ cooperative dwelling
affiliations is hereby required to furnish a yearly roster of the names and 
addresses of their members that own, rent, or have an interest in 
properties located in the City of West Carrollton to the Finance  Director
or his delegate. This roster must include any changes during the year such as
new owners or forwarding addresses. The yearly roster shall be filed in the
following year on or before  January 31st. Larger entities may be required
to file on a quarterly or semi- annually basis at the Finance Director's
discretion.





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.23  DUTIES OF THE FINANCE DIRECTOR.




   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to collect and
receive the tax levied by this chapter in the manner prescribed by this
chapter, and it shall also be his duty to keep an accurate record showing the
payment received by him from each taxpayer and the date of the payment.










   (B)   (1)   The Finance Director or his delegate is hereby
charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter and they are hereby authorized to enforce the rules and regulations
relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, including provisions for the
re-examination and correction of returns and payments.





      (2)   In any case where a taxpayer has failed, neglected or
refused to file a return or has failed, neglected or refused to pay  the tax
due on a return or has filed a return which does not show the proper amount
of tax due, the Finance Director or his delegate may determine the amount of
tax appearing to be due  the City from the taxpayer based on any 
information in his possession and shall send to such taxpayer a written
statement showing the amount of tax so determined together with interest and
penalties thereon, if any.










   (C)   The Finance Director or his delegate is authorized to arrange
for the payment of unpaid taxes, fees, interest and penalties on a schedule
of installment payments when the taxpayer has approved to the Finance
Director or his delegate that, due to certain hardship conditions he is
unable to pay the full amount of tax due. Such authorization shall not be
granted until proper returns are filed by the taxpayer for all amounts owed
by him under this chapter.  However, all additional assessments shall be
made and all criminal and civil actions to recover municipal income taxes,
and the  associated penalties, interest, and fees shall be brought within
three years after the tax was due, the return was filed, the bankruptcy was
discharged, or the City of West Carrollton payment agreement expected
completion date, whichever is later.





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.24  INVESTIGATIVE POWERS OF THE FINANCE DIRECTOR.




   (A)   (1)   The Finance Director or his delegate or any
authorized employee is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers, 
records, and Federal Income Tax Returns of any employer or of any taxpayer or
person subject to, or who the Finance Director or his delegate believes is
subject to the provisions of this chapter, for the purpose of verifying the
accuracy of any return made, or, if any return was made to ascertain the tax
due under this chapter. Every such employer, supposed  employer, taxpayer,
or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed  and required to furnish upon
written request by the Finance  Director or his delegate, or his duly
authorized agent or employee, the means, facilities and opportunity for
making such examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized.





      (2)   The Finance Director or his delegate is hereby
authorized to order any person presumed to have knowledge of the facts to
appear before him and may examine such person, under oath, concerning any
income which was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction
tending to effect such income, and for this purpose may compel the production
of books, papers, records, and Federal Income Tax Returns and the attendance
of all persons before him, whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he
believes such persons have knowledge of  such income or information
pertinent to such inquiry.










   (B)   The Finance Director or his delegate or any authorized
employee is hereby authorized to institute procedures to determine the
associations, businesses, corporations, persons, employers, and  employees
subject to the provisions of this chapter, and in connection therewith, to
require that all persons, as defined in this chapter shall provide in writing
to the Finance Director or his delegate such information as deemed necessary
to provide for the enforcement of this chapter. The refusal to provide
information requested by the Finance Director shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter, punishable as provided in this chapter. 





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.25  CONFIDENTIALITY.




   (A)   Any information gained as result of any returns,
investigations, hearings, or verifications required or authorized by this
chapter shall be confidential. No disclosure thereof shall be made except to
Municipal, County, State, or Federal taxing agencies, or, except for official
purposes, or except in accordance with proper judicial order. No person shall
otherwise divulge such information.










   (B)   Each disclosure shall constitute a separate offense. In
addition any City of West Carrollton employee who violates the provisions of
this Section relative to disclosure of confidential information shall be
guilty of an offense which may be punishable by immediate dismissal. 





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.26  SAVING CLAUSE.




   This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm, or corporation or to
any property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of Council to impose
the tax herein provided for. Any sentence, clause, section, or part of this
chapter, or any tax against or exception granted any individual or any of the
several groups of persons, or forms of income  specified herein is found to
be unconstitutional or illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality, or  invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section,
or part of this chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It
is hereby declared to be the intention of Council of the City of West
Carrollton that this chapter would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence, part thereof not been
included therein. 





(Ord. 3251. Passed 11-11-03.)









94.27  EFFECTIVE PERIOD.



   Any taxes levied by this chapter shall remain in full force and effect
and apply in all terms and conditions for tax events prior to January 1,
2019.  The tax provided for in this ordinance, (Ordinance 3602), shall be
levied, collected and paid with respect to the qualified wages, commissions,
and other compensation, and with respect to the net profits of businesses,
professions, and other activities, earned from the effective date of this
ordinance, January 1, 2019, and shall apply to all taxes, filings, and
assessments effective and beginning with tax year 2019 for a continuing
period of time. 



(Ord. 3602.  Passed 1-24-17.)








 



CHAPTER 94.5
INCOME TAX EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2016










94.5.01   Authority to levy tax; purposes of tax; rate.





94.5.011   Authority to levy tax.





94.5.012   Purposes of tax; rate.





94.5.013   Allocation of funds.





94.5.014   Statement of procedural history; state mandated changes to
municipal income tax.





94.5.02   Effective date.





94.5.03   Definitions.





94.5.04   Income subject to tax for individuals.





94.5.041   Determining municipal taxable income for individuals.





94.5.042   Domicile.





94.5.043   Exemption for member or employee of general assembly and
certain judges.





94.5.05   Collection at source.





94.5.051   Collection at source; withholding from qualifying wages.





94.5.052   Collection at source; occasional entrant.





94.5.053   Collection at source; casino and VLT.





94.5.06   Income subject to net profit tax.





94.5.061   Determining municipal taxable income for taxpayers who are not
individuals.





94.5.062   Net profit; income subject to net profit tax; alternative
apportionment.





94.5.063   Consolidated federal income tax return.





94.5.064   Tax credit for businesses that foster new jobs in Ohio.





94.5.065   Tax credits to foster job retention.





94.5.07   Declaration of estimated tax.





94.5.08   Credit for tax paid.





94.5.081   Credit for tax paid to another  municipality.





94.5.082   Refundable credit for qualifying  loss.





94.5.083   Credit for person working in joint economic development
district or zone.





94.5.084   Credit for tax beyond statute for obtaining refund.





94.5.09   Annual return.





94.5.091   Return and payment of tax.





94.5.092   Return and payment of tax; individual serving in combat  zone.





94.5.093   Use of Ohio Business Gateway; types of filings authorized.





94.5.094   Extension of time to file.





94.5.095   Amended returns.





94.5.096   Refunds.





94.5.10   Penalty, interest, fees and  charges.





94.5.11   Audit.





94.5.12   Rounding.





94.5.13   Authority and powers of the Tax Administrator.





94.5.131   Authority of Tax Administrator; administrative powers of the
Tax Administrator.





94.5.132   Authority of Tax Administrator; compromise of claim and payment
over time.





94.5.133   Authority of Tax Administrator; right to examine.





94.5.134   Authority of Tax Administrator; requiring identifying
information.





94.5.14   Confidentiality.





94.5.15   Fraud.





94.5.16   Opinion of the Tax Administrator.





94.5.17   Assessment; appeal based on presumption of delivery.





94.5.18   Local Board of Tax Review; appeal to Local Board of Tax Review.





94.5.19   Actions to recover; statute of limitations.





94.5.20   Adoption of rules.





94.5.201   Landlord reporting.





94.5.97   Collection after termination of chapter.





94.5.98   Savings clause.





94.5.99   Violations; penalty.





94.6.01   Filing net profit taxes; election to be subject to provisions of
chapter.





94.6.02   Definitions.





94.6.03   Applicability; taxable situs; apportionment.





94.6.04   Information provided to tax administrators; confidentiality.





94.6.05   Filing of annual return; remittance; disposition of funds.





94.6.06   Electronic filing.





94.6.07   Consolidated returns.





94.6.08   Failure to pay tax.





94.6.09   Declaration of estimated taxes.





94.6.10   Additional penalties.





94.6.11   Assessments against taxpayer.





94.6.12   Refund applications.





94.6.13   Amended returns.





94.6.14   Examination of records and other documents and persons.





94.6.15   Credits.





94.6.16   Reckless violations; penalties.
















94.5.01 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE.









94.5.011 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX.




   (A)     The tax on income and the withholding tax established by
this Chapter 94.5 are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio
Constitution.  The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this
Chapter 94.5 are deemed to be levied in accordance with, and to be consistent
with, the provisions and limitations of Ohio Revised Code 718 (ORC 718). 
This Chapter is deemed to incorporate the provisions of ORC 718.











   (B)    The tax is an annual tax levied on the income of every person
residing in or earning or receiving income in the municipal corporation, and
shall be measured by municipal taxable income.    The Municipality shall
tax income at a uniform rate.  The tax is levied on Municipal Taxable
Income, as defined herein.  (Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.012 PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE.




     (A)    The purpose of this chapter is to provide funds for
general municipal operations, maintenance of equipment, new equipment,
extension, enlargement and improvements.











   (B)    The voter-approve income tax rate is 2.25%.  (Ord. 3572. 
Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.013  ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.




   (A)     The funds collected under the provisions of this chapter
shall be placed in a fund to be known as the Income Tax Receipts Fund and
shall be allocated in such a manner as prescribed by ordinances adopted by
the City Council.











   (B)   However, of the 2.25% or other total City Income Tax, monies
received from the .50% City Income Tax are designated to the Capital
Improvement Program Fund (CIP) and shall be further allocated to various
other funds by the City Council through the annual appropriation ordinance
for capital improvements, related debt service and economic development
purposes and the 1.75% City Income Tax or remaining monies received are
designated to the General Fund.  (Ord. 3602.  Passed 1-24-17.)










94.5.014 STATEMENT OF PROCEDURAL HISTORY; STATE MANDATED CHANGES TO MUNICIPAL
INCOME TAX.




   (A)    Significant and wide-ranging amendments to ORC 718 were
enacted by Am Sub HB 5, passed by the 130th General Assembly, and signed by
Governor Kasich on December 19, 2014, and H.B. 5 required municipal
corporations to conform to and adopt the provisions of ORC 718 in order to
have the authority to impose, enforce, administer and collect a municipal
income tax.











   (B)    As mandated by H.B. 5, municipal income tax Ordinance 3572,
effective January 1, 2016, comprehensively amends Chapter 94 in accordance
with the provisions of ORC 718 to allow the Municipality to continue the
income tax and withholding tax administration and collection efforts on
behalf of the Municipality.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.02  EFFECTIVE DATE.




   (A)    Ordinance 3572, effective January 1, 2016, and corresponding
changes to ORC 718, apply to municipal taxable years beginning on or after
January 1, 2016.  All provisions of this Chapter 94.5 apply to taxable years
beginning 2016 and succeeding taxable years.











   (B)    Ordinance 3572 does not repeal the existing sections of
Chapter 94 for any taxable year prior to 2016, but rather amends Chapter 94
effective January 1, 2016.  For municipal taxable years beginning before
January 1, 2016, the Municipality shall continue to administer, audit, and
enforce the income tax of the Municipality under ORC 718 and ordinances and
resolutions of the Municipality as that chapter and those ordinances and
resolutions existed before January 1, 2016.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.03   DEFINITIONS.




   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this
chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of
the United States relating to federal income taxation or in Title LVII of the
Ohio Revised Code, unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term
used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in
a comparable context in both the laws of the United States relating to
federal income tax and in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code and the use is
not consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of the United States
relating to federal income tax shall control over the use of the term in
Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code.





   For purposes of this Section, the singular shall include the plural,
and the masculine shall include the feminine and the gender-neutral.





   As used in this chapter:











   (1)    "ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME," for a person required to
file as a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C
corporation under division 23(D) of this section, means a C corporation's
federal taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as
determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows: 











      (A)     Deduct intangible income to the extent included in
federal taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether
the intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets
held for the production of income. 











      (B)     Add an amount equal to five per cent of intangible
income deducted under division  (1)(A) of this section, but excluding that
portion of intangible income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of property described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue
Code; 











      (C)     Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the
computation of federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the
sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or
1231 of the Internal Revenue Code; 











      (D)    (i)     Except as provided in division (1)(D)(ii)
of this section, deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to
the extent the income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the
Internal Revenue Code; 











         (ii)    Division (1)(D)(i) of this section does not
apply to the extent the income or gain is income or gain described in section
1245 or 1250 of the Internal Revenue Code. 











      (E)     Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a
deduction in the computation of federal taxable income; 











      (F)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or
regulated investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to,
distributions to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of
investors and allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable
income;











      (G)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded
in computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer
agreement or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under
section 4313.02 of the Ohio Revised Code; 











      (H)   (i)   Except as limited by divisions (1)(H)(ii),
(iii) and (iv) of this section, deduct any net operating loss incurred by the
person in a taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2017. 











            The amount of such net operating loss shall be
deducted from net profit that is reduced by exempt income to the extent
necessary to reduce municipal taxable income to zero, with any remaining
unused portion of the net operating loss carried forward to not more than
five consecutive taxable years following the taxable year in which the loss
was incurred, but in no case for more years than necessary for the deduction
to be fully utilized.











         (ii)     No person shall use the deduction allowed by
division (1)(H) of this section to offset qualifying wages. 











         (iii)    (a)     For taxable years beginning in
2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, a person may not deduct, for purposes of an
income tax levied by a municipal corporation that levies an income tax before
January 1, 2016, more than fifty per cent of the amount of the deduction
otherwise allowed by division (1)(H)(i)  of this section. 











            (b)    For taxable years beginning in 2023 or
thereafter, a person may deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a
municipal corporation that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, the
full amount allowed by division (1)(H)(i)  of this section. 











         (iv)    Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
deduction that is available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any
amount pursuant to division (1)(H) of this section. 











         (v)     Nothing in division (1)(H)(iii)(a) of this
section precludes a person from carrying forward, for use with respect to any
return filed for a taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net
operating loss that was not fully utilized by operation of division
(1)(H)(iii)(a) of this section.  To the extent that an amount of net
operating loss that was not fully utilized in one or more taxable years by
operation of division (1)(H)(iii)(a) of this section is carried forward for
use with respect to a return filed for a taxable year beginning in 2019,
2020, 2021, or 2022, the limitation described in division (1)(H)(iii)(a) of
this section shall apply to the amount carried forward.











      (I)     Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned
directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal
taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations  includes that net
profit in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with division
(E)(3)(b) of Section 94.5.063 of this Chapter.   











      (J)     Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned
directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal
taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss
in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with division (E)(3)(b)
of Section 94.5.063 of this Chapter. 











         If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a
disregarded entity that has made the election described in division (47)(B)
of this section, is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the
election described in division (23)(D) of this section, and is not an
individual, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under
this section as if the taxpayer were a C  corporation, except guaranteed
payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not
be allowed as a deductible expense unless such payments are in consideration
for the use of capital and treated as payment of interest under section 469
of the Internal Revenue Code or United States treasury regulations. Amounts
paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement plan with respect to
a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former
member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance
for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or
former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a
partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former
member shall not be allowed as a deduction.











         Nothing in division (1) of this section shall be construed
as allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall
be construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued
for purposes of federal self-employment tax.











   (2)    (A)     "ASSESSMENT" means any of the following:











         (i)     A written finding by the Tax Administrator that
a person has underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or
any combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation;











         (ii)    A full or partial denial of a refund request
issued under Section 94.5.096 (B)(2) of this Chapter;





         (iii)     A Tax Administrator's denial of a taxpayer's
request for use of an alternative apportionment method, issued under Section
94.5.062(B)(2) of this Chapter; or











         (iv)     A Tax Administrator's requirement for a
taxpayer to use an alternative apportionment method, issued under Section
94.5.062(B)(3) of this Chapter.











         (v)     For purposes of division (2)(A)(i), (ii), (iii)
and (iv) of this Section, an assessment shall  commence the person's time
limitation for making an appeal to the Local Board of Tax Review pursuant to
Section 94.5.18 of this Chapter, and  shall have "ASSESSMENT" written in all
capital letters at the top of such finding. 











      (B)    "ASSESSMENT" does not include notice(s) denying a
request for refund issued under Section 94.5.096 (B)(3) of this Chapter, a
billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due balances owed
to the municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator's request for additional
information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors, or a Tax
Administrator's other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer that
does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (2)(A) of this section.











   (3)     "AUDIT" means the examination of a person or the inspection
of the books, records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear
before the Tax Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a
municipal income tax 











   (4)     "BOARD OF REVIEW" has same meaning as "Local Board of Tax
Review". 











   (5)   "CALENDAR QUARTER" means the three-month period ending on the
last day of March, June, September, or December.











   (6)   “CASINO OPERATOR" and "CASINO FACILITY" have the same
meanings as in section 3772.01 of the Ohio Revised Code.











   (7)    "CERTIFIED MAIL," "EXPRESS MAIL," "UNITED STATES MAIL,"
"POSTAL SERVICE," and similar terms include any delivery service authorized
pursuant to section 5703.056 of the Ohio Revised Code.











   (8)   “COMPENSATION" means any form of remuneration paid to an
employee for personal services. 











   (9)     "DISREGARDED ENTITY" means a single member limited
liability company, a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if
the company, subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income
tax purposes.











   (10)     "DOMICILE" means the true, fixed and permanent home of the
taxpayer to which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.











   (11)       "EXEMPT INCOME" means all of the following: 











      (A)     The military pay or allowances of members of the
armed forces of the United States or members of their reserve components,
including the national guard of any state; 











      (B)    (i)     Except as provided in division
(11)(B)(ii)  of this section, intangible income; 











         (ii)    A municipal corporation that taxed any type of
intangible income on March 29, 1988, pursuant to Section 3 of S.B. 238 of the
116th general assembly, may continue to tax that type of income if a majority
of the electors of the municipal corporation voting on the question of
whether to permit the taxation of that type of intangible income after 1988
voted in favor thereof at an election held on November 8, 1988. 











      (C)     Social security benefits, railroad retirement
benefits, unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments,
payments from annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the
beneficiary of an employee under a retirement program or plan, disability
payments received from private industry or local, state, or federal
governments or from charitable, religious or educational organizations, and
the proceeds of sickness, accident, or liability insurance policies. As used
in division (11)(C) of this section, "unemployment compensation" does not
include supplemental unemployment compensation described in section
3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code. 











      (D)     The income of religious, fraternal, charitable,
scientific, literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income
is derived from tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible
property, or tax-exempt activities. 











      (E)    Compensation paid under section 3501.28 or 3501.36 of
the Ohio Revised Code to a  person serving as a precinct election official
to the extent that such compensation does not exceed one thousand dollars for
the taxable year. Such compensation in excess of one thousand dollars for the
taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal corporation. A
municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such compensation to
withhold any tax from that compensation. 











      (F)     Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by
charitable, religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor
unions, lodges, and similar organizations; 











      (G)   Alimony and child support received; 











      (H)     Awards for personal injuries or for damages to
property from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid
for lost salaries or wages or awards for punitive damages; 











      (I)     Income of a public utility when that public utility
is subject to the tax levied under section 5727.24 or 5727.30 of the Ohio
Revised Code. Division (11)(I) of this section does not apply for purposes of
Chapter 5745. of the Ohio Revised Code. 











      (J)    Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and
income of a decedent's estate during the period of administration except such
income from the operation of a trade or business; 











      (K)     Compensation or allowances excluded from federal
gross income under section 107 of the Internal Revenue Code; 











      (L)     Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as
defined in division (34) of this section; 











      (M)     Compensation paid to a person employed within the
boundaries of a United States air force base under the jurisdiction of the
United States air force that is used for the housing of members of the United
States air force and is a center for air force operations, unless the person
is subject to taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation
is subject to taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income
shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile. 











      (N)    An S corporation shareholder's distributive share of
net profits of the S corporation, other than any part of the distributive
share of net profits that represents wages as defined in section 3121(a) of
the Internal Revenue Code or net earnings from self-employment as defined in
section 1402(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. 











      (O)    All of the municipal taxable income earned by
individuals under eighteen years of age. 











      (P)   (i)     Except as provided in divisions (11)(P)(ii),
(iii), and (iv) of this section, qualifying wages described in division
(B)(1) or (E) of Section 94.5.052 of this Chapter to the extent the
qualifying wages are not subject to withholding for the Municipality under
either of those divisions. 











         (ii)     The exemption provided in division (11)(P)(i)
of this section does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in
which the employee resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying
wages. 











         (iii)    The exemption provided in division (11)(P)(i)
of this section does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to
withhold under division (D)(2) of Section 94.5.052 of this Chapter 











         (iv)     The exemption provided in division (11)(P)(i)
of this section does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following
conditions apply: 











            (a)     For qualifying wages described in
division (B)(1) of Section 94.5.052 of this Chapter, the employee's employer
withholds and remits tax on the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation
in which the employee's principal place of work is situated, or, for
qualifying wages described in division (E) of Section 94.5.052 of this
Chapter, the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying
wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer's fixed location is
located; 











            (b)     The employee receives a refund of the tax
described in division (11)(P)(iv)(a) of this section on the basis of the
employee not performing services in that municipal corporation. 











      (Q)   (i)     Except as provided in division (11)(Q)(ii)
or (iii)  of this section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to
a nonresident individual for personal services performed in the Municipality
on not more than twenty days in a taxable year. 











         (ii)    The exemption provided in division (11)(Q)(i) of
this section does not apply under either of the following circumstances: 











            (a)     The individual's base of operation is
located in the Municipality.











            (b)    The individual is a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for
the performance of services in the individual's capacity as a professional
athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of division
(11)(Q)(ii)(b) of this section, "professional athlete," "professional
entertainer," and "public figure" have the same meanings as in Section
94.5.052 of this Chapter. 











         (iii)    Compensation to which division (11)(Q) of this
section applies shall be treated as earned or received at the individual's
base of operation. If the individual does not have a base of operation, the
compensation shall be treated as earned or received where the individual is
domiciled. 











         (iv)     For purposes of division (11)(Q) of this
section, "base of operation" means the location where an individual owns or
rents an office, storefront, or similar facility to which the individual
regularly reports and at which the individual regularly performs personal
services for compensation. 











      (R)     Compensation paid to a person for personal services
performed for a political subdivision on property owned by the political
subdivision, regardless of whether the compensation is received by an
employee of the subdivision or another person performing services for the
subdivision under a contract with the subdivision, if the property on which
services are performed is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to
section 709.023 of the Ohio Revised Code on or after March 27, 2013, unless
the person is subject to such taxation because of residence. If the
compensation is subject to taxation because of residence, municipal income
tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of residence. 











      (S)     Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the
constitution or laws of the United States. 











         Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through
entity under division (11) of this section is exempt income of each owner of
the pass-through entity to the extent of that owner's distributive or
proportionate share of that item of the entity's income.











   (12)       "FORM 2106" means internal revenue service form 2106
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.











   (13)     "GENERIC FORM" means an electronic or paper form that is
not prescribed by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for
reporting taxes withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer, estimated municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax
liability, including a request for refund.











   (14)     "INCOME" means the following: 











      (A)    (i)    For residents, all income, salaries,
qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source
earned or received by the resident, including the resident's distributive
share of the net profit of pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly
by the resident and any net profit of the resident, except as provided in
division (23)(D) of this section. 











         (ii)     For the purposes of division (14)(A)(i)  of
this section: 











            (a)    Any net operating loss of the resident
incurred in the taxable year and the resident's distributive share of any net
operating loss generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the
resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a
deduction, for that taxable year and the following five taxable years,
against any other net profit of the resident or the resident's distributive
share of any net profit attributable to the resident's ownership interest in
a pass-through entity until fully utilized, subject to division (14)(A)(iv) 
of this section; 











            (b)     The resident's distributive share of the
net profit of each pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the
resident shall be calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is
carried forward by that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to
reduce the entity's net profit for the current taxable year. 











         (iii)     Division (14)(A)(ii) of this section does not
apply with respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an
ownership interest in an S corporation unless shareholders' distributive
shares of net profits from S corporations are subject to tax in the municipal
corporation as provided in division 11(N) or division 14(E) of this Section. 











         (iv)     Any amount of a net operating loss used to
reduce a taxpayer's net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of
net operating loss that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use
by that taxpayer. In no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable
years with respect to a taxpayer's net operating loss exceed the original
amount of that net operating loss available to that taxpayer. 











      (B)     In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries,
qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source
earned or received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or
rendered, or activities conducted in the Municipality, including any net
profit of the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share
of the net profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or
indirectly by the nonresident. 











      (C)     For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of
the taxpayer; 











      (D)     Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings,
winnings from games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a
professional gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct
related wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the
Internal Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings. Credit for tax
withheld or paid to another municipal corporation on such winnings paid to
the municipal corporation where winnings occur is limited to the credit as
specified in Section 94.5.081 of this Chapter. 











   (15)   "INTANGIBLE INCOME" means income of any of the following
types: income yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income
arising from the ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of
intangible property including, but not limited to, investments, deposits,
money, or credits as those terms are defined in Chapter 5701. of the Ohio
Revised Code, and patents, copyrights, trademarks, trade names, investments
in real estate investment trusts, investments in regulated investment
companies, and appreciation on deferred compensation. "Intangible income"
does not include prizes, awards, or other income associated with any lottery
winnings, gambling winnings, or other similar games of chance.











   (16)       "INTERNAL REVENUE CODE" means the "Internal Revenue
Code of 1986," 100 Sta. 2085, 26 U.S.C.A. 1, as amended. 











   (17)     "LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY" means a limited liability
company formed under Chapter 1705 of the Ohio Revised Code or under the laws
of another state.











   (18)   “LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW" and "BOARD OF TAX REVIEW" means
the entity created under Section 94.5.18 of this Chapter..











   (19)   "MUNICIPAL CORPORATION"  means, in general terms, a status
conferred upon a local government unit, by state law giving the unit certain
autonomous operating authority such as the power of taxation, power of
eminent domain, police power and regulatory power, and includes a joint
economic development district or joint economic development zone that levies
an income tax under section 715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74 of the Ohio
Revised Code.











   (20)   (A)   "MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME" means the following: 











         (i)     For a person other than an individual, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then,
as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the Municipality under Section
94.5.062 of this Chapter, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating
loss carryforward available to the person for the Municipality. 











         (ii)    (a)   For an individual who is a resident of
a Municipality other than a qualified municipal corporation, income reduced
by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income, then reduced as
provided in division (20)(B) of this section, and further reduced by any
pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for the
Municipality. 











            (b)    For an individual who is a resident of a
qualified municipal corporation, Ohio adjusted gross income reduced by income
exempted, and increased by deductions excluded, by the qualified municipal
corporation from the qualified municipal corporation's tax on or before
December 31, 2013. If a qualified municipal corporation, on or before
December 31, 2013, exempts income earned by individuals who are not residents
of the qualified municipal corporation and net profit of persons that are not
wholly located within the qualified municipal corporation, such individual or
person shall have no municipal taxable income for the purposes of the tax
levied by the qualified municipal corporation and may be exempted by the
qualified municipal corporation from the requirements of section 718.03 of
the Ohio Revised Code. 











         (iii)     For an individual who is a nonresident of the
Municipality, income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise
included in income and then, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the
Municipality under Section 94.5.062 of this Chapter, then reduced as provided
in division (20)(B) of this section, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net
operating loss carryforward available to the individual for the
Municipality. 











      (B)   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer
who is an individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division
(20)(A)(ii)(a) or (iii) of this section, the amount of the individual's
employee business expenses reported on the individual's form 2106 that the
individual deducted for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year,
subject to the limitation imposed by section 67 of the Internal Revenue Code.
For the municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the
taxpayer may deduct all such expenses allowed for federal income tax
purposes. For a municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is not a
resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to the extent the
expenses are related to the taxpayer's performance of personal services in
that nonresident municipal corporation. 











   (21)    "MUNICIPALITY" means the City of West Carrollton. 











   (22)   "NET OPERATING LOSS" means a loss incurred by a person in the
operation of a trade or business.  "Net operating loss" does not include
unutilized losses resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or
passive activity loss limitations.











   (23)   (A)   “NET PROFIT" for a person other than an individual
means adjusted federal taxable income. 











      (B)     "NET PROFIT" for a person who is an individual means
the individual's net profit required to be reported on schedule C, schedule
E, or schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the
purposes of division, the net operating loss carried forward shall be
calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in division (1)(H) of
this section. 











      (C)     For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding
division (23)(A) of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall
not be taxable as against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be
included in the net profit of the owner of the disregarded entity. 











      (D)    (i)    For purposes of this chapter, "publicly
traded partnership" means any partnership, an interest in which is regularly
traded on an established securities market.  A "publicly traded partnership"
may have any number of partners.











         (ii)    For the purposes of this chapter, and not
withstanding any other provision of this chapter, the net profit of a
publicly traded partnership that makes the election described in division
(23)(D) of this section shall be taxed as if the partnership were a C
corporation, and shall not be treated as the net profit or income of any
owner of the partnership.











         (iii)    A publicly traded partnership that is treated
as a partnership for federal income tax purposes and that is subject to tax
on its net profits in one or more municipal corporations in this state may
elect to be treated as a C corporation for municipal income tax purposes. 
The publicly traded partnership shall make the election in every municipal
corporation in which the partnership is subject to taxation on its net
profits.  The election shall be made on the annual tax return filed in each
such municipal corporation.  Once the election is made, the election is
binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the
initial election.  The election continues to be binding for each subsequent
five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing municipal
income tax returns as a C corporation for municipal purposes under division
(D)(iv) of this section.











         (iv)   An election to discontinue filing as a C
corporation must be made in the first year following the last year of a
five-year election period in effect under division (D)(iii) of this
section.  The election to discontinue filing as a C corporation is binding
for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election
and continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the
taxpayer elects to discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a
partnership for municipal purposes.  An election to discontinue filing as a
partnership must be made in the first year following the last year of a
five-year election period.











         (v)    The publicly traded partnership shall not be
required to file the election with any municipal corporation in which the
partnership is not subject to taxation on its net profits, but division (D)
of this section applies to all municipal corporations in which an individual
owner of the partnership resides.   











         (vi)   The individual owners of the partnership not
filing as a C Corporation shall be required to file with their municipal
corporation of residence, and report partnership distribution of net profit.











   (24)       "NONRESIDENT" means an individual that is not a
resident of the Municipality.











   (25)     "OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY" means the online computer network
system, created under section 125.30 of the Ohio Revised Code, that allows
persons to electronically file business reply forms with state agencies and
includes any successor electronic filing and payment system.











   (26)     "OTHER PAYER" means any person, other than an individual's
employer or the employer's agent, that pays an individual any amount included
in the federal gross income of the individual. "Other payer" includes casino
operators and video lottery terminal sales agents. 











   (27)       "PASS-THROUGH ENTITY" means a partnership not treated
as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes,
a limited liability company not treated as an association taxable as a C
corporation for federal income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other
class of entity from which the income or profits of the entity are given
pass-through treatment for federal income tax purposes. "Pass-through entity"
does not include a trust, estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded
entity.











   (28)       "PENSION" means any amount paid to an employee or
former employee that is reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or
successor form.  Pension does not include deferred compensation, or amounts
attributable to nonqualified deferred compensation plans, reported as
FICA/Medicare wages on an IRS form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor
form.











   (29)     "PERSON" includes individuals, firms, companies, joint
stock companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited
liability partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C
corporations, S corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity. 











   (30)     "POSTAL SERVICE" means the United States postal service,
or private delivery service delivering documents and packages within an
agreed upon delivery schedule, or any other carrier service delivering the
item.











   (31)   "POSTMARK DATE," "DATE OF POSTMARK," and similar terms
include the date recorded and marked by a delivery service and recorded
electronically to a database kept in the regular course if its business and
marked on the cover in which the payment or document is enclosed, the date on
which the payment or document was given to the delivery service for delivery 











   (32)    (A)       "PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD"
means any net operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning before
January 1, 2017, to the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution or
ordinance of the Municipality that was adopted by the Municipality before
January 1, 2016, to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net
profit generated in such Municipality in future taxable years. 











      (B)     For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable
income, any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward
to any taxable year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter,
for the number of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or
until fully utilized, whichever is earlier. 











   (33)   “QUALIFIED MUNICIPAL CORPORATION" means a municipal
corporation that, by resolution or ordinance adopted on or before December
31, 2011, adopted Ohio adjusted gross income, as defined by section 5747.01
of the Ohio Revised Code, as the income subject to tax for the purposes of
imposing a municipal income tax.











   (34)     "QUALIFYING WAGES" means wages, as defined in section
3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations,
adjusted as follows:











      (A)     Deduct the following amounts: 











         (i)     Any amount included in wages if the amount
constitutes compensation attributable to a plan or program described in
section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code. 











         (ii)    Any amount included in wages if the amount
constitutes payment on account of a disability related to sickness or an
accident paid by a party unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer. 











         (iii)   Intentionally left blank. 











         (iv)    Intentionally left blank.











         (v)     Any amount included in wages that is exempt
income. 











      (B)     Add the following amounts: 





         (i)     Any amount not included in wages solely because
the employee was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986. 











         (ii)    Any amount not included in wages because the
amount arises from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock
option, the exercise of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of stock purchased under a stock option. Division (34)(B)(ii) of
this section applies only to those amounts constituting ordinary income. 











         (iii)   Any amount not included in wages if the amount
is an amount described in section 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal
Revenue Code. Division (34)(B)(iii)  of this section applies only to
employee contributions and employee deferrals. 











         (iv)  Any amount that is supplemental unemployment
compensation benefits described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue
Code and not included in wages. 





   





         (v)     Any amount received that is treated as
self-employment income for federal tax purposes in accordance with section
1402(a)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code. 











         (vi)     Any amount not included in wages if all of the
following apply: 











            (a)     For the taxable year the amount is
employee compensation that is earned outside of the United States and that
either is included in the taxpayer's gross income for federal income tax
purposes or would have been included in the taxpayer's gross income for such
purposes if the taxpayer did not elect to exclude the income under section
911 of the Internal Revenue Code; 











            (b)    For no preceding taxable year did the
amount constitute wages as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code; 











            (c)    For no succeeding taxable year will the
amount constitute wages; and 











            (d)    For any taxable year the amount has not
otherwise been added to wages pursuant to either division (34)(B) of this
section or section 718.03 of the Ohio Revised Code, as that section existed
before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the 130th general assembly, March 23,
2015. 











   (35)      "RELATED ENTITY" means any of the following: 











      (A)     An individual stockholder, or a member of the
stockholder's family enumerated in section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code,
if the stockholder and the members of the stockholder's family own directly,
indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at least fifty
per cent of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock; 











      (B)     A stockholder, or a stockholder's partnership,
estate, trust, or corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder's
partnerships, estates, trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly,
beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at least fifty per cent of
the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock; 











      (C)     A corporation, or a party related to the corporation
in a manner that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation
to the party or from the party to the corporation under division (35)(D) of
this section, provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially,
or constructively, at least fifty per cent of the value of the corporation's
outstanding stock; 











      (D)     The attribution rules described in section 318 of the
Internal Revenue Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the
ownership requirements in divisions (35)(A) to (C) of this section have been
met. 











   (36)     "RELATED MEMBER" means a person that, with respect to the
taxpayer during all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related
entity, a component member as defined in section 1563(b) of the Internal
Revenue Code, or a person to or from whom there is attribution of stock
ownership in accordance with section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code
except, for purposes of determining whether a person is a related member
under this division, "twenty per cent" shall be substituted for "5 percent"
wherever "5 percent" appears in section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue
Code. 











   (37)    "RESIDENT" means an individual who is domiciled in the
Municipality as determined under Section 94.5.042 of this Chapter. 











   (38)   "S CORPORATION" means a person that has made an election
under subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code
for its taxable year.











   (39)    "SCHEDULE C" means internal revenue service schedule C (form
1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 











   (40)    "SCHEDULE E" means internal revenue service schedule E (form
1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. 











   (41)    "SCHEDULE F" means internal revenue service schedule F (form
1040) filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.











   (42)   "SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY" means a limited
liability company that has one direct member.











   (43)    "SMALL EMPLOYER" means any employer that had total revenue
of less than five hundred thousand dollars during the preceding taxable year.
For purposes of this division, "total revenue" means receipts of any type or
kind, including, but not limited to, sales receipts; payments; rents;
profits; gains, dividends, and other investment income; commissions;
premiums; money; property; grants; contributions; donations; gifts; program
service revenue; patient service revenue; premiums; fees, including premium
fees and service fees; tuition payments; unrelated business revenue;
reimbursements; any type of payment from a governmental unit, including
grants and other allocations; and any other similar receipts reported for
federal income tax purposes or under generally accepted accounting
principles. "Small employer" does not include the federal government; any
state government, including any state agency or instrumentality; any
political subdivision; or any entity treated as a government for financial
accounting and reporting purposes.











   (44)     "TAX ADMINISTRATOR" means the individual charged with
direct responsibility for administration of an income tax levied by a
municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter, and also includes the
following: 











      (A)     A municipal corporation acting as the agent of
another municipal corporation; 











      (B)    A person retained by a municipal corporation to
administer a tax levied by the municipal corporation, but only if the
municipal corporation does not compensate the person in whole or in part on a
contingency basis; 











      (C)     The Central Collection Agency (CCA) or the Regional
Income Tax Agency (RITA) or their successors in interest, or another entity
organized to perform functions similar to those performed by the Central
Collection Agency and the Regional Income Tax Agency. 











   (45)       "TAX RETURN PREPARER" means any individual described in
section 7701(a)(36) of the Internal Revenue CODE AND 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15 .











   (46)   "TAXABLE YEAR" means the corresponding tax reporting period
as prescribed for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.











   (47)    (A)       "TAXPAYER" means a person subject to a tax
levied on income by a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter.
"Taxpayer" does not include a grantor trust or, except as provided in
division (47)(B)(i)  of this section, a disregarded entity. 











      (B)    (i)     A single member limited liability company
that is a disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate
taxpayer from its single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which
it either filed as a separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year
ending in 2003, if all of the following conditions are met: 











            (a)     The limited liability company's single
member is also a limited liability company. 











            (b)     The limited liability company and its
single member were formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal
corporations for at least five years before January 1, 2004. 











            (c)     Not later than December 31, 2004, the
limited liability company and its single member each made an election to be
treated as a separate taxpayer under division (L) of section 718.01 of the
Ohio Revised Code  as this section existed on December 31, 2004. 











            (d)     The limited liability company was not
formed for the purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation
income tax liability of the limited liability company or its single member. 











            (e)     The Ohio municipal corporation that was
the primary place of business of the sole member of the limited liability
company consented to the election. 











         (ii)     For purposes of division (47)(B)(i)(e) of this
section, a municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a
limited liability company if, for the limited liability company's taxable
year ending in 2003, its income tax liability was greater in that municipal
corporation than in any other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax
liability to that municipal corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003
was at least four hundred thousand dollars. 











   (48)   “TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES" means the rights
provided to taxpayers in sections 718.11 , 718.12 , 718.19, 718.23, 718.36,
718.37, 718.38, 5717.011 , and 5717.03 of the Ohio Revised Code and any
corresponding ordinances of the Municipality, and the responsibilities of
taxpayers to file, report, withhold, remit, and pay municipal income tax and
otherwise comply with Chapter 718. of the Ohio Revised Code and resolutions,
ordinances, and rules adopted by a municipal corporation for the imposition
and administration of a municipal income tax.











   (49)       "VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL" has the same meaning as in
section 3770.21 of the Ohio Revised Code. 











   (50)   "VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL SALES AGENT" means a lottery sales
agent licensed under Chapter 3770. of the Ohio Revised Code to conduct video
lottery terminals on behalf of the state pursuant to section 3770.21 of the
Ohio Revised Code.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.04  INCOME SUBJECT TO TAX FOR INDIVIDUALS.









94.5.041   DETERMINING MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME FOR INDIVIDUALS.










   (A)    "Municipal Taxable Income" for a resident of the Municipality
is calculated as follows:











      (1)    "Income" reduced by "Exempt Income" to the extent such
exempt income is otherwise included in income, reduced by allowable employee
business expense deduction as found in division (20)(B) of Section 94.5.03 of
this Chapter, further reduced by any "Pre-2017 Net Operating Loss
Carryforward" equals "Municipal Taxable Income".











         (a)     "Income" is defined in Section 94.5.03 (14) of
this Chapter.











            (i)     "Qualifying Wages" is defined in Section
94.5.03(34). 











            (ii)    "Net profit" is included in "income", and
is defined in Section 94.5.03 (23) of this Chapter.  This section also
provides that the net operating loss carryforward shall be calculated and
deducted in the same manner as provided in division (1)(H) of Section
94.5.03.  Treatment of net profits received by an individual taxpayer from
rental real estate is provided in Section 94.5.062(E).











            (iii)   Section 94.5.03(14) provides the
following: offsetting and net operating loss carryforward treatment in
(14)(A)(ii)(a); resident's distributive share of net profit from pass through
entity treatment in (14)(A)(ii)(b); treatment of S Corporation distributive
share of net profit in the hands of the shareholder in (14)(A)(iii);
restriction of amount of loss permitted to be carried forward for use by
taxpayer in a subsequent taxable year in (14)(A)(iv).   











            (iv)   “Pass Through Entity" is defined in
Section 94.5.03(27).











         (b)    "Exempt Income" is defined in Section 94.5.03
(11) of this Chapter. 











         (c)   Allowable employee business expense deduction is
described in (20)(B) of Section 94.5.03 of this Chapter, and is subject to
the limitations provided in that section. 











         (d)    "Pre-2017 Net Operating Loss Carryforward" is
defined in Section 94.5.03 (32) of this Chapter











   (B)    "Municipal Taxable Income" for a nonresident of the
Municipality is calculated as follows:











      (1)    "Income" reduced by "Exempt Income" to the extent such
exempt income is otherwise included in income, as applicable, apportioned or
sitused to the Municipality as provided in Section 94.5.062 of this Chapter,
reduced by allowable employee business expense deduction as found in (20)(B)
of Section 94.5.03 of this Chapter, further reduced by any "Pre-2017 Net
Operating Loss Carryforward" equals "Municipal Taxable Income".











         (a)    "Income" is defined in Section 94.5.03(14) of
this Chapter.











            (i)   “Qualifying Wages" is defined in Section
94.5.03(34). 











            (ii)    "Net profit" is included in "income", and
is defined in Section 94.5.03(23) of this Chapter.  This section also
provides that the net operating loss carryforward shall be calculated and
deducted in the same manner as provided in division (1)(H) of Section
94.5.03. "Net profit" for a nonresident individual includes any net profit of
the nonresident, but excludes the distributive share of net profit or loss of
only pass through entity owned directly or indirectly by the nonresident.











            (iii)     "Pass Through Entity" is defined in
Section 94.5.03(27). 











         (b)   “Exempt Income" is defined in Section
94.5.03(11) of this Chapter. 











         (c)    "Apportioned or sitused to the Municipality as
provided in Section 94.5.062 of this Chapter" includes the apportionment of
net profit income attributable to work done or services performed in the
Municipality.  Treatment of net profits received by an individual taxpayer
from rental real estate is provided in Section 94.5.062(E).











         (d)    "Allowable employee business expense deduction"
as described in (20)(B) of Section 94.5.03 of this Chapter, is subject to the
limitations provided in that section. For a nonresident of the Municipality,
the deduction is limited to the extent the expenses are related to the
performance of personal services by the nonresident in the Municipality.











         (e)    "Pre-2017 Net Operating Loss Carryforward" is
defined in Section 94.5.03(32) of this Chapter. 





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.042   DOMICILE.










   (A)     As used in this section:











      (1)     "Domicile" means the true, fixed and permanent home
of the taxpayer to which whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.   











      (2)     An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the
Municipality for all or part of a taxable year if the individual was
domiciled in the Municipality on the last day of the immediately preceding
taxable year or if the tax administrator reasonably concludes that the
individual is domiciled in the Municipality for all or part of the taxable
year.











      (3)   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile
described in division (A)(1) of this section if the individual establishes by
a preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the
Municipality  for all or part of the taxable year. 











   (B)     For the purpose of determining whether an individual is
domiciled in the Municipality for all or part of a taxable year, factors that
may be considered include, but are not limited to, the following: 











      (1)     The individual's domicile in other taxable years; 











      (2)    The location at which the individual is registered to
vote; 











      (3)     The address on the individual's driver's license; 











      (4)     The location of real estate for which the individual
claimed a property tax  exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the
individual's residence or domicile;











      (5)     The location and value of abodes owned or leased by
the individual; 











      (6)     Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual
regarding the individual's  residency; 











      (7)    The primary location at which the individual is
employed. 











      (8)     The location of educational institutions attended by
the individual's dependents as defined in section 152 of the Internal Revenue
Code, to the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is
based on the residency of the individual or the individual's spouse in the
municipal corporation or state where the educational institution is located; 











      (9)     The number of contact periods the individual has with
the Municipality. For the purposes of this division, an individual has one
"contact period" with the Municipality if the individual is away overnight
from the individual's abode located outside of the Municipality and while
away overnight from that abode spends at least some portion, however minimal,
of each of two consecutive days in the Municipality.  For purposes of this
section, the State's contact period test or bright-line test and resulting
determination have no bearing on municipal residency or domicile.











   (C)    All applicable factors are provided in Ohio Revised Code
Section 718.012. 





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.043 EXEMPTION FOR MEMBER OR EMPLOYEE OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY AND CERTAIN
JUDGES










   (A)     Only the municipal corporation of residence shall be
permitted to levy a tax on the income of any member or employee of the Ohio
General Assembly, including the Lieutenant Governor, whose income is received
as a result of services rendered as such member or employee and is paid from
appropriated funds of this state.











   (B)     Only the municipal corporation of residence and the city of
Columbus shall levy a tax on the income of the Chief Justice or a Justice of
the Supreme Court received as a result of services rendered as the Chief
Justice or Justice.  Only the municipal corporation of residence shall levy
a tax on the income of a judge sitting by assignment of the Chief Justice or
on the income of a district court of appeals judge sitting in multiple
locations within the district, received as a result of services rendered as a
judge.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.05 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.









94.5.051 COLLECTION AT SOURCE; WITHHOLDING FROM QUALIFYING WAGES.










   (A)    (1)    Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
located or doing business in the Municipality shall withhold from each
employee an amount equal to the qualifying wages of the employee earned by
the employee in the Municipality multiplied by the applicable rate of the
Municipality's income tax, except for qualifying wages for which withholding
is not required under section 94.5.052 of this Chapter or division (D) or (F)
of this section.  An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall
deduct and withhold the tax from qualifying wages on the date that the
employer, agent, or other payer directly, indirectly, or constructively pays
the qualifying wages to, or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit of,
the employee. 











      (2)     In addition to withholding the amounts required under
division (A)(1) of this section, an employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer may also deduct and withhold, on the request of an employee, taxes for
the municipal corporation in which the employee is a resident. 











   (B)    (1)    An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
shall remit to the Tax Administrator of the Municipality the greater of the
income taxes deducted and withheld or the income taxes required to be
deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer, along with any
report required by the Tax Administrator to accompany such payment, according
to the following schedule: 











         (a)     Any employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer not required to make payments under division (B)(1)(b) of this section
of taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments
to the Tax Administrator not later than the fifteenth day of the month
following the end of each calendar quarter.











         (b)     Taxes required to be deducted and withheld
shall be remitted monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes
deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld by the
employer, agent, or other payer on behalf of the municipal corporation in the
preceding calendar year exceeded two thousand three hundred ninety-nine
dollars, or if the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to
be deducted and withheld on behalf of the Municipality in any month of the
preceding calendar quarter exceeded two hundred dollars. Payment under
division (B)(1)(b) of this section shall be made so that the payment is
received by the Tax Administrator not later than fifteen days after the last
day of each month.   











   (C)     An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall
make and file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer,
agent, or other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted
to the Tax Administrator.  A return filed by an employer, agent, or other
payer under this division shall be accepted by the Municipality as the return
required of an employee whose sole income subject to the tax under this
chapter is the qualifying wages reported by the employee's employer, agent of
an employer, or other payer, unless the  Municipality requires all resident
individual taxpayers to file a tax return under section 94.5.091 of this
Chapter,











   (D)     An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not
required to withhold municipal income tax with respect to an individual's
disqualifying disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the
disqualifying disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the
corporation with respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such
corporation's successor entity. 











   (E)    (1)     An employee is not relieved from liability for a
tax by the failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to
withhold the tax as required  under this chapter or by the employer's,
agent's, or other payer's exemption from the requirement to withhold the
tax. 











      (2)     The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer to remit to the Municipality the tax withheld relieves the
employee from liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the
employer, agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the
tax withheld. 











   (F)     Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject
to any municipal corporation income tax or municipal income tax withholding
requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not constitute
qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or
distributed. 





 





   (G)    Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required
to withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the Municipality until such time as the
withheld amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.











   (H)     On or before the last day of February of each year, an
employer shall file a Withholding Reconciliation Return with the Tax
Administrator listing the names, addresses, and social security numbers of
all employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have
been withheld for the Municipality during the preceding calendar year, the
amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee's qualifying wage,
the total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the
preceding calendar year, the name of every other municipal corporation for
which tax was withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during
the preceding calendar year, any other information required for federal
income tax reporting purposes on Internal Revenue Service form W-2 or its
equivalent form with respect to such employee, and other information as may
be required by the Tax Administrator. 











   (I)     The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an
employer, or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged
with the responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and
making payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a
failure to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer,  agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer's or employee's liability for a failure of the
employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax
due. 











   (J)     An employer is required to deduct and withhold municipal
income tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer's employees and
constituting qualifying wages only to the extent that the tips and gratuities
are under the employer's control. For the purposes of this division, a tip or
gratuity is under the employer's control if the tip or gratuity is paid by
the customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or if
the customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or other
electronic means. 











   (K)     A Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an
employer at the request of an employee when such tax is not otherwise
required to be withheld by this Chapter to be tax required to be withheld and
remitted for the purposes of this section.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.052 COLLECTION AT SOURCE; OCCASIONAL ENTRANT.










   (A)     The following terms as used in this section:











      (1)    "Employer" includes a person that is a related member
to or of an employer. 











      (2)     "Professional athlete" means an athlete who performs
services in a professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration. 











      (3)     "Professional entertainer" means a person who
performs services in the professional performing arts for wages or other
remuneration on a per-event basis. 











      (4)     "Public figure" means a person of prominence who
performs services at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances,
or similar events, for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis. 











      (5)   "Fixed location" means a permanent place of doing
business in this state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar
location owned or controlled by an employer. 











      (6)     "Worksite location" means a construction site or
other temporary worksite in this state at which the employer provides
services for more than twenty days during the calendar year. "Worksite
location" does not include the home of an employee. 











      (7)     "Principal place of work" means the fixed location to
which an employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular
and ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment
duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, "principal place
of work" means the worksite location in this state to which the employee is
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If
the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a regular and
ordinary basis to a fixed location or worksite location, "principal place of
work" means the location in this state at which the employee spends the
greatest number of days in a calendar year performing services for or on
behalf of the employee's employer. 











         If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the
employee spent the "greatest number of days in a calendar year" performing
services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more
municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of
days that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other
municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee's
qualifying wages subject to division (B)(1)(a) of this section among those
two or more municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any
fair and reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal
allocation among such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the
time spent or sales made by the employee in each such municipal corporation.
A municipal corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this
division shall be the employee's "principal place of work" with respect to
those qualifying wages for the purposes of this section.











         For the purposes of this division, the location at which an
employee spends a particular day shall be deemed in accordance with division
(B)(2) of this section, except that "location" shall be substituted for
"municipal corporation" wherever "municipal corporation" appears in that
division.











   (B)    (1)    Subject to divisions (C), (E), (F), and (G) of this
section, an employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on
qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services
in a municipal corporation that imposes such a tax if the employee performed
such services in the municipal corporation on twenty or fewer days in a
calendar year, unless one of the following conditions applies:











         (a)    The employee's principal place of work is located
in the Municipality. 











         (b)    The employee performed services at one or more
presumed worksite locations in the Municipality. For the purposes of this
division, "presumed worksite location" means a construction site or other
temporary worksite in this state at which the employer provides services that
can reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than twenty days in a
calendar year. Services can "reasonably be expected by the employer to last
more than twenty days" if either of the following applies at the time the
services commence: 











            (i)     The nature of the services are such that
it will require more than twenty days of actual services to complete the
services; 





            (ii)     The agreement between the employer and
its customer to perform services at a location requires the employer to
perform actual services at the location for more than twenty days. 











         (c)     The employee is a resident of the Municipality
and has requested that the employer withhold tax from the employee's
qualifying wages as provided in section 94.5.051 of this Chapter.











         (d)     The employee is a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid
for the performance of services in the employee's capacity as a professional
athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure within the Municipality.











      (2)   For the purposes of division (B)(1) of this section, an
employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in a
municipal corporation only if the employee spent more time performing
services for or on behalf of the employer in that municipal corporation than
in any other municipal corporation on that day.  For the purposes of
determining the amount of time an employee spent in a particular location,
the time spent performing one or more of the following activities shall be
considered to have been spent at the employee's principal place of work:











         (a)    Traveling to the location at which the employee
will first perform services for the employer for the day; 











           (b)     Traveling from a location at which the
employee was performing services for the employer to any other location; 











         (c)     Traveling from any location to another location
in order to pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery,
property that has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired,
refurbished, processed, remanufactured, or improved by the employee's
employer; 











           (d)     Transporting or delivering property
described in division (B)(2)(c) of this section, provided that, upon delivery
of the property, the employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the
property to real estate owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the
employee's employer; 











           (e)     Traveling from the location at which the
employee makes the employee's final delivery or pick-up for the day to either
the employee's principal place of work or a location at which the employee
will not perform services for the employer. 











   (C)     If the principal place of work of an employee is located in
a municipal corporation that imposes an income tax in accordance with this
chapter, the exception from withholding requirements described in division
(B)(1) of this section shall apply only if, with respect to the employee's
qualifying wages described in that division, the employer withholds and
remits tax on such qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the
employee's principal place of work is located. 











   (D)    (1)     Except as provided in division (D)(2) of this
section, if, during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends
performing personal services in a municipal corporation exceeds the
twenty-day threshold described in division (B)(1) of this section, the
employer shall withhold and remit tax to that municipal corporation for any
subsequent days in that calendar year on which the employer pays qualifying
wages to the employee for personal services performed in that municipal
corporation.











      (2)     An employer required to begin withholding tax for a
municipal corporation under division (D)(1) of this section may elect to
withhold tax for that municipal corporation for the first twenty days on
which the employer paid qualifying wages to the employee for personal
services performed in that municipal corporation. 











      (3)    If an employer makes the election described in division
(D)(2) of this section, the taxes withheld and paid by such an employer
during those first twenty days to the municipal corporation in which the
employee's principal place of work is located are refundable to the
employee. 











   (E)     Without regard to the number of days in a calendar year on
which an employee performs personal services in any municipal corporation, an
employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the employee's
qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the municipal
corporation in which the employer's fixed location is located if the employer
qualifies as a small employer as defined in Section 94.5.03 of this Chapter.
To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer for a taxable
year, a Tax Administrator may require the employer to provide the Tax
Administrator with the employer's federal income tax return for the preceding
taxable year. 











   (F)     Divisions (B)(1) and (D) of this section shall not apply to
the extent that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement
regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements
of section 94.5.051 of this Chapter. 











   (G)     In the case of a person performing personal services at a
petroleum refinery located in a municipal corporation that imposes a tax on
income, an employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on the
qualifying wages of such a person if the person performs those services on
twelve or fewer days in a calendar year, unless the principal place of work
of the employer is located in another municipal corporation in this state
that imposes a tax applying to compensation paid to the person for services
performed on those days and the person is not liable to that other municipal
corporation for tax on the compensation paid for such services. For the
purposes of this division, a petroleum refinery is a facility with a standard
industrial classification code facility classification of 2911, petroleum
refining. 











   Notwithstanding division (D) of this section, if, during a calendar
year, the number of days an individual performs personal services at a
petroleum refinery exceeds twelve, the employer shall withhold tax for the
municipal corporation for the first twelve days for which the employer paid
qualifying wages to the individual and for all subsequent days in the
calendar year on which the individual performed services at the refinery.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.053 COLLECTION AT SOURCE; CASINO AND VLT.










   (A)     The Municipality shall require a casino facility or a
casino operator, as defined in  Section 6(C)(9) of Article XV, Ohio
Constitution, and section 3772.01 of the Ohio Revised Code, respectively, or
a lottery sales agent conducting video lottery terminals sales on behalf of
the state to withhold and remit municipal income tax with respect to amounts
other than qualifying wages as provided in this section.











   (B)    If a person's winnings at a casino facility are an amount for
which reporting to the internal revenue service of the amount is required by
section 6041 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the casino operator
shall deduct and withhold municipal income tax from the person's winnings at
the rate of the tax imposed by the municipal corporation in which the casino
facility is located. 











   (C)     Amounts deducted and withheld by a casino operator are held
in trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is
owed. 











      (1)     On or before the tenth day of each month, the casino
operator shall file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the
Municipality, providing the name, address, and social security number of the
person from whose winnings amounts were deducted and withheld, the amount of
each such deduction and withholding during the preceding calendar month, the
amount of the winnings from which each such amount was withheld, the type of
casino gaming that resulted in such winnings, and any other information
required by the Tax Administrator. With this return, the casino operator
shall remit electronically to the Municipality all amounts deducted and
withheld during the preceding month. 











      (2)     Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of
January, a casino operator shall file an annual return electronically with
the Tax Administrator of the municipal corporation in which the casino
facility is located, indicating the total amount deducted and withheld during
the preceding calendar year. The casino operator shall remit electronically
with the annual return any amount that was deducted and withheld and that was
not previously remitted. If the name, address, or social security number of a
person or the amount deducted and withheld with respect to that person was
omitted on a monthly return for that reporting period, that information shall
be indicated on the annual return. 











      (3)     Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of
January, a casino operator shall issue an information return to each person
with respect to whom an amount has been deducted and withheld during the
preceding calendar year. The information return shall show the total amount
of municipal income tax deducted from the person's winnings during the
preceding year. The casino operator shall provide to the Tax Administrator a
copy of each information return issued under this division.  The
administrator may require that such copies be transmitted electronically. 











      (4)    A casino operator that fails to file a return and remit
the amounts deducted and withheld shall be personally liable for the amount
withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty and
interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax
deducted and withheld.











      (5)     If a casino operator sells the casino facility or
otherwise quits the casino business, the amounts deducted and withheld along
with any penalties and interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The
successor shall withhold an amount of the purchase money that is sufficient
to cover the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and
interest thereon until the predecessor casino operator produces either of the
following: 











         (a)     A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing
that the amounts deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon
have been paid; 











         (b)     A certificate from the Tax Administrator
indicating that no amounts are due. 











            If the successor fails to withhold purchase money,
the successor is personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted
and withheld and penalties and interest thereon. 











      (6)     The failure of a casino operator to deduct and
withhold the required amount from a person's winnings does not relieve that
person from liability for the municipal income tax with respect to those
winnings. 











   (D)     If a person's prize award from a video lottery terminal is
an amount for which reporting to the internal revenue service is required by
section 6041 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the video lottery
sales agent shall deduct and withhold municipal income tax from the person's
prize award at the rate of the tax imposed by the municipal corporation in
which the video lottery terminal facility is located. 











   (E)     Amounts deducted and withheld by a video lottery sales
agent are held in trust for the  benefit of the municipal corporation to
which the tax is owed. 











      (1)     The video lottery sales agent shall issue to a person
from whose prize award an amount has been deducted and withheld a receipt for
the amount deducted and withheld, and shall obtain from the person receiving
a prize award the person's name, address, and social security number in order
to facilitate the preparation of returns required by this section. 











      (2)    On or before the tenth day of each month, the video
lottery sales agent shall file a return electronically with the Tax
Administrator of the Municipality providing the names, addresses, and social
security numbers of the persons from whose prize awards amounts were deducted
and withheld, the amount of each such deduction and withholding during the
preceding calendar month, the amount of the prize award from which each such
amount was withheld, and any other information required by the Tax
Administrator. With the return, the video lottery sales agent shall remit
electronically to the Tax Administrator all amounts deducted and withheld
during the preceding month.











      (3)     A video lottery sales agent shall maintain a record
of all receipts issued under division (E) of this section and shall make
those records available to the Tax Administrator upon request. Such records
shall be maintained in accordance with section 5747.17 of the Ohio Revised
Code and any rules adopted pursuant thereto. 











      (4)     Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of
January, each video lottery terminal sales agent shall file an annual return
electronically with the Tax Administrator of the municipal corporation in
which the facility is located indicating the total amount deducted and
withheld during the preceding calendar year. The video lottery sales agent
shall remit electronically with the annual return any amount that was
deducted and withheld and that was not previously remitted. If the name,
address, or social security number of a person or the amount deducted and
withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a monthly return for that
reporting period, that information shall be indicated on the annual return. 











      (5)     Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of
January, a video lottery sales agent shall issue an information return to
each person with respect to whom an amount has been deducted and withheld
during the preceding calendar year. The information return shall show the
total amount of municipal income tax deducted and withheld from the person's
prize award by the video lottery sales agent during the preceding year. A
video lottery sales agent shall provide to the Tax Administrator of the
municipal corporation a copy of each information return issued under this
division. The Tax Administrator may require that such copies be transmitted
electronically. 











      (6)     A video lottery sales agent who fails to file a
return and remit the amounts deducted and withheld is personally liable for
the amount deducted and withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability
extends to any penalty and interest imposed for the late filing of a return
or the late payment of tax deducted and withheld. 











   (F)     If a video lottery sales agent ceases to operate video
lottery terminals, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties
and interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor of the
video lottery sales agent that purchases the video lottery terminals from the
agent shall withhold an amount from the purchase money that is sufficient to
cover the amounts deducted and withheld and any penalties and interest
thereon until the predecessor video lottery sales agent operator produces
either of the following:











      (1)     A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the
amounts deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been
paid; 











      (2)     A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating
that no amounts are due. 











         If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the
successor is personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and
withheld and penalties and interest thereon. 











   (G)    The failure of a video lottery sales agent to deduct and
withhold the required amount from a person's prize award does not relieve
that person from liability for the municipal income tax with respect to that
prize award. 











   (H)    If a casino operator or lottery sales agent files a return
late, fails to file a return, remits amounts deducted and withheld late, or
fails to remit amounts deducted and withheld as required under this section,
the Tax Administrator of a municipal corporation may impose the following





applicable penalty: 











      (1)     For the late remittance of, or failure to remit, tax
deducted and withheld under this section, a penalty equal to fifty per cent
of the tax deducted and withheld; 











      (2)     For the failure to file, or the late filing of, a
monthly or annual return, a penalty of five hundred dollars for each return
not filed or filed late. Interest shall accrue on past due amounts deducted
and withheld at the rate prescribed in section 5703.47 of the Ohio Revised
Code. 











   (I)     Amounts deducted and withheld on behalf of a municipal
corporation shall be allowed as a credit against payment of the tax imposed
by the municipal corporation and shall be treated as taxes paid for purposes
of section 94.5.07 of this Chapter. This division applies only to the person
for whom the amount is deducted and withheld.   











   (J)    The Tax Administrator shall prescribe the forms of the
receipts and returns required under this section.  (Ord. 3572.  Passed
11-24-15.)










94.5.06 INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX.









94.5.061 DETERMINING MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME FOR TAXPAYERS WHO ARE NOT
INDIVIDUALS.










   "Municipal Taxable Income" for a taxpayer who is not an individual for
the Municipality is calculated as follows:











   (A)    "Income" reduced by "Exempt Income" to the extent otherwise
included in income, multiplied by apportionment, further reduced by any
"Pre-2017 Net Operating Loss Carryforward" equals "Municipal Taxable Income".











      (1)    "Income" for a taxpayer that is not an individual means
the "Net Profit" of the taxpayer. 











         (i)    "Net Profit" for a person other than an
individual is defined in Section 94.5.03(23). 





         (ii)    "Adjusted Federal Taxable Income" is defined in
Section 94.5.03(1) of this Chapter.











      (2)    "Exempt Income" is defined in Section 94.5.03(11) of
this Chapter. 











      (3)    "Apportionment" means the apportionment as determined
by Section 94.5.062 of this Chapter. 











      (4)    "Pre-2017 Net Operating Loss Carryforward" is defined
in Section 94.5.03 (32) of this Chapter.  (Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.062 NET PROFIT; INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX; ALTERNATIVE
APPORTIONMENT.










   This section applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or
profession in the Municipality unless the taxpayer is an individual who
resides in the Municipality or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined
company, or telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports
under Chapter 5745 of the Ohio Revised Code.











   (A)    Net profit from a business or profession conducted both
within and without the boundaries of the Municipality shall be considered as
having a taxable situs in the Municipality for purposes





of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the average ratio of
the following:











      (1)     The average original cost of the real property and
tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or
profession in the Municipality during the taxable period to the average
original cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used
by the taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period,
wherever situated. 











         As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or
real property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the
value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental
thereon by eight; 











      (2)     Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during
the taxable period to individuals employed in the business or profession for
services performed in the Municipality to wages, salaries, and other
compensation paid during the same period to individuals employed in the
business or profession, wherever the individual's services are performed,
excluding compensation from which taxes are not required to be withheld under
section 94.5.052 of this Chapter; 











      (3)     Total gross receipts of the business or profession
from sales and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period
in the Municipality to total gross receipts of the business or profession
during the same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or
performed.











   (B)   (1)     If the apportionment factors described in division
(A) of this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's
business activity in the Municipality, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax
Administrator of the Municipality may require, that the taxpayer use, with
respect to all or any portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative
apportionment method involving one or more of the following: 











         (a)     Separate accounting; 





         (b)     The exclusion of one or more of the factors; 











         (c)    The inclusion of one or more additional factors
that would provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the
taxpayer to the Municipality;











         (d)    A modification of one or more of the factors. 











      (2)     A taxpayer request to use an alternative
apportionment method shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return,
timely filed appeal of an assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The
taxpayer may use the requested alternative method unless the Tax
Administrator denies the request in an assessment issued within the period
prescribed by division (A) of Section 94.5.19 of this Chapter. 











      (3)     A Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in division (B)(1) of this
section only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period
prescribed by division (A) of Section 94.5.19 of this Chapter. 











      (4)     Nothing in division (B) of this section nullifies or
otherwise affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by a Tax
Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016. 











   (C)     As used in division (A)(2) of this section, "wages,
salaries, and other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other
compensation paid to an employee for services performed at any of the
following locations: 











      (1)   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented
to, or under the possession of one of the following: 











         (a)     The employer; 











         (b)     A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the
employer, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or
patient; 











         (c)     A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a
person described in division (C)(1)(b) of this section, or a related member
of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient. 











      (2)     Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing,
investigation, inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative,
judicial, or legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided
that the compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf  of,
the employer or that the employee's presence at the location directly or
indirectly benefits the employer; 











      (3)     Any other location, if the Tax Administrator
determines that the employer directed the employee to perform the services at
the other location in lieu of a location described in division (C)(1) or (2)
of this section solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal
income tax liability. If a Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the
employer may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that the Tax Administrator's determination was unreasonable. 











   (D)     For the purposes of division (A)(3) of this section,
receipts from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused
to a municipal corporation as follows: 











      (1)     Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale
originated. For the purposes of this division, a sale of property originates
in a municipal corporation if, regardless of where title passes, the property
meets any of the following criteria:











         (a)     The property is shipped to or delivered within
the municipal corporation from a stock of goods located within the municipal
corporation. 











         (b)    The property is delivered within the municipal
corporation from a location outside the municipal corporation, provided the
taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation
or promotion of sales within such municipal corporation and the sales result
from such solicitation or promotion. 











      (c)     The property is shipped from a place within the
municipal corporation to purchasers outside the municipal corporation,
provided that the taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly
engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery
is made. 











      (2)     Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation to the extent that such services are
performed in the municipal corporation. 











      (3)     To the extent included in income, gross receipts from
the sale of real property located in the municipal corporation shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation. 











      (4)    To the extent included in income, gross receipts from
rents and royalties from real property located in the municipal corporation
shall be sitused to the municipal corporation. 











      (5)     Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible
personal property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation based upon
the extent to which the tangible personal property is used in the municipal
corporation. 











   (E)     The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the
rental of real estate owned directly by the individual or by a disregarded
entity owned by the individual shall be subject to tax only by the municipal
corporation in which the property generating the net profit is located and
the municipal corporation in which the individual taxpayer that receives the
net profit resides. 











   A municipal corporation shall allow such taxpayers to elect to use
separate accounting for the purpose of calculating net profit sitused under
this division to the municipal corporation in which the property is located.











   (F)    (1)     Except as provided in division (F)(2) of this
section, commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to
the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the municipal
corporation in which the real estate is located.  Net profit reported by the
real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to a municipal corporation
based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the
sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in the municipal corporation
to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate
everywhere in the taxable year. 











      (2)     An individual who is a resident of a municipal
corporation that imposes a municipal income tax shall report the individual's
net profit from all real estate activity on the individual's annual tax
return for that municipal corporation.  The individual may claim a credit
for taxes the individual paid on such net profit to another municipal
corporation to the extent that such credit is allowed under Section 94.5.081
of this Chapter. 











   (G)     If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable
income, the taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option
granted to an employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the
employee's income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is
exempted  from taxation under divisions (11)(L) and (34)(A)(iv) of Section
94.5.03 of this Chapter, by a municipal corporation to which the taxpayer has
apportioned a portion of its net profit, the taxpayer shall add the amount
that is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer's net profit that was
apportioned to that municipal corporation.  In no case shall a taxpayer be
required to add to its net profit that was apportioned to that municipal
corporation any amount other than the amount upon which the employee would be
required to pay tax were the amount related to the stock option not exempted
from taxation.   











   This division applies solely for the purpose of making an adjustment to
the amount of a taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to a municipal
corporation under this section.











   (H)     When calculating the ratios described in division (A) of
this section for the purposes of that division or division (B) of this
section, the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's
ratios the property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.063 CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN.




 





   (A)     As used in this section:











      (1)     "Affiliated group of corporations" means an
affiliated group as defined in section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code,
except that, if such a group includes at least one incumbent local exchange
carrier that is primarily engaged in the business of providing local exchange
telephone service in this state, the affiliated group shall not include any
incumbent local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included in the
group. 











      (2)     "Consolidated federal income tax return" means a
consolidated return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to section
1501 of the Internal Revenue Code. 











      (3)     "Consolidated federal taxable income" means the
consolidated taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as
computed for the purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return,
before consideration of net operating losses or special deductions.
"Consolidated federal taxable income" does not include income or loss of an
incumbent local exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group
under division (A)(1) of this section. 











      (4)    "Incumbent local exchange carrier" has the same meaning
as in section 4927.01 of the Revised Code. 











      (5)   "Local exchange telephone service" has the same meaning
as in section 5727.01 of the Revised Code. 











   (B)    (1)     For taxable years beginning on or after January
1, 2016, a taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
may elect to file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable
year if at least one member of the affiliated group of corporations is
subject to the municipal income tax in that taxable year and if the
affiliated group of corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax
return with respect to that taxable year. 





         (a)     The election is binding for a five-year period
beginning with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change
in the reporting method is required under federal law. 











         (b)    The election continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
consolidated municipal income tax returns under division (B)(2) of this
section; or 











         (c)    A taxpayer receives permission from the Tax
Administrator. The Tax Administrator shall approve such a request for good
cause shown. 











      (2)     An election to discontinue filing consolidated
municipal income tax returns under this section must be made in the first
year following the last year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax
return election period in effect under division (B)(1) of this section.











         The election to discontinue filing a consolidated municipal
income tax return is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first
taxable year of the election.











      (3)     An election made under division (B)(1) or (2) of this
section is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations
subject to a municipal income tax.











   (C)     A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of
corporations that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a
taxable year shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for that
taxable year if the Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm's
length and that there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses
with regard to allocation of net profits to the municipal corporation. A
taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated municipal income tax return
for a taxable year shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for
all subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives
written permission from the Tax Administrator to file a separate return or a
taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances. 











   (D)     A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated municipal income
tax return in the same manner as is required under the United States
Department of Treasury regulations that prescribe procedures for the
preparation of the consolidated federal income tax return required to be
filed by the common parent of the affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a
member. 











   (E)    (1)     Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(2),
(3), and (4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal
income tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined
in section 94.5.03(1) of this Chapter, by substituting "consolidated federal
taxable income" for "federal taxable income" wherever "federal taxable
income" appears in that division and by substituting "an affiliated group of
corporation's" for "a C corporation's" wherever "a C corporation's" appears
in that division. 











      (2)     No corporation filing a consolidated municipal income
tax return shall make any adjustment otherwise required under division (1) of
94.5.03 of this Chapter to the extent that the item of income or deduction
otherwise subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in
the computation of consolidated federal taxable income. 











      (3)     If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity
having at least eighty per cent of the value of its ownership interest owned
or controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations
is included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income
for a taxable year, the corporation filing a consolidated municipal income
tax return shall do one of the following with respect to that pass-through
entity's net profit or loss for that taxable year:











         (a)     Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or
loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group
and, for the purpose of making the computations required in Section 94.5.062
of this Chapter, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so
excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on
the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 











         (b)    Include the pass-through entity's net profit or
loss in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and,
for the purpose of making the computations required in Section 94.5.062 of
this Chapter, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so
included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate
taxpayer  on the basis of the entity's net profits that are included in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 











      (4)     If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity
having less than eighty per cent of the value of its ownership interest owned
or controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations
is included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income
for a taxable year, all of the following shall apply: 











         (a)     The corporation filing the consolidated
municipal income tax return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net
profit or loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated
group and, for the purposes of making the computations required in Section
94.5.062 of this Chapter, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts
of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net
profit sitused to a municipal corporation; 











           (b)     The pass-through entity shall be subject to
municipal income taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this
chapter on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be
included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group. 











   (F)     Corporations filing a consolidated municipal income tax
return shall make the computations required under Section 94.5.062 of this
Chapter by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income attributable to"
for "net profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in that section and
by substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever
"taxpayer" appears in that section.











   (G)     Each corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax
return is jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties,
fines, charges, or other amounts imposed by a municipal corporation in
accordance with this chapter on the corporation, an affiliated group of which
the corporation is a member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one
or more members of such an affiliated group. 











   (H)    Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or
entered into an agreement with a municipal corporation before January 1,
2016, to file a consolidated or combined tax return with such municipal
corporation may continue to file consolidated or combined tax returns in
accordance with such election or agreement for taxable years beginning on and
after January 1, 2016. 





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.064  TAX CREDIT FOR BUSINESSES THAT FOSTER NEW JOBS IN OHIO.










   The Municipality, by Ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable
credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer to foster job creation in the
Municipality.  If a credit is granted under this section, it shall be
measured as a percentage of the new income tax revenue the Municipality
derives from new employees of the taxpayer and shall be for a term not
exceeding fifteen years. Before the Municipality passes an ordinance granting
a credit, the Municipality and the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement
specifying all the conditions of the credit.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.065  TAX CREDITS TO FOSTER JOB RETENTION.




   





   The Municipality, by Ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable
credit against its tax on income to a taxpayer for the purpose of fostering
job retention in the Municipality.  If a credit is granted under this
section, it shall be measured as a percentage of the income tax revenue the
Municipality derives from the retained employees of the taxpayer, and shall
be for a term not exceeding fifteen years. Before the Municipality passes an
ordinance allowing such a credit, the Municipality and the taxpayer shall
enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions of the credit.  (Ord.
3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.07  DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX.










   (A)     As used in this section: 











      (1)     "Estimated taxes" means the amount that the taxpayer
reasonably estimates to be the taxpayer's tax liability for a municipal
corporation's income tax for the current taxable year. 











      (2)     "Tax liability" means the total taxes due to a
municipal corporation for the taxable year, after allowing any credit to
which the taxpayer is entitled, and after applying any estimated tax payment,
withholding payment, or credit from another taxable year. 











   (B)    (1)     Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of
estimated taxes for the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the
Tax Administrator, if the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least two
hundred dollars. For the purposes of this section: 











         (a)     Taxes withheld from qualifying wages shall be
considered as paid to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were
withheld in equal amounts on each payment date. If the taxpayer establishes
the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld, the amounts withheld
shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the amounts were actually
withheld. 











         (b)     An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a
subsequent taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark
stamped on the cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is
made by electronic funds transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used
in this division, "date of the postmark" means, in the event there is more
than one date on the cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the
postal service. 











         (c)    A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than
twelve months shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax
Administrator.











         (d)     Taxes withheld by a casino operator or by a
lottery sales agent under section 718.031 of the Ohio Revised Code are deemed
to be paid to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld on
the date the taxes are withheld from the taxpayer's winnings.











      (2)     Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint
declarations of estimated taxes. 











      (3)     The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on
or before the date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns
under division (G) of Section 94.5.091 of this Chapter or on or before the
fifteenth day of the fourth month of the first taxable year after the
taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time. 











      (4)     Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file
a declaration on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of each fiscal year or period. 











      (5)     The original declaration or any subsequent amendment
may be increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment
day as provided in this section. 











   (C)    (1)     The required portion of the tax liability for the
taxable year that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the
Municipality or Tax Administrator, including the application of tax refunds
to estimated taxes and withholding on or before the applicable payment date,
shall be as follows: 











         (a)    On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth
month after the beginning of the taxable year, twenty-two and one-half per
cent of the tax liability for the taxable year; 











         (b)     On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth
month after the beginning of the  taxable year, forty-five per cent of the
tax liability for the taxable year; 











         (c)    On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month
after the beginning of the taxable year, sixty-seven and one-half per cent of
the tax liability for the taxable year; 











         (d)     On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth
month of the taxable year, ninety per cent of the tax liability for the
taxable year. 





      (2)     A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules
prescribed by the Tax Administrator.  When an amended declaration has been
filed, the unpaid balance shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid
in equal installments on or before the remaining payment dates.  The amended
declaration must be filed on the next applicable due date as outlined in
(C)(1)(a) through (d) of this section.











      (3)     On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of
the year following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was
filed, an annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall
be paid with the return in accordance with section 94.5.091 of this Chapter. 











         (a)     For taxpayers who are individuals, or who are
not individuals and  are reporting and filing on a calendar year basis, the
annual tax return is due on the same date as the filing of the federal tax
return, unless extended pursuant to division (G) of section 5747.08 of the
Revised Code. 











         (b)     For taxpayers who are not individuals, and are
reporting and filing on a fiscal year basis or any period other than a
calendar year, the annual return is due on the fifteenth day of the fourth
month following the end of the taxable year or period.











      (4)   An amended declaration is required whenever the
taxpayer's estimated tax liability changes during the taxable year.  A
change in estimated tax liability may either increase or decrease the
estimated tax liability for the taxable year.











   (D)    (1)     In the case of any underpayment of any portion of
a tax liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to section
94.5.10 of this Chapter  upon  the  amount  of  underpayment  for 
the  period  of underpayment, unless the underpayment is due to reasonable
cause as described in division (E) of this section. The amount of the
underpayment shall be determined as follows:











         (a)     For the first payment of estimated taxes each
year, twenty-two and one-half per cent of the tax liability, less the amount
of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 











         (b)     For the second payment of estimated taxes each
year, forty-five per cent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid
by the date prescribed for that payment; 











         (c)     For the third payment of estimated taxes each
year, sixty-seven and one-half per cent of the tax liability, less the amount
of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment; 











         (d)     For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each
year, ninety per cent of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by
the date prescribed for that payment. 











      (2)     The period of the underpayment shall run from the day
the estimated payment was required to be made to the date on which the
payment is made. For purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes
on or before any payment date shall be considered a payment of any previous
underpayment only to the extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the
amount of the payment presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty. 











   (E)     An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined
under division (D) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the
penalty imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the
taxable year if any of the following apply: 











      (1)     The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals
at least ninety per cent of the tax liability for the current taxable year,
determined by annualizing the income received during the year up to the end
of the month immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due. 











      (2)     The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals
at least one hundred per cent of the tax liability shown on the return of the
taxpayer for the preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately
preceding taxable year reflected a period of twelve months and the taxpayer
filed a return with the municipal corporation under Section 94.5.091 of this
Chapter for that year. 











      (3)     The  taxpayer  is  an  individual  who 
resides  in  the Municipality  but was not domiciled there on the first
day of January of the calendar year that includes the first day of the
taxable year.











   (F)     A Tax Administrator may waive the requirement for filing a
declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that
the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other
factors.  (Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.08 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID.









94.5.081 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO ANOTHER MUNICIPALITY.










   (A)   Every individual taxpayer who resides in the City but who
received net profits, qualified wages, commissions or other compensation for
work done or services performed or rendered outside of the City, if he has
paid a municipal income tax or Joint Economic Development District tax based
on income, on such net profits, qualified wages, commissions or other
compensation in another municipality, shall be allowed a credit for the
amount so paid by him or in his behalf in such municipality.  The credit
shall not exceed the tax assessed by this Ordinance on such income earned in
such other municipality or municipalities where such tax is paid.











   (B)    Not withstanding the provisions contained in this Ordinance
hereof, or any other provisions inconsistent herewith, a claim for refund or
credit under this section shall be made in such manner as the Finance
Director or his delegate may, by regulation, provide.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.082 REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR QUALIFYING LOSS.










   (A)     As used in this section:











      (1)    "Nonqualified deferred compensation plan" means a
compensation plan described in section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue
Code.











      (2)   (a)     Except as provided in division (A)(2)(b) of
this section, "qualifying loss" means the excess, if any, of the total amount
of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan over the total amount of income the taxpayer has
recognized for federal income tax purposes for all taxable years on a
cumulative basis as compensation with respect to the taxpayer's receipt of
money and property attributable to distributions in connection with the
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.











         (b)     If, for one or more taxable years, the taxpayer
has not paid to one or more municipal corporations income tax imposed on the
entire amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a
nonqualified deferred compensation plan, then the "qualifying loss" is the
product of the amount resulting from the calculation described in division
(A)(2)(a) of this section computed without regard to division (A)(2)(b) of
this section and a fraction the numerator of which is the portion of such
compensation on which the taxpayer has paid income tax to one or more
municipal corporations and the denominator of which is the total amount of
compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.











         (c)     With respect to a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan, the taxpayer sustains a qualifying loss only in the
taxable year in which the taxpayer receives the final distribution of money
and property pursuant to that nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 











      (3)     "Qualifying tax rate" means the applicable tax rate
for the taxable year for the which the taxpayer paid income tax to a
municipal corporation with respect to any portion of the total amount of
compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan. If different tax rates applied for different
taxable years, then the "qualifying tax rate" is a weighted average of those
different tax rates. The weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to
the municipal corporation each year with respect to the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan.











   (B)    (1)    Except as provided in division (D) of this section,
a refundable credit shall be allowed against the income tax imposed by a
municipal corporation for each qualifying loss sustained by a taxpayer during
the taxable year. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the product of
the qualifying loss and the qualifying tax rate.











      (2)    A taxpayer shall claim the credit allowed under this
section from each municipal corporation to which the taxpayer paid municipal
income tax with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan in one
or more taxable years.











      (3)     If a taxpayer has paid tax to more than one municipal
corporation with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the
amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal
corporation shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation's
proportionate share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the
taxpayer to all municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.











      (4)     In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed
under this section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid
to a municipal corporation for all taxable years with respect to the
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.











   (C)    (1)     For purposes of this section, municipal
corporation income tax that has been withheld with respect to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan shall be considered to have been paid by the
taxpayer with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. 











      (2)     Any municipal income tax that has been refunded or
otherwise credited for the benefit of the taxpayer with respect to a
nonqualified deferred compensation plan shall not be considered to have been
paid to the municipal corporation by the taxpayer.











   (D)     The credit allowed under this section is allowed only to
the extent the taxpayer's qualifying loss is attributable to:











      (1)     The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had
established the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or











      (2)     The employee's failure or inability to satisfy all of
the employer's terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified
deferred compensation.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.083 CREDIT FOR PERSON WORKING IN JOINT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT OR
ZONE.




 





   A Municipality shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a
resident of the Municipality who works in a joint economic development zone
created under section 715.691 or a joint economic development district
created under section 715.70, 715.71, or 715.72 of the Ohio Revised Code to
the same extent that it grants a credit against its tax on income to its
residents who are employed in another municipal corporation, pursuant to
Section 94.5.081 of this Chapter.  (Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.084 CREDIT FOR TAX BEYOND STATUTE FOR OBTAINING REFUND.




 





   (A)    Income tax that has been deposited or paid to the
Municipality, but should have been deposited or paid to another municipal
corporation, is allowable by the Municipality as a refund, but is subject to
the three-year limitation on refunds as provided in Section 94.5.096 of this
Chapter.   











   (B)    Income tax that should have been deposited or paid to the
Municipality, but was deposited or paid to another municipal corporation,
shall be subject to collection and recovery by the Municipality.  To the
extent a refund of such tax or withholding is barred by the limitation on
refunds as provided in section 94.5.096, the Municipality will allow a
non-refundable credit equal to the tax or withholding paid to the other
municipality against the income tax the Municipality claims is due. If the
Municipality's tax rate is higher, the tax representing the net difference of
the tax rates is also subject to collection by the Municipality, along with
any penalty and interest accruing during the period of nonpayment.











   (C)    No carryforward of credit will be permitted when the
overpayment is beyond the three-year limitation for refunding of same as
provided in Section 94.5.096 of this Chapter.











   (D)    Nothing in this section requires a Municipality to allow
credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation if the Municipality has
reduced credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation.  Section
94.5.081 of this Chapter regarding any limitation on credit shall prevail.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.09 ANNUAL RETURN.









94.5.091 RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.










   (A)    (1)     An annual return with respect to the income tax
levied on Municipal Taxable Income by the Municipality shall be completed and
filed by every taxpayer for any taxable year for which the taxpayer is
subject to the tax, regardless of whether or not income tax is due. 











      (2)     The Tax Administrator shall accept on behalf of all
nonresident individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an
employer, or other payer located in the Municipality under subsection
94.5.051(C) of this Chapter when the nonresident individual taxpayer's sole
income subject to the tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer, and no additional tax is due to the
Municipality.











      (3)    All resident individual taxpayers, 18 years of age and
older, shall file an annual municipal income tax return with the
Municipality, regardless of income or liability.











   (B)     If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required
of that individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent's executor,
administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent. 











   (C)     If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or
notice required by the Municipality in accordance with this chapter, the
return or notice required of that individual shall be completed and filed by
the individual's duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or
other person charged with the care of the person or property of that
individual.  Such duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary,
or other person charged with the care of the person or property of that
individual shall provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate
documentation to support that they are authorized to file a return or notice
on behalf of the taxpayer.  This notice shall include any legally binding
authorizations, and contact information including name, address, and phone
number of the duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or
other person.











   (D)     Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall
be completed and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust.  Such
fiduciary shall provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate
documentation to support that they are authorized to file a return or notice
on behalf of the taxpayer.  This notice shall include any legally binding
authorizations, and contact information including name, address, and phone
number of the fiduciary.











   (E)     No municipal corporation shall deny spouses the ability to
file a joint return. 











   (F)    (1)     Each return required to be filed under this
section shall contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly
authorized agent and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer,
and shall include the taxpayer's social security number or taxpayer
identification number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under
penalty of perjury.











      (2)     A taxpayer who is an individual is required to
include, with each annual return, amended return, or request for refund
required under this section, copies of only the following documents: all of
the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form W-2, "Wage and Tax Statements,"
including all information reported on the taxpayer's federal W-2, as well as
taxable wages reported or withheld for any municipal corporation; the
taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1040 or, in the case of a return or
request required by a qualified municipal corporation, Ohio IT 1040; and,
with respect to an amended tax return or refund request, any other
documentation necessary to support the refund request or the adjustments made
in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files the annual return
required by this section electronically is not required to provide paper
copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless the Tax
Administrator requests such copies after the return has been filed.   











      (3)     A taxpayer that is not an individual is required to
include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit return, or
request for refund required under this section, copies of only the following
documents: the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form 1065, form
1120, form 1120-REIT, form 1120F, or form 1120S, and, with respect to an
amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary to
support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return. 











      (4)    A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an
annual net profit return electronically through the Ohio business gateway or
in some other manner shall either mail the documents required under this
division to the Tax Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic
submission is available, submit the documents electronically through the Ohio
business gateway or a portal provided by Municipality. The department of
taxation shall publish a method of electronically submitting the documents
required under this division through the Ohio business gateway on or before
January 1, 2016. The department shall transmit all documents submitted
electronically under this division to the appropriate Tax Administrator.   











      (5)     After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax
Administrator shall request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information,
statements, or documents required by the Municipality to determine and verify
the taxpayer's municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under
division (F) of this section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files
on a generic form or on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. 











      (6)    Any other documentation, including schedules, other
municipal income tax returns, or other supporting documentation necessary to
verify credits, income, losses, or other pertinent factors on the return
shall also be included to avoid delay in processing, or disallowance by the
Tax Administrator of undocumented credits or losses.











   (G)    (1)    (a)    Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, each individual income tax return required to be filed under this
section shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on
or before the date prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax
returns under division (G) of section 5747.08 of the Ohio Revised Code. The
taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms prescribed by
the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with remittance made
payable to the Municipality or Tax Administrator.











         (b)    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
each annual net profit income tax return required to be filed under this
section by a taxpayer that is not an individual shall be completed and filed
as required by the tax administrator on or before the fifteenth day of the
fourth month following the end of the taxpayer's taxable year or period. 
The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms prescribed
by the tax administrator or on generic forms, together with remittance made
payable to the Municipality or Tax Administrator.











         (c)    In the case of individual income tax return
required to be filed by an individual, and net profit income tax return
required to be filed by a taxpayer who is not an individual,  no remittance
is required if the amount shown to be due is ten dollars or less.





 





      (2)    If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in
order to ensure the payment of the tax imposed by the Municipality in
accordance with this chapter, the Tax Administrator may require taxpayers to
file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this section,
including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns. 











      (3)    With respect to taxpayers to whom Section 94.5.092 of
this Chapter applies, to the extent that any provision in this division
conflicts with any provision in Section 94.5.092 of this Chapter, the
provision in Section 94.5.092 of this Chapter prevails. 











   (H)    (1)    For taxable years beginning after 2015, the
Municipality shall not require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net
profits if the amount due is ten dollars or less.











      (2)     Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the
Municipality for a taxable year pursuant to division (H)(1) of this section
shall file with the Municipality an annual net profit return under division
(F)(3) and (4) of this section. 











   (I)     This division shall not apply to payments required to be
made under division (B)(1)(b) or (c) of Section 94.5.051 of this Chapter. 











      (1)    If any report, claim, statement, or other document
required to be filed, or any payment required to be made, within a prescribed
period or on or before a prescribed date under this chapter is delivered
after that period or that to the Tax Administrator or other municipal
official with which the report, claim, statement, or other document is
required to be filed, or to which the payment is required to be made, the
date of the postmark stamped on the cover in which the report, claim,
statement, or other document, or payment is mailed shall be deemed to be the
date of delivery or the date of payment. "The date of postmark" means, in the
event there is more than one date on the cover, the earliest date imprinted
on the cover by the postal service.











      (2)     If a payment is required to be made by electronic
funds transfer, the payment is considered to be made when the payment is
credited to an account designated by the Tax Administrator for the receipt of
tax payments, except that, when a payment made by electronic funds transfer
is delayed due to circumstances not under the control of the taxpayer, the
payment is considered to be made when the taxpayer submitted the payment. 
For purposes of this section, "submitted the payment" means the date which
the taxpayer has designated for the delivery of payment, which may or may 
not  be the same date as the date the payment was initiated by the taxpayer.











   (J)    The amounts withheld for the Municipality by an employer, the
agent of an employer, or other payer as described in section 94.5.051 of this
Chapter shall be allowed to the recipient of the compensation as credits
against payment of the tax imposed on the recipient unless the amounts
withheld were not remitted to the Municipality and the recipient colluded
with the employer, agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to
remit the amounts withheld.   











   (K)     Each return required by the Municipality to be filed in
accordance with this section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check
to authorize another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the
return, to communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to
the return. The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate
that by checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the Tax Administrator to
contact the preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during
the examination or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or
other person only to provide the Tax Administrator with information that is
missing from the return, to contact the Tax Administrator for information
about the examination or other review of the return or the status of the
taxpayer's refund or payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical
errors, offsets, or return preparation that the taxpayer has received from
the Tax Administrator and has shown to the preparer or other person.   
Authorization by the taxpayer of another person to communicate with the Tax
Administrator about matters pertaining to the return does not preclude the
Tax Administrator from contacting the taxpayer regarding such matters.











   (L)     The Tax Administrator of the Municipality shall accept for
filing a generic form of any income tax return, report, or document required
by the Municipality in accordance with this Chapter, provided that the
generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information
required by ordinances, resolutions, or rules adopted by the Municipality or
Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return preparer
filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this
Chapter and of the Municipality's Ordinance or resolution governing the
filing of returns, reports, or documents.











   (M)     When income tax returns, reports, or other documents
require the signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Administrator shall
accept a facsimile of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.











   (N)    (1)    As used in this division, "worksite location" has
the same meaning as in section 94.5.052 of this chapter.











      (2)    A person may notify a tax administrator that the person
does not expect to be a taxpayer with respect to the municipal corporation
for a taxable year if both of the following conditions apply:











         (a)    The person was required to file a tax return with
the municipal corporation for the immediately preceding taxable year because
the person performed services at a worksite location within the municipal
corporation, and the person has filed all appropriate and required returns
and remitted all applicable income tax and withholding payments as provided
by this chapter.  The tax administrator is not required to accept an
affidavit from a taxpayer who has not complied with the provisions of this
chapter.











         (b)    The person no longer provides services in the
municipal corporation, and does not expect to be subject to the municipal
corporation's income tax for the taxable year.











            The person shall provide the notice in a signed
affidavit that briefly explains the person's circumstances, including the
location of the previous worksite location and the last date on which the
person performed services or made any sales within the municipal
corporation.  The affidavit also shall include the following statement: 











            "The affiant has no plans to perform any services
within the municipal corporation, make any sales in the municipal
corporation, or otherwise become subject to the tax levied by the municipal
corporation during the taxable year.  If the affiant does become subject to
the tax levied by the municipal corporation for the taxable year, the affiant
agrees to be considered a taxpayer and to properly register as a taxpayer
with the municipal corporation, if such a registration is required by the
municipal corporation's resolutions, ordinances, or rules."  The person
shall sign the affidavit under penalty of perjury.











         (c)    If a person submits an affidavit described in
division (N)(2) of this section, the tax administrator shall not require the
person to file any tax return for the taxable year unless the tax
administrator possesses information that conflicts with the affidavit or if
the circumstances described in the affidavit change, or the taxpayer has
engaged in activity which results in work being performed, services provided,
sales made, or other activity that results in municipal taxable income
reportable to the Municipality in the taxable year.  It shall be the
responsibility of the taxpayer to comply with the provisions of this chapter
relating to the reporting and filing of municipal taxable income on an annual
municipal income tax return, even if an affidavit has been filed with the tax
administrator for the taxable year.  Nothing in division (N) of this section
prohibits the tax administrator from performing an audit of the person. 
(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.092 RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX; INDIVIDUALS SERVING IN COMBAT ZONE.










   (A)    Each member of the national guard of any state and each
member of a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called
to active duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the
United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each
civilian serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency
operation in support of the armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator
of the Municipality for both an extension of time for filing of the return
and an extension of time for payment of taxes required by the Municipality in
accordance with this chapter during the period of the member's or civilian's
duty service and for one hundred eighty days thereafter. The application
shall be filed on or before the one hundred eightieth day after the member's
or civilian's duty terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as
the Tax Administrator considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the
extension. 











   (B)    (1)     If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an
applicant is qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax
Administrator shall enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment
of the tax in installments that begin on the one hundred eighty-first day
after the applicant's active duty or service terminates. Except as provided
in division (B)(3) of this section, the Tax Administrator may prescribe such
contract terms as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate.











      (2)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be
required to file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to
pay any tax otherwise due to the Municipality  before the one hundred
eighty-first day after the applicant's active duty or service terminates. 











      (3)     Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under
division (B)(1) of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator
shall not require any payments of penalties or interest in connection with
those taxes for the extension period. 











   (C)   (1)    Nothing in this division denies to any person
described in this division the application of divisions (A) and (B) of this
section. 











      (2)    (a)     A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for
an extension under the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension
of time in which to file any return, report, or other tax document and an
extension of time in which to make any payment of taxes required by the
Municipality in accordance with this chapter. The length of any extension
granted under division (C)(2)(a) of this section shall be equal to the length
of the corresponding extension that the taxpayer receives under the Internal
Revenue Code. As used in this section, "qualifying taxpayer" means a member
of the national guard or a member of a reserve component of the armed forces
of the United States called to active duty pursuant to either an executive
order issued by the President of the United States or an act of the Congress
of the United States, or a civilian serving as support personnel in a combat
zone or contingency operation in support of the armed forces. 











         (b)     Taxes the payment of which is extended in
accordance with division (C)(2)(a) of this section are not delinquent during
the extension period. Such taxes become delinquent on the first day after the
expiration of the extension period if the taxes are not paid prior to that
date. The Tax Administrator shall not require any payment of penalties or
interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period. The Tax
Administrator shall not include any period of extension granted under
division (C)(2)(a) of this section in calculating the penalty or interest due
on any unpaid tax. 











   (D)     For each taxable year to which division (A), (B), or (C) of
this section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (B)(2) and
(3) or (C) of this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that
taxpayer if the filing status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married
filing jointly for that year. 





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.093 USE OF OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY; TYPES OF FILINGS AUTHORIZED.










   (A)     Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with
respect to the taxpayer's net profit from a business or profession may file
any municipal income tax return or, estimated municipal income tax return, or
extension for filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of
amounts shown to be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway. 











   (B)     Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may
report the amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and
may make remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.











   (C)    Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing
employer withholding tax returns or deposit of any required tax.











   (D)     The use of the Ohio Business Gateway by municipal
corporations, taxpayers, or other persons does not affect the legal rights of
municipalities or taxpayers as otherwise permitted by law.  The State of
Ohio shall not be a party to the administration of municipal income taxes or
to an appeal of a municipal income tax matter, except as otherwise
specifically provided by law.











   (E)     Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting or
removing the authority of any municipal corporation to administer, audit, and
enforce the provisions of its municipal income tax.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.094 EXTENSION OF TIME TO FILE.










   (A)     Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax
return.  The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be
the fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year
to which the return relates.











   (B)     Any taxpayer that qualifies for an automatic federal
extension for a period other than six-months for filing the taxpayer's
federal income tax return shall automatically receive an extension for the
filing of a municipal income tax return.  The extended due date of the
municipal income tax return shall be the same as that of the extended federal
income tax return. 











   (C)    A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may request
that the tax administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the
date for filing the taxpayer's municipal income tax return.  If the request
is received by the tax administrator on or before the date the municipal
income tax return is due, the tax administrator shall grant the taxpayer's
requested extension.











   (D)     An extension of time to file under this chapter is not an
extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants
an extension of that date.











   (E)     If the State Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the
date for filing state income tax returns under division (G) of section
5747.08 of the Ohio Revised Code, a taxpayer shall automatically receive an
extension for the filing of a municipal income tax return.  The extended due
date of the municipal income tax return shall be the same as the extended due
date of the state income tax return.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.095 AMENDED RETURNS.










   (A)     (1)    A taxpayer shall file an amended return with the
Tax Administrator in such form as the Tax Administrator requires if any of
the facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's
annual return to determine the tax due levied by the Municipality in
accordance with this chapter must be altered. 











      (2)    Within sixty days after the final determination of any
federal or state tax liability affecting the taxpayer's municipal tax
liability, that taxpayer shall make and file an amended municipal return
showing income subject to the municipal income tax based upon such final
determination of federal or state tax liability, and pay any additional
municipal income tax shown due thereon or make a claim for refund of any
overpayment, unless the tax or overpayment is ten dollars or less. 











      (3)    If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated
municipal income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate
return to a consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal
income tax return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before
filing the amended return.











   (B)    (1)     In the case of an underpayment, the amended
return shall be accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due
together with any penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to
be due is ten dollars or less, such amount need not accompany the amended
return. Except as provided under division (B)(2) of this section, the amended
return shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments
from a previously filed return that are not affected, either directly or
indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax
return unless the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or
prosecutions under section 94.5.19 of this Chapter  has not expired for a
previously filed return.











      (2)     The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the
amount of tax that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and
attachments were reopened.











   (C)    (1)    In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund
may be filed under this division within the period prescribed by division
(A)(2) of section 94.5.19 of this Chapter for filing the amended return even
if it is filed beyond the period prescribed in that division if it otherwise
conforms to the requirements of that division. If the amount of the refund is
ten dollars or less, no refund need be paid by the Municipality to the
taxpayer. Except as set forth in division (C)(2) of this section, a request
filed under this division shall claim refund of overpayments resulting from
alterations to only those facts, figures, computations, or attachments
required in the taxpayer's annual return that are affected, either directly
or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income
tax return unless it is also filed within the time prescribed in section
94.5.096 of this Chapter. Except as set forth in division (C)(2) of this
section, the request shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or
attachments that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the
adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return.











      (2)     The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount
of refund that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and
attachments were reopened.  (Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.096 REFUNDS.










   (A)    Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator
of the Municipality, in accordance with this section, shall refund to
employers, agents of employers, other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to
any income or withholding tax levied by the Municipality: 











      (1)     Overpayments of more than ten dollars; 











               (2)     Amounts paid erroneously if the refund
requested exceeds ten dollars. 











   (B)    (1)     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
returns setting forth a request for refund shall be filed with the Tax
Administrator, within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever is
later. Any documentation that substantiates the taxpayer's claim for a refund
must be included with the return filing.  Failure to remit all
documentation, including schedules, other municipal income tax returns, or
other supporting documentation necessary to verify credits, income, losses or
other pertinent factors on the return will cause delay in processing, and /
or disallowance of undocumented credits or losses. 











      (2)     On filing of the refund request, the Tax
Administrator shall determine the amount of refund due and certify such
amount to the appropriate municipal corporation official for payment. Except
as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, the administrator shall issue
an assessment to any taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially
denied. The assessment shall state the amount of the refund that was denied,
the reasons for the denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment. 











      (3)     If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a
refund request included within the taxpayer's originally filed annual income
tax return, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of
the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and
instructions for requesting an assessment that may be appealed under Section
94.5.18 of this Chapter. 











   (C)     A request for a refund that is received after the last day
for filing specified in division (B) of this section shall be considered to
have been filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist: 





      (1)     The request is delivered by the postal service, and
the earliest postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is
enclosed is not later than the last day for filing the request. 











      (2)     The request is delivered by the postal service, the
only postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a
private postal meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last
day for filing the request, and the request is received within seven days of
such last day.











      (3)     The request is delivered by the postal service, no
postmark date was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or
the date of the postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is
received within seven days of the last day for making the request.











   (D)    Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a
taxpayer of any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the
overpayment until the date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if
any overpayment is refunded within ninety days after the final filing date of
the annual return or ninety days after the completed return is filed,
whichever is later, no interest shall be allowed on the refund. For the
purpose of computing the payment of interest on amounts overpaid, no amount
of tax for any taxable year shall be considered to have been paid before the
date on which the return on which the tax is reported is due, without regard
to any extension of time for filing that return. Interest shall be paid at
the interest rate described in division (A)(4) of Section 94.5.10 of this
Chapter. 











   (E)     As used in this section, "withholding tax" has the same
meaning as in section 94.5.10 of this Chapter.  (Ord. 3572.  Passed
11-24-15.)










94.5.10 PENALTY, INTEREST, FEES, AND CHARGES.










   (A)     As used in this section: 











      (1)     "Applicable law" means this chapter, the resolutions,
ordinances, codes, directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the
Municipality provided such resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives,
instructions, and rules impose or directly or indirectly address the levy,
payment, remittance, or filing requirements of a municipal income tax. 











      (2)     "Federal short-term rate" means the rate of the
average market yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United
States with remaining periods to maturity of three years or less, as
determined under section 1274 of the Internal Revenue Code, for July of the
current year. 











      (3)    "Income tax," "estimated income tax," and "withholding
tax" mean any income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed
by a municipal corporation pursuant to applicable law, including at any time
before January 1, 2016. 











      (4)     "Interest rate as described in division (A) of this
section" means the federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole
number per cent, plus five per cent. The rate shall apply for the calendar
year next following the July of the year in which the federal short-term rate
is determined in accordance with division (A)(2) of this section. 











      (5)     "Return" includes any tax return, report,
reconciliation, schedule, and other document required to be filed with a Tax
Administrator or municipal corporation by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of
the employer, or any other payer pursuant to applicable law, including at any
time before January 1, 2016. 











      (6)     "Unpaid estimated income tax" means estimated income
tax due but not paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under
applicable law.











      (7)     "Unpaid income tax" means income tax due but not paid
by the date the income tax is required to be paid under applicable law. 











      (8)     "Unpaid withholding tax" means withholding tax due
but not paid by the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under
applicable law. 











      (9)   "Withholding tax" includes amounts an employer, any
agent of an employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part
from an employee's qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the
employer, agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee's
qualifying wages. 











   (B)    (1)    This section shall apply to the following:











         (a)    Any return required to be filed under applicable
law for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016;











         (b)    Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding
tax required to be paid or remitted to the Municipality on or after January
1, 2016 for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016











      (2)    This section does not apply to returns required to be
filed or payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of
the filing or payment date.  Returns required to be filed or payments
required to be made before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date
shall be subject to the ordinances or rules,, as adopted from time to time 
before January 1, 2016 of this Municipality..











   (C)    The Municipality shall impose on a taxpayer, employer, any
agent of the employer, and any other payer, and will attempt to collect, the
interest amounts and penalties prescribed in this section when the taxpayer,
employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer for any reason fails,
in whole or in part, to make to the Municipality timely and full payment or
remittance of income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file
timely with the Municipality any return required to be filed.











      (1)     Interest shall be imposed at the rate defined as
"interest rate as described in division (A) of this section", per annum, on
all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax, and unpaid withholding
tax.  This imposition of interest shall be assessed per month, or fraction
of a month.











      (2)    With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated
income tax, a penalty equal to fifteen percent of the amount not timely paid
shall be imposed.











      (3)    With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, a penalty
equal to fifty percent of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed.











      (4)    With respect to returns other than estimated income tax
returns, the Municipality shall impose a monthly penalty of twenty-five
dollars for each failure to timely file each return, regardless of the
liability shown thereon for each month, or any fraction thereof, during which
the return remains unfiled regardless of the liability shown thereon.  The 
penalty shall not exceed a total of one hundred fifty dollars in assessed
penalty for each failure to timely file a return.











   (D)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes,
withholding taxes, and returns, the Municipality shall not impose, seek to
collect, or collect any penalty, amount of interest, charges or additional
fees not described in this section.











   (E)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes,
withholding taxes, and returns, the Municipality  shall not refund or credit
any penalty, amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that were
properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016.











   (F)   The Tax Administrator may, in the Tax Administrator's sole
discretion, abate or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this
section when the Tax Administrator deems such abatement or partial abatement
to be appropriate.  Such abatement or partial abatement shall be properly
documented and maintained on the record of the taxpayer who received benefit
of such abatement or partial abatement.











   (G)   The Municipality  may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any
agent of the employer, or any other payer the Municipality's post-judgment
collection costs and fees, including attorney's fees.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.11  AUDIT.










   (A)     At or before the commencement of an audit, as defined in
Section 94.5.03(3) of this Chapter, the Tax Administrator shall provide to
the taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax Administrator and
of the taxpayer during an audit and a statement of the taxpayer's rights,
including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of tax.  At or
before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall inform the
taxpayer when the audit is considered to have commenced.











   (B)     Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the
Tax Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular
business hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A
taxpayer who is unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the
grounds that the proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must
offer reasonable alternative dates for the audit. 











   (C)     At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a
taxpayer is entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney,
accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator
shall prescribe a form by which a taxpayer may designate such a person to
assist or represent the taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting
from actions by the Tax Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a
form, the Tax Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax
Administrator considers appropriate, that a person is the authorized
representative of a taxpayer. 











      A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person
conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the
taxpayer's attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. This
division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an
attorney. 











   (D)    A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination. 











   (E)     The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a
provision of this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any
taxes owed by the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer's
case. 











   (F)     If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with
the provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by
the taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest arising
from the audit.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.12  ROUNDING.










   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person
is required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document
required under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or
exceeds fifty cents shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any
fractional part of a dollar that is less than fifty cents shall be dropped,
rounding down to the nearest whole dollar.  If a person chooses to round
amounts entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered on
the document. 





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.13 AUTHORITY AND POWERS OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.









94.5.131 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS OF THE TAX
ADMINISTRATOR.










   The Tax Administrator has the authority to perform all duties and
functions necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this
Chapter, including without limitation: 











   (A)     Exercise all powers whatsoever of an inquisitorial nature
as provided by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records,
memorandums, and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons
under oath, to issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books,
accounts, papers, records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to
apply to a court for attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve
vouchers for the fees of officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths;
provided that the powers referred to in this division of this section shall
be exercised by the Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance
of the duties respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under a
municipal corporation income tax ordinance or resolution adopted in
accordance with this chapter; 











   (B)     Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties; 











   (C)     Confer and meet with officers of other municipal
corporations and states and officers of the United States on any matters
pertaining to their respective official duties as provided by law; 











   (D)     Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders
from bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, illegally or erroneously imposed or
collected, or for any other reason overpaid, and, in addition, the Tax
Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and make a written
statement of the Tax Administrator's findings, and, if the Tax Administrator
finds that there has been an overpayment, approve and issue a refund payable
to the taxpayer, the taxpayer's assigns, or legal representative as provided
in this chapter; 











   (E)     Exercise the authority provided by law relative to
consenting to the compromise and settlement of tax claims; 











   (F)     Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use
of alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with section
94.5.062 of this Chapter; 











   (G)     Make all tax findings, determinations, computations,
assessments and orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and
required to make and, pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the
Tax Administrator's own motion, review, redetermine, or correct any tax
findings, determinations, computations, assessments or orders the Tax
Administrator has made, but the Tax Administrator shall not review,
redetermine, or correct any tax finding, determination, computation,
assessment or order which the Tax Administrator has made for which an appeal
has been filed with the Local Board of Tax Review or other appropriate
tribunal, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by the appellant or
applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;











   (H)         Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in
the manner authorized by law; 











   (I)     Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the
withholding obligations described in section 94.5.051 of this Chapter.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.132          AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; COMPROMISE OF CLAIM
AND PAYMENT OVER TIME.










   (A)     As used in this section, "claim" means a claim for an
amount payable to the Municipality that arises pursuant to the municipal
income tax imposed in accordance with this chapter. 











   (B)     The Tax Administrator may do either of the following if
such action is in the best interests of the Municipality:











      (1)     Compromise a claim; 











      (2)     Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment
of a claim by agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments, upon
such terms and conditions as the Tax Administrator may require. 











   (C)     The Tax Administrator's rejection of a compromise or
payment-over-time agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim
shall not be appealable. 











   (D)     A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to
a claim shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of only the
parties to the compromise or agreement, and shall not extinguish or otherwise
affect the liability of any other person. 











   (E)    (1)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with
respect to a claim shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the
compromise or agreement or if the compromise or agreement was obtained by
fraud or by misrepresentation of a material fact. Any amount that was due
before the compromise or agreement and that is unpaid shall remain due, and
any penalties or interest that would have accrued in the absence of the
compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue and be due. 











      (2)    The Tax Administrator shall have sole discretion to
determine whether or not penalty, interest, charges or applicable fees will
be assessed through the duration of any compromise or payment-over-time
agreement. 











   (F)    The Tax Administrator may require that the taxpayer provide
detailed financial documentation and information, in order to determine
whether or not a payment-over-time agreement will be authorized.  The
taxpayer's failure to provide the necessary and required information by the
Tax Administrator shall preclude consideration of a  payment-over-time
agreement.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.133  AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; RIGHT TO EXAMINE.










   (A)    The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee
thereof may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income
tax returns of any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or
that the Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this
Chapter for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if
no return was filed, to ascertain the tax due under this Chapter.  Upon
written request by the Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or
employee thereof, every employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this
section is required to furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator,
authorized agent,  or employee to investigate and examine such books,
papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns at a reasonable
time and place designated in the request.











   (B)     The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer,
or other person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is
subject to, the provisions of this Chapter shall be open to the Tax
Administrator's inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a
period of six years following the end of the taxable year to which the
records or documents relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing,
consents to their destruction within that period, or by order requires that
they be kept longer. The Tax Administrator of a municipal corporation may
require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep such records as
the Tax Administrator determines necessary to show whether or not that person
is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax levied by the
Municipality or for the withholding of such tax. 











   (C)     The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person
that the Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any
income that was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction
tending to affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose,
compel any such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any
books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such
person's possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by
an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such
hearing or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law
by a person who is not an attorney.











   (D)  No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator
compelling attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books,
papers, records, or federal and state income tax returns under this section
shall fail to comply. 





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.134 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; REQUIRING IDENTIFYING INFORMATION.










   (A)     The Tax Administrator may require any person filing a tax
document with the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information, which
may include the person's social security number, federal employer
identification number, or other identification number requested by the Tax
Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information that has experienced any change with respect to that
information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or upon,
filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information.   











   (B)    (1)     If the Tax Administrator makes a request for
identifying information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid
identifying information within thirty days of making the request, nothing in
this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the
person to whom the request was directed pursuant to section 94.5.10 of this
Chapter, in addition to any applicable penalty described in section 94.5.99
of this Chapter.











      (2)     If a person required by the Tax Administrator to
provide identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a
change with respect to that information as required under division (A) of
this section within thirty days after filing the next tax document requiring
such identifying information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax
Administrator from imposing a penalty pursuant to section 94.5.10 of this
Chapter. 











      (3)     The penalties provided for under divisions (B)(1) and
(2) of this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax
or fee with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in
addition to any applicable criminal penalties described in section 94.5.99 of
this Chapter for a violation of 94.5.15 of this Chapter, and any other
penalties that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by law. 





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.14  CONFIDENTIALITY.










   (A)     Any information gained as a result of returns,
investigations, hearings, or verifications required or authorized by ORC 718
or by the charter or ordinance of the Municipality is confidential, and no
person shall access or disclose such information except in accordance with a
proper judicial order or in connection with the performance of that person's
official duties or the official business of the Municipality as authorized by
ORC 718 or the charter or ordinance authorizing the levy. The Tax
Administrator of the Municipality or a designee thereof may furnish copies of
returns filed or otherwise received under this chapter and other related tax
information to the Internal Revenue Service, the State Tax Commissioner, and
Tax Administrators of other municipal corporations. 











   (B)     This section does not prohibit the Municipality from
publishing or disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose
information with respect to particular taxpayers.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.15  FRAUD.










   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the
preparation or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return,
schedule, statement, claim, or document authorized or required by municipal
corporation ordinance or state law to be filed with  the Tax Administrator,
or knowingly procure, counsel, or advise the preparation or presentation of
such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document, or knowingly
change, alter, or amend, or knowingly procure, counsel or advise such change,
alteration, or amendment of the records upon which such report, return,
schedule, statement, claim, or document is based with intent to defraud the
Municipality or  the Tax Administrator.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.16  OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.










   (A)     An "opinion of the Tax Administrator" means an opinion
issued under this section with respect to prospective municipal income tax
liability. It does not include ordinary correspondence of the Tax
Administrator. 











   (B)     A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of
the Tax Administrator as to whether or how certain income, source of income,
or a certain activity or transaction will be taxed. The written response of
the Tax Administrator shall be an "opinion of the Tax Administrator" and
shall bind the Tax Administrator, in accordance with divisions (C), (G), and
(H) of this section, provided all of the following conditions are satisfied: 











      (1)     The taxpayer's request fully and accurately describes
the specific facts or circumstances relevant to a determination of the
taxability of the income, source of income, activity, or transaction, and, if
an activity or transaction, all parties involved in the activity or
transaction are clearly identified by name, location, or other pertinent
facts. 





      (2)     The request relates to a tax imposed by the
Municipality in accordance with this Chapter. 











      (3)     The Tax Administrator's response is signed by the Tax
Administrator and  designated as an "opinion of the Tax Administrator." 











   (C)     An opinion of the Tax Administrator shall remain in effect
and shall protect the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and who
reasonably relies on it from liability for any taxes, penalty, or interest
otherwise chargeable on the activity or transaction specifically held by the
Tax Administrator's opinion to be taxable in a particular manner or not to be
subject to taxation for any taxable years that may be specified in the
opinion, or until the earliest of the following dates: 











      (1)     The effective date of a written revocation by the Tax
Administrator sent to the taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The effective date of the revocation shall be the taxpayer's date
of receipt or one year after the issuance of the opinion, whichever is later;











      (2)     The effective date of any amendment or enactment of a
relevant section of the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified state law, or the
Municipality's income tax ordinance that would substantially change the
analysis and conclusion of the opinion of the Tax Administrator; 











      (3)     The date on which a court issues an opinion
establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to the Ohio Revised
Code, uncodified state law, or the Municipality's income tax ordinance; 











      (4)     If the opinion of the Tax Administrator was based on
the interpretation of federal law, the effective date of any change in the
relevant federal statutes or regulations, or the date on which a court issues
an opinion establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to federal
statutes or regulations; 











      (5)  The effective date of any change in the taxpayer's material
facts or circumstances; 











      (6)     The effective date of the expiration of the opinion,
if specified in the opinion. 











   (D)     (1)    A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for
any activity or transaction related to a request for an opinion that
contained any misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts. 











      (2)    If the taxpayer knowingly has misrepresented the
pertinent facts or omitted material facts with intent to defraud the
Municipality in order to obtain a more favorable opinion, the taxpayer may be
in violation of section 94.5.15 of this Chapter.











   (E)     If a Tax Administrator provides written advice under this
section, the opinion shall include a statement that: 











      (1)    The tax consequences stated in the opinion may be
subject to change for any of the reasons stated in division (C) of this
section; 











      (2)     It is the duty of the taxpayer to be aware of such
changes. 











   (F)     A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any
request received under this section. 











   (G)     This section binds a Tax Administrator only with respect to
opinions of the Tax Administrator issued on or after January 1, 2016. 











   (H)     An opinion of a Tax Administrator binds that Tax
Administrator only with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was
prepared and does not bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal
corporation. 











   (I)     A Tax Administrator shall make available the text of all
opinions issued under this section, except those opinions prepared for a
taxpayer who has requested that the text of the opinion remain confidential.
In no event shall the text of an opinion be made available until the Tax
Administrator has removed all information that identifies the taxpayer and
any other parties involved in the activity or transaction.











   (J)    An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section
or a refusal to offer an opinion under subsection (F) may not be appealed. 





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.17 ASSESSMENT; APPEAL BASED ON PRESUMPTION OF DELIVERY.










   (A)    (1)     The Tax Administrator shall serve an assessment
either by personal service, by certified mail, or by a delivery service
authorized under section 5703.056 of the Ohio Revised Code. 











      (2)     The Tax Administrator may deliver the assessment
through alternative means as provided in this section, including, but not
limited to, delivery by secure electronic mail. Such alternative delivery
method must be authorized by the person subject to the assessment. 











      (3)     Once service of the assessment has been made by the
Tax Administrator or other municipal official, or the designee of either, the
person to whom the assessment is directed may protest the ruling of that
assessment by filing an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review within
sixty days after the receipt of service. The delivery of an assessment of the
Tax Administrator as prescribed in Section 718.18 of the Revised Code is
prima facie evidence that delivery is complete and that the assessment is
served.











   (B)     (1)     A person may challenge the presumption of
delivery and service as set forth in this division.  A person disputing the
presumption of delivery and service under this section bears the burden of
proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the address to which the
assessment was sent was not an address with which the person was associated
at the time the Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment by
certified mail. For the purposes of this section, a person is associated with
an address at the time the Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment
if, at that time, the person was residing, receiving legal documents, or
conducting business at the address; or if, before that time, the person had
conducted business at the address and, when the assessment was mailed, the
person's agent or the person's affiliate was conducting business at the
address. For the purposes of this section, a person's affiliate is any other
person that, at the time the assessment was mailed, owned or controlled at
least twenty per cent, as determined by voting rights, of the addressee's
business.











      (2)     If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the
basis described in division (B)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is
subject to collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so
within sixty days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other
municipal official, or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in
this division prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering
into a compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such
an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.18  LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW; APPEAL TO LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.










   (A)    (1)    The legislative authority of the Municipality shall
maintain a Local Board of Tax Review to hear appeals as provided in Ohio
Revised Code Chapter 718.   











      (2)     The Local Board of Tax Review shall consist of three
members. Members may be domiciled, but appointing authority may decide. The
three members of the Local Board of Tax Review may be domiciled in the
Municipality, but the appointing authority may consider membership from
individuals who are not domiciled within the Municipality. 











         Two members shall be appointed by the legislative authority
of the Municipality, and may not be employees, elected officials, or
contractors with the Municipality at any time during their term or in the
five years immediately preceding the date of appointment. One member shall be
appointed by the top administrative official of the Municipality. This member
may be an employee of the Municipality, but may not be the Director of
Finance or equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other similar
official or an employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any
direct subordinate thereof. 











      (3)     The term for members of the Local Board of Tax Review
appointed by the legislative authority of the Municipality shall be two
years. There is no limit on the number of terms that a member may serve
should the member be reappointed by the legislative authority. The board
member appointed by the top administrative official of the Municipality shall
serve at the discretion of the administrative official. 











      (4)     Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the
legislative authority may be removed by the legislative authority as set
forth in Section 718.11(A)(4) of the Ohio Revised Code.   











      (5)     A member of the board who, for any reason, ceases to
meet the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall
resign immediately by operation of law. 











      (6)     A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment within sixty days of when the vacancy
was created. Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the
expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall
hold office for the remainder of such term. No vacancy on the board shall
impair the power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all the
powers of the board.











      (7)     If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the
board due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the
legislative authority or top administrative official that appointed the
member shall appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the board in
the member's place.  This appointment shall be subject to the same
requirements and limitations as are applicable to the appointment of the
member temporarily unable to serve.











      (8)     No member of the Local Board of Tax Review shall
receive compensation, fee, or reimbursement of expenses for service on the
board.











      (9)    A member of a Local Board of Tax Review shall not be
appointed to or serve on another such board simultaneously.











   (B)     Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer's right to appeal the assessment,  the manner in which the taxpayer
may appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be
directed, and to whom the appeal should be directed. 











   (C)     Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the
assessment to the board by filing a request with the board. The request shall
be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the assessment should
be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within sixty days after
the taxpayer receives the assessment. 











   (D)     The Local Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to
be held within sixty days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under
division (C) of this section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to
prepare or waives a hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the
taxpayer may appear before the board and/or may be represented by an attorney
at law, certified public accountant, or other representative. The board may
allow a hearing to be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such
a case, the hearing must be completed within one hundred twenty days after
the first day of the hearing unless the parties agree otherwise. 











   (E)     The board may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax
Administrator's assessment or any part of that assessment. The board shall
issue a final determination on the appeal within ninety days after the
board's final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final
determination by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within
fifteen days after issuing the final determination.  The  taxpayer or the
Tax Administrator may appeal the board's final determination as provided in
section 5717.011 of the Ohio Revised Code.











   (F)    The Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this
section shall adopt rules governing its procedures, including a schedule of
related costs, and shall keep a record of its transactions. The rules
governing the Local Board of Tax Review procedures shall be in writing, and
may be amended as needed by the Local Board of Tax Review.  Such records are
not public records available for inspection under section 149.43 of the Ohio
Revised Code.  For this reason, any documentation, copies of returns or
reports, final determinations, or working papers for each case must be
maintained in a secure location under the control of the Tax Administrator.
No member of the Local Board of Tax Review may remove such documentation,
copies of returns or reports, final determinations, or working papers from
the hearing.  Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Local Board of Tax
Review created pursuant to this section are not meetings of a public body
subject to section 121.22 of the Ohio Revised Code.  For this reason, such
hearings shall not be open to the public, and only those parties to the case
may be present during the hearing.  (Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.19  ACTIONS TO RECOVER; STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.










   (A)    (1)    (a)    Civil actions to recover municipal income
taxes and penalties  and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought
within the latter of:











            (i)    Three years after the tax was due or the
return was filed, whichever is later; or











            (ii)    One year after the conclusion of the
qualifying deferral period, if any. 











         (b)    The time limit described in division (A)(1)(a) of
this section may be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and
the employer, agent of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in
writing to the extension. Any extension shall also extend for the same period
of time the time limit described in division (C) of this section. 











      (2)    As used in this section, "qualifying deferral period"
means a period of time beginning and ending as follows: 











         (a)     Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved
by an assessment files with a Local Board of Tax Review the request described
in Section 94.5.18 of this Chapter.  That date shall not be affected by any
subsequent decision, finding, or holding by any administrative body or court
that the Local Board of Tax Review with which the aggrieved person filed the
request did not have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the
assessment or any part of that assessment. 











         (b)    Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the
date on which the final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review
becomes final or, if any party appeals from the determination of the Local
Board of Tax Review, the sixtieth day after the date on which the final
determination of the Local Board of Tax Review is either ultimately affirmed
in whole or in part or ultimately reversed and no further appeal of either
that affirmation, in whole or in part, or that reversal is available or
taken. 











   (B)     Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a
resolution or ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within
three years after the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of
fraud, failure to file a return, or the omission of twenty-five per cent or
more of income required to be reported, prosecutions may be commenced within
six years after the commission of the offense. 











   (C)     A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be
brought within the time limitation provided in Section 94.5.096 of this
Chapter. 





 





   (D)    (1)     Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is
pending, the petitioner may pay all or a  portion of the assessment that is
the subject of the appeal.  The acceptance of a  payment by the
Municipality does not prejudice any claim for refund upon final 
determination of the appeal. 











      (2)    If upon final determination of the appeal an error in
the assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed
or pursuant to a final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review created
under Section 94.5.18 of this Chapter, of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals, or
any court to which the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals has been
appealed, so that the amount due from the party assessed under the corrected
assessment is less than the amount paid, there shall be issued to the
appellant or to the appellant's assigns or legal representative a refund in
the amount of the overpayment as provided by Section 94.5.096 of this
Chapter, with interest on that amount as provided by division (D) of this
section.











   (E)    No civil action to recover municipal income tax or related
penalties or interest shall be brought during either of the following time
periods:











      (1)     The period during which a taxpayer has a right to
appeal the imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties; 











      (2)     The period during which an appeal related to the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties is pending.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.20  ADOPTION OF RULES.










   (A)    Pursuant to Section 718.30 of the Ohio Revised Code, the
Municipality, pursuant to this Chapter, grants authority to the Tax
Administrator to adopt rules to administer the income tax imposed by the
Municipality.











   (B)    All rules adopted under this section shall be published and
posted on the internet.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.201  LANDLORD REPORTING.










   (A)   Every owner of two (2) or more rental units and every owner or
operator of a mobile home park is hereby directed and required to furnish to
the Finance Director or his delegate a yearly roster of the names and
addresses of persons residing in the rental units or mobile home park.  The
listing must include any changes during the year.  The yearly roster shall
be filed in the following year on or before January 31st.  Larger entities
may be required to file on a quarterly or semi-annually basis at the Finance
Director’s discretion.











   (B)    Every condominium association, owners’ organizations of
condominium units, or other owners’/residents’ cooperative dwelling
affiliations is hereby required to furnish a yearly roster of the names and
addresses of their members that own, rent, or have an interest in properties
located in the City of West Carrollton to the Finance Director or his
delegate.  This roster must include any changes during the year such as new
owners or forwarding addresses.  The yearly roster shall be filed in the
following year on or before January 31st.  Larger entities may be required
to file on a quarterly or semi-annually basis at the Finance Director’s
discretion.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.97  COLLECTION AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.










   (A)    This chapter shall continue in full force and effect insofar
as the levy of taxes is concerned until repealed, and insofar as the
collection of taxes levied hereunder and actions and proceedings for
collecting any tax so levied or enforcing any provisions of this chapter are
concerned, it shall continue in full force and effect until all of the taxes
levied in the aforesaid period are fully paid and any and all suits and
prosecutions for the collection of taxes or for the punishment of violations
of this chapter have been fully terminated, subject to the limitations
contained in Section 94.5.19.











   (B)       Annual returns due for all or any part of the last
effective year of this chapter shall be due on the date provided in Section
94.5.091 as though the same were continuing.





(Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.98  SAVINGS CLAUSE.










   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax
imposed against, or exemption from tax granted to, any taxpayer or forms of
income specified herein is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid,
such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall affect only such
clause, sentence, section or part of this chapter so found and shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses,
sections or other parts of this chapter.  It is hereby declared to be the
intention of the legislative authority of the Municipality that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included in this
chapter.  (Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.5.99  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.










   (A)     Except as provided in division (B) of this section, whoever
violates Section 94.5.15 of this Chapter, division (A) of Section 94.5.14 of
this Chapter, or Section 94.5.051 of this Chapter by failing to remit
municipal income taxes deducted and withheld from an employee, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be subject to a fine of
not more than one thousand dollars or imprisonment for a term of up to six
months, or both.  In addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from
office or discharge from employment, or both. 











   (B)     Any person who discloses information received from the
Internal Revenue Service in violation of Internal Revenue Code Sec. 7213(a),
7213A, or 7431 shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than five thousand dollars plus the costs of
prosecution, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both. 
In addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from office or
discharge from employment, or both.











   (C)     Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of
division (A) of Section 94.5.14 of this Chapter constitutes a separate
offense. 











   (D)    Whoever violates any provision of this Chapter for which
violation no penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after
the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree; on each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense,
the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  By way of an
illustrative enumeration, violations of this Chapter shall include but not be
limited to the following acts, conduct, and/or omissions:











      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or
declaration required by this Chapter; or











      (2)   Knowingly make any incomplete return; or 











      (3)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax,
penalties, and interest, or any combination thereof, imposed by this Chapter;
or











      (4)     Cause to not be remitted the city income tax withheld
from  qualifying wages of  employees to the Municipality municipal
corporation as required by Section 94.5.051; or 











      (5)    Neglect or refuse to withhold or remit municipal income
tax from employees; or 











      (6)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly
authorized agent or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers,
federal and state income tax returns, or any documentation relating to the
income or net profits of a taxpayer; or











      (7)     Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to
produce his or her books, records, papers, federal and state income tax
returns, or any documentation relating to  the income or net profits of a
taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator; or











      (8)     Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any
information with respect to such person's income  or net profits, or in the
case of a person responsible for maintaining information relating to his or
her employers' income or net profits, such person's employer's income or net
profits; or











      (9)     Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or
any order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator; or











      (10)    To avoid imposition or collection of municipal income
tax, willfully give to an employer or prospective employer false information
as to his or her true name, correct social security number and residence
address, or willfully fail to promptly notify an employer or a prospective
employer of any change in residence address and date thereof; or











      (11)    Fail, as an employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer, to maintain proper records of employees residence addresses, total
qualifying wages paid and municipal tax withheld, or to knowingly give the
Tax Administrator false information; or











      (12)    Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to make any payment
of estimated municipal income tax for any taxable year or any part of any
taxable year in accordance with this Chapter; or











      (13)    Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment
of the whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this
Chapter.











      (14)    For purposes of this Section, any violation that does
not specify a culpable mental state or intent, shall be one of strict
liability and no culpable mental state or intent shall be required for a
person to be guilty of that violation.











      (15)     For purposes of this Section, the term "person"
shall, in addition to the meaning prescribed in Section 94.5.03, include in
the case of a corporation, association, pass-through entity or unincorporated
business entity not having any resident owner or officer within the city, any
employee or agent of such corporation, association, pass-through entity or
unincorporated business entity who has control or supervision over or is
charged with the responsibility of filing the municipal income tax returns
and making the payments of the municipal income tax as required by this
Chapter.  (Ord. 3572.  Passed 11-24-15.)










94.6.01    FILING NET PROFIT TAXES; ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO PROVISIONS
OF CHAPTER.










   (A)    A taxpayer may elect to be subject to sections 94.6.1 to
94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances in lieu of the provisions set forth in the
remainder of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, upon the taxpayer's election, both of the following shall apply:











      (1)    The state tax commissioner shall serve as the sole
administrator of the municipal net profit tax for which the taxpayer as
defined in 94.6.02(C) other than an individual of the Codified Ordinances is
liable for the term of the election;











      (2)    The commissioner shall administer the tax pursuant to
sections 718.80 to 718.95 of the Revised Code, sections 94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of
the Codified Ordinances, and any applicable provision of Chapter 5703 of the
Revised Code.











   (B)   (1)    A taxpayer shall make the initial election on or
before the first day of the third month after the beginning of the taxpayer's
taxable year by notifying the tax commissioner and the City of West
Carrollton, on a form prescribed by the tax commissioner.











      (2)   (a)    The election, once made by the taxpayer,
applies to the taxable year in which the election is made and to each
subsequent taxable year until the taxpayer notifies the tax commissioner and
the City of West Carrollton of its termination of the election.











         (b)    A notification of termination shall be made, on a
form prescribed by the tax commissioner, on or before the first day of the
third month of any taxable year.











         (c)    Upon a timely and valid termination of the
election, the taxpayer is no longer subject to sections 94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of
the Codified Ordinances, and is instead subject to the provisions set forth
in the remainder of this chapter.











   (C)    The tax commissioner shall enforce and administer sections
94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances. In addition to any other powers
conferred upon the tax commissioner by law, the tax commissioner may:











      (1)    Prescribe all forms necessary to administer those
sections;











      (2)    Adopt such rules as the tax commissioner finds
necessary to carry out those sections;











      (3)    Appoint and employ such personnel as are necessary to
carry out the duties imposed upon the tax commissioner by those sections.











   (D)    The tax commissioner shall not be considered a tax
administrator, as that term is defined in section 718.01 of the Revised Code
and Section 94.5.03(44) of the City of West Carrollton Codified Ordinances. 
(Ord. 3629.  Passed 2-27-18.)










94.6.02   DEFINITIONS.










   If a term used in sections 94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances
that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context
in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in
Title LVII of the Revised Code and the use is not consistent, then the use of
the term in the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax
shall have control over the use of the term in Title LVII of the Revised
Code, unless the term is defined in Chapter 5703. of the Revised Code, in
which case the definition in that chapter shall control. Any reference in
this chapter to the Internal Revenue Code includes other laws of the United
States related to federal income taxes. If a term is defined in both this
section and section 94.5.03 of the Codified Ordinances, the definition in
this section shall control for all uses of that term in sections 94.6.1 to
94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances.











   As used in sections 94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances only:











   (A)   "Municipal taxable income" means income apportioned or sitused
to the municipal corporation under section 94.5.03(20)(A) of the Codified
Ordinances, as applicable, reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward available to the person for the municipal corporation.











   (B)    "Adjusted federal taxable income," for a person required to
file as a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C
corporation as described in division (D)(5) of section 718.01 of the Revised
Code and section 94.5.03(1) of the Codified Ordinances, means a C
corporation's federal taxable income before net operating losses and special
deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:











      (1)    Deduct intangible income to the extent included in
federal taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether
the intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets
held for the production of income.











      (2)    Add an amount equal to five per cent of intangible
income deducted under division (B)(1) of this section, but excluding that
portion of intangible income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of property described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue
Code.











      (3)    Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the
computation of federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the
sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or
1231 of the Internal Revenue Code.











   (4)   (a)    Except as provided in division (B)(4)(b) of this
section, deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the
extent the income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code.











      (b)    Division (B)(4)(a) of this section does not apply to
the extent the income or gain is income or gain described in section 1245 or
1250 of the Internal Revenue Code.











      (5)    Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a
deduction in the computation of federal taxable income.











      (6)    In the case of a real estate investment trust or
regulated investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to,
distributions to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of
investors and allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable
income.











      (7)    Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or
excluded in computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a
transfer agreement or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement
under section 4313.02 of the Revised Code.











      (8)    Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise
deducted or excluded in computing adjusted federal taxable income.











      (9)    Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned
directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal
taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net
profit in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with division
E(3)(b)of section 94.5.063 of the Codified Ordinances.











      (10)    Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned
directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal
taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss
in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with division E(3)(b)of
section 94.5.063 of the Codified Ordinances.











         If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a
disregarded entity that has made the election described in division (A) of
section 94.6.01 of the Codified Ordinances, and is not a publicly traded
partnership that has made the election described in division(A) of section
94.6.01 of the Codified Ordinances, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted
federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C
corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or
accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder,
member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless
such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as
payment of interest under section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United
States treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified
self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and
amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not
be allowed as a deduction.











         Nothing in division (B) of this section shall be construed
as allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall
be construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued
for purposes of federal self-employment tax.











   (C)    "Taxpayer" has the same meaning as in section 94.5.03(47)(A)
of the Codified Ordinances, except that "taxpayer" does not include natural
persons or entities subject to the tax imposed under Chapter 5745. of the
Revised Code. "Taxpayer" may include receivers, assignees, or trustees in
bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume the role of a taxpayer.











   (D)    "Tax return" or "return" means the notifications and reports
required to be filed pursuant to sections 94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified
Ordinances for the purpose of reporting municipal income taxes, and includes
declarations of estimated tax.











   (E)    "Taxable year" means the calendar year or the taxpayer's
fiscal year ending during the calendar year, or fractional part thereof, upon
which the calculation of the taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income is
based pursuant to this chapter. If a taxpayer's taxable year is changed for
federal income tax purposes, the taxable year for purposes of sections 94.6.1
to 94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances is changed accordingly but may consist
of an aggregation of more than one taxable year for federal income tax
purposes. The tax commissioner may prescribe by rule an appropriate period as
the taxable year for a taxpayer that has had a change of its taxable year for
federal income tax purposes, for a taxpayer that has two or more short
taxable years for federal income tax purposes as the result of a change of
ownership, or for a new taxpayer that would otherwise have no taxable year.











   (F)    "Assessment" means a notice of underpayment or nonpayment of
a tax issued pursuant to section 94.5.17 of the Codified Ordinances.





(Ord. 3629.  Passed 2-27-18.)










94.6.03    APPLICABILITY; TAXABLE SITUS; APPORTIONMENT.










   This section applies to any taxpayer that is engaged in a business or
profession in the City of West Carrollton and that has made the election
under section 94.6.01 of the Codified Ordinances.











   (A)    Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without
the boundaries of the City of West Carrollton shall be considered as having a
taxable situs in the City of West Carrollton for purposes of municipal income
taxation in the same proportion as the average ratio of the following:











      (1)    The average original cost of the real property and
tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or
profession in the City of West Carrollton during the taxable period to the
average original cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned
or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period,
wherever situated.











         As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or
real property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the
value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental
thereon by eight;











      (2)    Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the
taxable period to individuals employed in the business or profession for
services performed in the City of West Carrollton to wages, salaries, and
other compensation paid during the same period to individuals employed in the
business or profession, wherever the individual's services are performed,
excluding compensation from which taxes are not required to be withheld under
section 94.5.052 of the Codified Ordinances;











      (3)    Total gross receipts of the business or profession from
sales and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in
the City of West Carrollton to total gross receipts of the business or
profession during the same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever
made or performed.











   (B)   (1)    If the apportionment factors described in division
(A) of this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's
business activity in the City of West Carrollton, the taxpayer may request,
or the tax commissioner may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to
all or any portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative
apportionment method involving one or more of the following:











         (a)    Separate accounting;











         (b)    The exclusion of one or more of the factors;











         (c)    The inclusion of one or more additional factors
that would provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the
taxpayer to the municipal corporation;











         (d)    A modification of one or more of the factors.











      (2)    A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment
method shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed
appeal of an assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may
use the requested alternative method unless the tax commissioner denies the
request in an assessment issued within the period prescribed by division (A)
of section 94.6.03 of the Codified Ordinances.











      (3)    The tax commissioner may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in division (B)(1) of this
section only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period
prescribed by division (A) of section 94.6.03 of the Codified Ordinances.











   (C)    As used in division (A)(2) of this section, "wages, salaries,
and other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation
paid to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:











      (1)    A location that is owned, controlled, or used by,
rented to, or under the possession of one of the following:











         (a)   The employer;











         (b)    A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the
employer, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;











         (c)    A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a
person described in division (C)(1)(b) of this section, or a related member
of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient.











      (2)    Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing,
investigation, inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative,
judicial, or legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided
that the compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of,
the employer or that the employee's presence at the location directly or
indirectly benefits the employer;











      (3)    Any other location, if the tax commissioner determines
that the employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other
location in lieu of a location described in division (C)(1) or (2) of this
section solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income
tax liability. If the tax commissioner makes such a determination, the
employer may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that the tax commissioner's determination was unreasonable.











   (D)    For the purposes of division (A)(3) of this section, receipts
from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to the
City of West Carrollton as follows:











      (1)    Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the City of West Carrollton  only if,
regardless of where title passes, the property meets either of the following
criteria:











         (a)    The property is shipped to or delivered within
the City of West Carrollton from a stock of goods located within the City of
West Carrollton.











         (b)    The property is delivered within the City of West
Carrollton from a location outside the City of West Carrollton, provided the
taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation
or promotion of sales within the City of West Carrollton and the sales result
from such solicitation or promotion.











      (2)    Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be
sitused to the City of West Carrollton to the extent that such services are
performed in the City of West Carrollton.











      (3)    To the extent included in income, gross receipts from
the sale of real property located in the City of West Carrollton  shall be
sitused to the City of West Carrollton.











      (4)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from
rents and royalties from real property located in the City of West Carrollton
shall be sitused to the City of West Carrollton.











      (5)    Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible
personal property shall be sitused to the City of West Carrollton based upon
the extent to which the tangible personal property is used in the City of
West Carrollton.











   (E)    Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker
relating to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to
the City of West Carrollton in which the real estate is located. Net profit
reported by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to the City of
West Carrollton based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker
received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in the City
of West Carrollton to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or
lease of real estate everywhere in the taxable year.











   (F)    If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable
income, the taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option
granted to an employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the
employee's income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted
from taxation under divisions (C)(12) and (R)(1)(d) of section 94.6.03 of the
Codified Ordinances by the City of West Carrollton or substantially similar
provision of the codified ordinances of another municipal corporation, the
taxpayer shall add the amount that is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer's
net profit that was apportioned to the City of West Carrollton. In no case
shall a taxpayer be required to add to its net profit that was apportioned to
the City of West Carrollton any amount other than the amount upon which the
employee would be required to pay tax were the amount related to the stock
option not exempted from taxation.











      This division applies solely for the purpose of making an
adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to
the City of West Carrollton under this section.











   (G)    When calculating the ratios described in division (A) of this
section for the purposes of that division or division (B) of this section,
the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.





(Ord. 3629.  Passed 2-27-18.)










94.6.04   INFORMATION PROVIDED TO TAX ADMINISTRATORS; CONFIDENTIALITY.










   (A)    Any information gained as a result of returns,
investigations, hearings, or verifications required or authorized by sections
94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances is confidential, and no person
shall disclose such information, except for official purposes, in accordance
with a proper judicial order, or as provided in section 4123.271 or 5703.21
of the Revised Code. The tax commissioner may furnish the internal revenue
service with copies of returns filed. This section does not prohibit the
publication of statistics in a form which does not disclose information with
respect to particular taxpayers.











   (B)    In May and November of each year, the tax commissioner shall
provide the City of West Carrollton tax administrator with the following
information for every taxpayer that filed tax returns with the commissioner
under sections 94.6.01 to 94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances and that had
municipal taxable income apportionable to the City of West Carrollton under
this chapter for any prior year:











      (1)    The taxpayer's name, address, and federal employer
identification number;











      (2)    The taxpayer's apportionment ratio for, and amount of
municipal taxable income apportionable to, the City of West Carrollton
pursuant to section 94.5.061 of the Codified Ordinances;











      (3)    The amount of any pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward utilized by the taxpayer;











      (4)    Whether the taxpayer requested that any overpayment be
carried forward to a future taxable year;











      (5)    The amount of any credit claimed under section 718.94
of the Revised Code.











   (C)    Not later than thirty days after each distribution made to
municipal corporations under section 718.83 of the Revised Code, the tax
commissioner shall provide to the City of West Carrollton a report stating
the name and federal identification number of every taxpayer that made
estimated payments that are attributable to the City of West Carrollton and
the amount of each such taxpayer's estimated payment.











   (D)    The information described under divisions (B) and (C) of this
section shall be provided to the individual or individuals designated by the
City of West Carrollton tax administrator under section 718.83(D) of the
Revised Code.











   (E)   (1)    The City of West Carrollton expects that the tax
commissioner will, pursuant to section 718.84(E) of the Revised Code, provide
tax returns and other information it receives in the performance of its
administration of the municipal net profits tax for taxpayers making the
election provided in section 94.6.01 of the Codified Ordinances. The tax
administrator shall review these returns and information, as well as the
information received pursuant to divisions (B) and (C) of this section, and
has discretion to refer any taxpayer for audit by the tax commissioner. Such
referral shall be made on a form prescribed by the commissioner and shall
include any information that forms the basis for the referral.











      (2)    if the tax commissioner declines to audit a taxpayer
referred by the tax administrator under this section, the City of West
Carrollton reserves its right to pursue any and all remedies, whether at law
or in equity, to ensure that the correct tax liability has been calculated
and paid by the taxpayer.  (Ord. 3629.  Passed 2-27-18.)










94.6.05   FILING OF ANNUAL RETURN; REMITTANCE; DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.










   (A)   (1)    For each taxable year, every taxpayer shall file an
annual return. Such return, along with the amount of tax shown to be due on
the return less the amount paid for the taxable year under section 94.5.09 of
the Codified Ordinances, shall be submitted to the tax commissioner, on a
form and in the manner prescribed by the commissioner, on or before the
fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of the taxpayer's taxable
year.











      (2)    If a taxpayer has multiple taxable years ending within
one calendar year, the taxpayer shall aggregate the facts and figures
necessary to compute the tax due under this chapter, in accordance with the
West Carrollton Codified Ordinances onto its annual return.











      (3)    The remittance shall be made payable to the treasurer
of state and in the form prescribed by the tax commissioner. If the amount
payable with the tax return is ten dollars or less, no remittance is required.











   (B)   (1)    Each return required to be filed under this section
shall contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized
agent and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall
include the taxpayer's identification number. Each return shall be verified
by a declaration under penalty of perjury.











      (2)   (a)    The tax commissioner may require a taxpayer to
include, with each annual tax return, amended return, or request for refund
filed with the commissioner under sections 94.6.01 to 94.6.16 of the Codified
Ordinances, copies of any relevant documents or other information.











         (b)    A taxpayer that files an annual tax return
electronically through the Ohio business gateway or in another manner as
prescribed by the tax commissioner shall either submit the documents required
under this division electronically as prescribed at the time of filing or, if
electronic submission is not available, mail the documents to the tax
commissioner. The department of taxation shall publish a method of
electronically submitting the documents required under this division on or
before January 1, 2019.











      (3)    After a taxpayer files a tax return, the tax
commissioner may request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information,
statements, or documents required to determine and verify the taxpayer's
municipal income tax.











   (D)   (1)   (a)    Any taxpayer that has duly requested an
automatic extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of a tax return with the
commissioner under this section. The extended due date of the return shall be
the fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year
to which the return relates.











         (b)    A taxpayer that has not requested or received a
six-month extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may
request that the commissioner grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the
date for filing the taxpayer's municipal income tax return. If the
commissioner receives the request on or before the date the municipal income
tax return is due, the commissioner shall grant the taxpayer's extension
request.











         (c)    An extension of time to file under division
(D)(1) of this section is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due
unless the tax commissioner grants an extension of that date.











      (2)    If the commissioner considers it necessary in order to
ensure payment of a tax imposed in accordance with the West Carrollton
Codified Ordinances, the commissioner may require taxpayers to file returns
and make payments otherwise than as provided in this section, including
taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns.











   (E)    Each return required to be filed in accordance with this
section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another
person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to
communicate with the tax commissioner about matters pertaining to the return.
The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by
checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the commissioner to contact the
preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during the
examination or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or
other person only to provide the commissioner with information that is
missing from the return, to contact the commissioner for information about
the examination or other review of the return or the status of the taxpayer's
refund or payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical errors,
offsets, or return preparation that the taxpayer has received from the
commissioner and has shown to the preparer or other person.











   (F)    When income tax returns or other documents require the
signature of a tax return preparer, the tax commissioner shall accept a
facsimile or electronic version of such a signature in lieu of a manual
signature.





(Ord. 3629.  Passed 2-27-18.)










94.6.06   ELECTRONIC FILING.










   (A)    All taxpayers that have made the election allowed under
section 94.6.01 of the Codified Ordinances shall file any tax return or
extension for filing a tax return, and shall make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, electronically, either through the Ohio business
gateway or in another manner as prescribed by the tax commissioner.











   (B)    A taxpayer may apply to the commissioner, on a form
prescribed by the commissioner, to be excused from the requirement to file
returns and make payments electronically. For good cause shown, the
commissioner may excuse the applicant from the requirement and permit the
applicant to file the returns or make the payments by nonelectronic means.











   (C)    The tax commissioner may adopt rules establishing the
following:











      (1)    The format of documents to be used by taxpayers to file
returns and make payments by electronic means;











      (2)    The information taxpayers must submit when filing tax
returns by electronic means.  (Ord. 3629.  Passed 2-27-18.)










94.6.07   CONSOLIDATED RETURNS.










   (A)   As used in this section:











      (1)    "Affiliated group of corporations" means an affiliated
group as defined in section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that,
if such a group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that
is primarily engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone
service in this state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent
local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.











      (2)    "Consolidated federal income tax return" means a
consolidated return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to section
1501 of the Internal Revenue Code.











      (3)    "Consolidated federal taxable income" means the
consolidated taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as
computed for the purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return,
before consideration of net operating losses or special deductions.
"Consolidated federal taxable income" does not include income or loss of an
incumbent local exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group
under division (A)(1) of this section.











      (4)    "Incumbent local exchange carrier" has the same meaning
as in section 4927.01 of the Revised Code.











      (5)    "Local exchange telephone service" has the same meaning
as in section 5727.01 of the Revised Code.











   (B)   (1)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of
corporations may elect to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year
if at least one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to
municipal income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of
corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to
that taxable year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning
with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the
reporting method is required under federal law. The election continues to be
binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to
discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under division (B)(2) of this
section or a taxpayer receives permission from the tax commissioner. The tax
commissioner shall approve such a request for good cause shown.











      (2)    An election to discontinue filing consolidated tax
returns under this section must be made on or before the fifteenth day of the
fourth month of the year following the last year of a five-year consolidated
tax return election period in effect under division (B)(1) of this section.
The election to discontinue filing a consolidated tax return is binding for a
five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.











      (3)   An election made under division (B)(1) or (2) of this
section is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations
subject to a municipal income tax.











      (4)    When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under
section 94.6.01 of the Codified Ordinances, a valid election made by the
taxpayer under division (B)(1) or (2) of section 94.6.07 of the Codified
Ordinances is binding upon the tax commissioner for the remainder of the
five-year period.











      (5)    When an election made under section 94.6.01 of the
Codified Ordinances is terminated, a valid election made under this section
is binding upon the tax administrator for the remainder of the five-year
period.











   (C)    A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of
corporations that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a
taxable year shall file a consolidated tax return for that taxable year if
the tax commissioner determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that
there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to
allocation of net profits to a municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is
required to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year shall file a
consolidated tax return for all subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer
requests and receives written permission from the commissioner to file a
separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances.











   (D)    A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated tax return in the
same manner as is required under the United States department of treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.











   (E)   (1)    Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(2),
(3), and (4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated tax
return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in section
94.6.02 of the Codified Ordinances, by substituting "consolidated federal
taxable income" for "federal taxable income" wherever "federal taxable
income" appears in that division and by substituting "an affiliated group of
corporation's" for "a C corporation's" wherever "a C corporation's" appears
in that division.











      (2)    No corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall
make any adjustment otherwise required under division (B) of section 94.6.07
of the Codified Ordinances to the extent that the item of income or deduction
otherwise subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in
the computation of consolidated federal taxable income.











      (3)    If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity
having at least eighty per cent of the value of its ownership interest owned
or controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations
is included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income
for a taxable year, the corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall do
one of the following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or
loss for that taxable year:











         (a)    Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or
loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group
and, for the purpose of making the computations required in section 94.6.07
of the Codified Ordinances, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts
of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net
profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss
is so excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate
taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be
included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.











         (b)    Include the pass-through entity's net profit or
loss in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and,
for the purpose of making the computations required in section 94.6.07 of the
Codified Ordinances, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so
included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer
on the basis of the entity's net profits that are included in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.











      (4)    If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity
having less than eighty per cent of the value of its ownership interest owned
or controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations
is included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income
for a taxable year, all of the following shall apply:











         (a)    The corporation filing the consolidated tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in section 94.6.07 of the
Codified Ordinances, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation;











         (b)    The pass-through entity shall be subject to
municipal income taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with sections
94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances on the basis of the entity's net
profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.











   (F)    Corporations filing a consolidated tax return shall make the
computations required under section 94.6.07 of the Codified Ordinances by
substituting "consolidated federal taxable income attributable to" for "net
profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in that section and by
substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever
"taxpayer" appears in that section.











   (G)    Each corporation filing a consolidated tax return is jointly
and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges, or
other amounts applicable under section 94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified
Ordinances or Chapter 5703. of the Revised Code to the corporation, an
affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any portion of the
taxable year, or any one or more members of such an affiliated group.  (Ord.
3629.  Passed 2-27-18.)










94.6.08   FAILURE TO PAY TAX.










   If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under 94.6.01 of the
Codified Ordinances fails to pay any tax as required under sections 94.6.1 to
94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances, or any portion of that tax, on or before
the date prescribed for its payment, interest shall be assessed, collected,
and paid, in the same manner as the tax, upon such unpaid amount at the rate
per annum prescribed by section 5703.47 of the Revised Code from the date
prescribed for its payment until it is paid or until the date an assessment
is issued under section 94.6.11 of the Codified Ordinances, whichever occurs
first.





(Ord. 3629.  Passed 2-27-18.)










94.6.09   DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAXES.










   (A)    As used in this section:











      (1)   "Combined tax liability" means the total amount of a
taxpayer's income tax liabilities to all municipal corporations in this state
for a taxable year.











      (2)    "Estimated taxes" means the amount that the taxpayer
reasonably estimates to be the taxpayer's combined tax liability for the
current taxable year.











   (B)   (1)    Except as provided in division (B)(4) of this
section, every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for the
current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the tax commissioner, if the
amount payable as estimated taxes is at least two hundred dollars.











      (2)    Except as provided in division (B)(4) of this section,
a taxpayer having a taxable year of less than twelve months shall make a
declaration under rules prescribed by the commissioner.











      (3)    The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or
before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of the
taxable year or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.











      (4)    The tax commissioner may waive the requirement for
filing a declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after
finding that the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative
costs and other factors.











   (C)    Each taxpayer shall file the declaration of estimated taxes
with, and remit estimated taxes to, the tax commissioner at the times and in
the amounts prescribed in division (C)(1) of this section. Remitted taxes
shall be made payable to the treasurer of state.











      (1)    The required portion of the combined tax liability for
the taxable year that shall be paid through estimated taxes shall be as
follows:











         (a)    On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth
month after the beginning of the taxable year, twenty-two and one-half per
cent of the combined tax liability for the taxable year;











         (b)    On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month
after the beginning of the taxable year, forty-five per cent of the combined
tax liability for the taxable year;











         (c)    On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month
after the beginning of the taxable year, sixty-seven and one-half per cent of
the combined tax liability for the taxable year;











         (d)    On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth
month of the taxable year, ninety per cent of the combined tax liability for
the taxable year.











      (2)    If the taxpayer determines that its declaration of
estimated taxes will not accurately reflect the taxpayer's tax liability for
the taxable year, the taxpayer shall increase or decrease, as appropriate,
its subsequent payments in equal installments to result in a more accurate
payment of estimated taxes.











      (3)   (a)    Each taxpayer shall report on the declaration
of estimated taxes the portion of the remittance that the taxpayer estimates
that it owes to each municipal corporation for the taxable year.











         (b)    Upon receiving a payment of estimated taxes under
this section, the commissioner shall immediately forward the payment to the
treasurer of state. The treasurer shall credit the payment in the same manner
as in division (B) of section 718.85 of the Revised Code.











   (D)   (1)    In the case of any underpayment of estimated taxes,
there shall be added to the taxes an amount determined at the rate per annum
prescribed by section 5703.47 of the Revised Code upon the amount of
underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless the underpayment is due
to reasonable cause as described in division (E) of this section. The amount
of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:











         (a)    For the first payment of estimated taxes each
year, twenty-two and one-half per cent of the combined tax liability, less
the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment;











         (b)    For the second payment of estimated taxes each
year, forty-five per cent of the combined tax liability, less the amount of
taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment;











         (c)    For the third payment of estimated taxes each
year, sixty-seven and one-half per cent of the combined tax liability, less
the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that payment;











         (d)    For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each
year, ninety per cent of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes
paid by the date prescribed for that payment.











      (2)    The period of the underpayment shall run from the day
the estimated payment was required to be made to the date on which the
payment is made. For purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes
on or before any payment date shall be considered a payment of any previous
underpayment only to the extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the
amount of the payment presently due.











      (3)    All amounts collected under this section shall be
considered as taxes collected under sections 94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the
Codified Ordinances and shall be credited and distributed to municipal
corporations in accordance with section 718.83 of the Revised Code.











   (E)    An underpayment of any portion of a combined tax liability
shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by this section
shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the following
apply:











      (1)    The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at
least ninety per cent of the combined tax liability for the current taxable
year, determined by annualizing the income received during the year up to the
end of the month immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due.











      (2)    The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at
least one hundred per cent of the tax liability shown on the return of the
taxpayer for the preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately
preceding taxable year reflected a period of twelve months and the taxpayer
filed a municipal income tax return for that year.





(Ord. 3629.  Passed 2-27-18.)










94.6.10   ADDITIONAL PENALTIES.










   (A)    In addition to any other penalty imposed by sections 94.6.1
to 94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances or Chapter 5703. of the Revised Code,
the following penalties shall apply:











      (1)    If a taxpayer required to file a tax return under
sections 94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances fails to make and file
the return within the time prescribed, including any extensions of time
granted by the tax commissioner, the commissioner may impose a penalty not
exceeding twenty-five dollars per month or fraction of a month, for each
month or fraction of a month elapsing between the due date, including
extensions of the due date, and the date on which the return is filed. The
aggregate penalty, per instance, under this division shall not exceed one
hundred fifty dollars.











      (2)    If a person required to file a tax return
electronically under sections 94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances
fails to do so, the commissioner may impose a penalty not to exceed the
following:











         (a)    For each of the first two failures, five per cent
of the amount required to be reported on the return;











         (b)    For the third and any subsequent failure, ten per
cent of the amount required to be reported on the return.











      (3)    If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under
section 94.6.01 of the Codified Ordinances fails to timely pay an amount of 
tax required to be paid under this chapter, the commissioner may impose a
penalty equal to fifteen per cent of the amount not timely paid.











      (4)    If a taxpayer files what purports to be a tax return
required by sections 94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances that does
not contain information upon which the substantial correctness of the return
may be judged or contains information that on its face indicates that the
return is substantially incorrect, and the filing of the return in that
manner is due to a position that is frivolous or a desire that is apparent
from the return to delay or impede the administration of sections 94.6.1 to
94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances, a penalty of up to five hundred dollars
may be imposed.











      (5)    If a taxpayer makes a fraudulent attempt to evade the
reporting or payment of the tax required to be shown on any return required
under sections 94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances, a penalty may be
imposed not exceeding the greater of one thousand dollars or one hundred per
cent of the tax required to be shown on the return.











      (6)    If any person makes a false or fraudulent claim for a
refund under the West Carrollton Codified Ordinances, a penalty may be
imposed not exceeding the greater of one thousand dollars or one hundred per
cent of the claim. Any penalty imposed under this division, any refund issued
on the claim, and interest on any refund from the date of the refund, may be
assessed under section 94.6.11 of the Codified Ordinances without regard to
any time limitation for the assessment imposed by division (A) of that
section.











   (B)    For purposes of this section, the tax required to be shown on
a tax return shall be reduced by the amount of any part of the tax paid on or
before the date, including any extensions of the date, prescribed for filing
the return.











   (C)    Each penalty imposed under this section shall be in addition
to any other penalty imposed under this section. All or part of any penalty
imposed under this section may be abated by the tax commissioner. The
commissioner may adopt rules governing the imposition and abatement of such
penalties.











   (D)    All amounts collected under this section shall be considered
as taxes collected under sections 94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified
Ordinances and shall be credited and distributed to municipal corporations in
the same proportion as the underlying tax liability is required to be
distributed to such municipal corporations under section 718.83 of the
Revised Code.





(Ord. 3629.  Passed 2-27-18.)










94.6.11  ASSESSMENTS AGAINST TAXPAYER.










   (A)    If any taxpayer required to file a return under section
94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances fails to file the return within
the time prescribed, files an incorrect return, or fails to remit the full
amount of the tax due for the period covered by the return, the tax
commissioner may make an assessment against the taxpayer for any deficiency
for the period for which the return or tax is due, based upon any information
in the commissioner's possession.











      The tax commissioner shall not make or issue an assessment
against a taxpayer more than three years after the later of the date the
return subject to assessment was required to be filed or the date the return
was filed. Such time limit may be extended if both the taxpayer and the
commissioner consent in writing to the extension. Any such extension shall
extend the three-year time limit in section 94.5.19 of the Codified
Ordinances for the same period of time. There shall be no bar or limit to an
assessment against a taxpayer that fails to file a return subject to
assessment as required by sections 94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified
Ordinances, or that files a fraudulent return. The commissioner shall give
the taxpayer assessed written notice of the assessment as provided in section
5703.37 of the Revised Code. With the notice, the commissioner shall provide
instructions on how to petition for reassessment and request a hearing on the
petition.











   (B)    Unless the taxpayer assessed files with the tax commissioner
within sixty days after service of the notice of assessment, either
personally or by certified mail, a written petition for reassessment signed
by the authorized agent of the taxpayer assessed having knowledge of the
facts, the assessment becomes final, and the amount of the assessment is due
and payable from the taxpayer to the treasurer of state. The petition shall
indicate the taxpayer's objections, but additional objections may be raised
in writing if received by the commissioner prior to the date shown on the
final determination. If the petition has been properly filed, the
commissioner shall proceed under section 5703.60 of the Revised Code.











   (C)    After an assessment becomes final, if any portion of the
assessment remains unpaid, including accrued interest, a certified copy of
the tax commissioner's entry making the assessment final may be filed in the
office of the clerk of the court of common pleas in the county in which the
taxpayer has an office or place of business in this state, the county in
which the taxpayer's statutory agent is located, or Franklin county.











      Immediately upon the filing of the entry, the clerk shall enter a
judgment against the taxpayer assessed in the amount shown on the entry. The
judgment may be filed by the clerk in a loose-leaf book entitled "special
judgments for municipal income taxes," and shall have the same effect as
other judgments. Execution shall issue upon the judgment upon the request of
the tax commissioner, and all laws applicable to sales on execution shall
apply to sales made under the judgment.











      If the assessment is not paid in its entirety within sixty days
after the day the assessment was issued, the portion of the assessment
consisting of tax due shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by
section 5703.47 of the Revised Code from the day the commissioner issues the
assessment until the assessment is paid or until it is certified to the
attorney general for collection under section 131.02 of the Revised Code,
whichever comes first. If the unpaid portion of the assessment is certified
to the attorney general for collection, the entire unpaid portion of the
assessment shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by section
5703.47 of the Revised Code from the date of certification until the date it
is paid in its entirety. Interest shall be paid in the same manner as the tax
and may be collected by issuing an assessment under this section.











   (D)    All money collected under this section shall be credited to
the municipal income tax fund and distributed to the municipal corporation to
which the money is owed based on the assessment issued under this section.











   (E)    If the tax commissioner believes that collection of the tax
will be jeopardized unless proceedings to collect or secure collection of the
tax are instituted without delay, the commissioner may issue a jeopardy
assessment against the taxpayer liable for the tax. Immediately upon the
issuance of the jeopardy assessment, the commissioner shall file an entry
with the clerk of the court of common pleas in the manner prescribed by
division (C) of this section. Notice of the jeopardy assessment shall be
served on the taxpayer assessed or the taxpayer's legal representative in the
manner provided in section 5703.37 of the Revised Code within five days of
the filing of the entry with the clerk. The total amount assessed is
immediately due and payable, unless the taxpayer assessed files a petition
for reassessment in accordance with division (B) of this section and provides
security in a form satisfactory to the commissioner and in an amount
sufficient to satisfy the unpaid balance of the assessment. Full or partial
payment of the assessment does not prejudice the commissioner's consideration
of the petition for reassessment.











   (F)    Notwithstanding the fact that a petition for reassessment is
pending, the taxpayer may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the
subject of the petition. The acceptance of a payment by the treasurer of
state does not prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the
petition.











      If upon final determination of the petition an error in the
assessment is corrected by the tax commissioner, upon petition so filed or
pursuant to a decision of the board of tax appeals or any court to which the
determination or decision has been appealed, so that the amount due from the
taxpayer under the corrected assessment is less than the portion paid, there
shall be issued to the taxpayer, its assigns, or legal representative a
refund in the amount of the overpayment as provided by section 95.5.19 of the
Codified Ordinances, with interest on that amount as provided by that section.





(Ord. 3629.  Passed 2-27-18.)










94.6.12   REFUND APPLICATIONS.










   (A)    An application to refund to a taxpayer the amount of taxes
paid on any illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of tax under sections
94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances, including assessments, shall be
filed with the tax commissioner within three years after the date of the
illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of the tax, or within any additional
period allowed by division (A) of section 94.6.11 of the Codified Ordinances.
The application shall be filed in the form prescribed by the tax commissioner.











   (B)   (1)    On the filing of a refund application, the tax
commissioner shall determine the amount of refund to which the applicant is
entitled. The amount determined shall be based on the amount  overpaid per
return or assessment. If the amount is greater than ten dollars and not less
than that claimed, the commissioner shall certify that amount to the director
of budget and management and the treasurer of state for payment from the tax
refund fund created in section 5703.052 of the Revised Code. If the amount is
greater than ten dollars but less than that claimed, the commissioner shall
proceed in accordance with section 5703.70 of the Revised Code.











      (2)    Upon issuance of a refund under this section, the
commissioner shall notify each municipal corporation of the amount refunded
to the taxpayer attributable to that municipal corporation, which shall be
deducted from the municipal corporation's next distribution under section
718.83 of the Revised Code.











   (C)    Any portion of a refund determined under division (B) of this
section that is not issued within ninety days after such determination shall
bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by section 5703.47 of the
Revised Code from the ninety-first day after such determination until the day
the refund is paid or credited. On an illegal or erroneous assessment,
interest shall be paid at that rate from the date of payment on the illegal
or erroneous assessment until the day the refund is paid or credited.





(Ord. 3629.  Passed 2-27-18.)










94.6.13   AMENDED RETURNS.










   (A)    If any of the facts, figures, computations, or attachments
required in an annual return filed by a taxpayer that has made the election
allowed under section 94.6.01 of the Codified Ordinances and used to
determine the tax due under sections 94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified
Ordinances must be altered as the result of an adjustment to the taxpayer's
federal income tax return, whether initiated by the taxpayer or the internal
revenue service, and such alteration affects the taxpayer's tax liability
under those sections, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with the tax
commissioner in such form as the commissioner requires. The amended return
shall be filed not later than sixty days after the adjustment is agreed upon
or finally determined for federal income tax purposes or after any federal
income tax deficiency or refund, or the abatement or credit resulting
therefrom, has been assessed or paid, whichever occurs first. If a taxpayer
intends to file an amended consolidated municipal income tax return, or to
amend its type of return from a separate return to a consolidated return,
based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax return, the taxpayer
shall notify the commissioner before filing the amended return.











   (B)    In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any
penalty and interest thereon. An amended return required by this section is a
return subject to assessment under section 94.6.11 of the Codified Ordinances
for the purpose of assessing any additional tax due under this section,
together with any applicable penalty and interest. The amended return shall
not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a
previously filed return no longer subject to assessment that are not
affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's
federal tax return.











   (C)    In the case of an overpayment, an application for refund may
be filed under this division within the sixty-day period prescribed for
filing the amended return, even if that period extends beyond the period
prescribed in section 94.6.12 of the Codified Ordinances, if the application
otherwise conforms to the requirements of that section. An application filed
under this division shall claim refund of overpayments resulting from
alterations to only those facts, figures, computations, or attachments
required in the taxpayer's annual return that are affected, either directly
or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return
unless it is also filed within the time prescribed in section 94.6.12 of the
Codified Ordinances. The application shall not reopen those facts, figures,
computations, or attachments that are not affected, either directly or
indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return.





(Ord. 3629.  Passed 2-27-18.)










94.6.14   EXAMINATION OF RECORDS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS AND PERSONS.










   (A)    The tax commissioner, or any authorized agent or employee
thereof, may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income
tax returns of any taxpayer or other person that is subject to sections
94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified Ordinances for the purpose of verifying the
accuracy of any return made or, if no return was filed, to ascertain the tax
due as required under those sections. Upon written request by the
commissioner or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every taxpayer
or other person subject to this section is required to furnish the
opportunity for the commissioner, authorized agent, or employee to
investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal and state
income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the request.











   (B)    The records and other documents of any taxpayer or other
person that is subject to sections 94.6.1 to 94.6.16 of the Codified
Ordinances shall be open to the tax commissioner's inspection during business
hours and shall be preserved for a period of six years following the end of
the taxable year to which the records or documents relate, unless the
commissioner, in writing, consents to their destruction within that period,
or by order requires that they be kept longer. The commissioner may require
any person, by notice served on that person, to keep such records as the
commissioner determines necessary to show whether or not that person is
liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax levied by a
municipal corporation.











   (C)    The tax commissioner may examine under oath any person that
the commissioner reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that
was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to
affect such income. The commissioner may, for this purpose, compel any such
person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers,
records, and federal income tax returns in such person's possession or
control. The person may be assisted or represented by an attorney,
accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing or
examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person
who is not an attorney.











   (D)    No person issued written notice by the tax commissioner
compelling attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books,
papers, records, or federal income tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.





(Ord. 3629.  Passed 2-27-18.)










94.6.15   CREDITS.










   (A)    A credit, granted by resolution or ordinance of the City of
West Carrollton pursuant to section 94.5.064 or 94.5.065 of the Codified
Ordinances, shall be available to a taxpayer that has made the election
allowed under section 94.6.01 of the Codified Ordinances, against the
municipal corporation's tax on income. A municipal corporation shall submit
the following information to the tax commissioner on or before the later of
January 31, 2018, or the thirty-first day of January of the first year in
which the taxpayer is eligible to receive the credit:











      (1)    A copy of the agreement entered into by the City of
West Carrollton and taxpayer under section 94.5.064 or 94.5.065  of the
Codified Ordinances;











      (2)    A copy of the ordinance or resolution authorizing the
agreement entered into between the City of West Carrollton and the taxpayer.











   (B)   (1)    Each taxpayer that claims a credit shall submit,
with the taxpayer's tax return, documentation issued by the City of West
Carrollton granting the credit that confirms the eligibility of the taxpayer
for the credit, the amount of the credit for which the taxpayer is eligible,
and the tax year to which the credit is to be applied.











      (2)    Such documentation shall be provided in the form
prescribed by the tax commissioner.











      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize
the tax commissioner to enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to grant a
credit, to determine if a taxpayer meets the conditions of a tax credit
agreement entered into by the City of West Carrollton and taxpayer under
section 94.5.064 or 94.5.065  of the Codified Ordinances, or to modify the
terms or conditions of any such existing agreement.





(Ord. 3629.  Passed 2-27-18.)










94.6.16   RECKLESS VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.










   (A)    Except as provided in division (B) of this section, whoever
recklessly violates division (A) of section 94.6.11 of the Codified
Ordinances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or imprisonment for a
term of up to six months, or both.











   (B)    Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of
division (A) of section 94.6.11 of the Codified Ordinances constitutes a
separate offense.











   (C)    These specific penalties shall not be construed to prevent
the City of West Carrollton from prosecuting any and all other offenses that
may apply.





(Ord. 3629.  Passed 2-27-18.)

































Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 95
PARKS AND RECREATION









Section










Rates










95.01   Fees and charges related to the Parks and Recreation Department





95.02   Use and conformance with rules and regulations





95.03   Softball tournament fees










Rules and Regulations










95.10   Removal, destruction of property





95.11   Deposit of materials





95.12   Fires





95.13   Camping





95.14   Weapons





95.15   Commercial activities





95.16   Hours





95.17   Traffic





95.18   Water areas





95.19   Beer or intoxicating liquor





95.20   Horses and other animals; hunting





95.21   Applicability of other ordinances




 



Swimming Pool



 




95.30   Fees











95.99   Penalty




 




RATES




 



95.01  FEES AND CHARGES RELATED TO THE  PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT.




   The following fees and charges are hereby established:




 



 


 

Resident

 

Non-Resident




(A)

 

Softball Diamonds (Per Diamond):





 

(1)   Reservation and clean-up deposit (refundable)

 

$50.00

 

$50.00





 

(2)   Fee per field per day

 

50.00

 

70.00





 

This reservation fee will automatically become the damage and clean-up fee
which will be returned if everything is in order.










   (B)   Youth Sports:





      (1)   Basketball.





      (2)   Cheerleading.





      (3)   Swim Team.










   Fees to be established by the corresponding Board of Directors with
review by Parks and Recreation Director.










   (C)   Recreation Fund Programs (70%/15%/15%):





      (1)   Contractual instructors:  Fees to be established by the
contractor with review by the Parks and Recreation Director.  Fifteen
percent (15%) of all fees collected shall be paid to the City’s General
Fund, and fifteen percent (15%) of all fees collected shall remain in the
Recreation Fund.





      (2)   Adult sports:





         (a)   Softball.





         (b)   Volleyball.










   Fees to be established annually by the Parks and Recreation Director
with the approval of the City Manager.  Fifteen percent (15%) of all fees
collected shall be paid to the City’s General Fund, and fifteen percent
(15%) of all fees collected shall remain in the Recreation Fund.









 



 


 

Resident

 

Non-Resident




(D)

 

Reservation fee and deposit for use of Senior Citizens/Community Center:





 

(1)   Deposit (refundable)

 

$50.00

 

$50.00





 

(2)   Fee

 

50.00

 

100.00










      Both deposit and fee are required to reserve the facility.  If
the facility is clean and returned to its original condition, $50.00 will be
refunded.










      Non-profit resident civic groups and churches are not required to
pay the $50.00 usage fee, but are still required to put up a $50.00 deposit.










   (E)   The resident fee will be extended to non-residents who either
pay West Carrollton City income tax or property taxes on property which they
own within the City.





(Res. 3-2005.  Passed 2-8-05.)









95.02  USE AND CONFORMANCE WITH RULES  AND REGULATIONS.




   Time and manner of use of the recreation facilities will be according
to rules and regulations established and approved by the parks and recreation
director.  The right to waive fees for special events and groups shall be
recommended by the parks and recreation director,  and  approved  by 
the  city  manager. 
(Ord. 1831, passed 3-12-74)  Penalty, see § 95.99









95.03  SOFTBALL TOURNAMENT FEES.




   The following softball tournament fees are hereby established:





   (A)   Reservation fee.  $50 is required to hold the fields for each
tournament.  This reservation fee will automatically become the damage and
clean up fee which will be returned if everything is in order.










   (B)   Diamond fee.  $25 per diamond per day for residents; $35 per
diamond per day for nonresidents.





(Res. 7-83, passed 3-8-83; amend. Res. 6-94, passed 2-8-94)










RULES AND REGULATIONS









95.10  REMOVAL, DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.




   (A)   No person shall remove from a park or write upon, cut,
mutilate, deface, or damage any building, equipment, or other property which
is owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the city.










   (B)   No person shall dig, move, or carry away any rock, stone, sod,
sand, earth, tree, wood, shrub, plant, flowers, or seed in a park, or trample
upon, injure, destroy, break, cut, chop, or deface any stone, tree, shrub,
plant, or flower in a park.










   (C)   No person shall remove any property, or part thereof which is
owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the city from a park, without the
written permission of the city.










   (D)   The divisions of this section shall not apply to the city in
the development, construction, maintenance, and conservation of park areas or
activities performed in the best interest of the city.





(Ord. 2056, passed 1-24-78)  Penalty, see § 95.99









95.11  DEPOSIT OF MATERIALS.




   (A)   No person shall deposit or discard in or adjacent to a park
any paper, garbage, fireplace or stove ashes, refuse, or other noxious or
waste material, other than in receptacles provided for the disposal of these
materials.










   (B)   No person shall bring into a park any garbage, ashes, refuse,
or other noxious or waste material, and deposit or discard the same in or
adjacent to a park.










   (C)   No person shall, while in or adjacent to a park, discharge,
throw, drop, or cause to flow into park waters any noxious or deleterious
substance, either solid or liquid.










   (D)   The divisions of this section shall not apply to the city in
the development, construction, maintenance, and conservation of park areas or
activities performed in the best interest of the city.





(Ord. 2056, passed 1-24-78)  Penalty, see § 95.99









95.12  FIRES.




   No person shall:





   (A)   Start or maintain a fire in a park, except in a fireplace or
at a site designated;










   (B)   Start a fire in a park, and leave the vicinity without fully
extinguishing the fire;










   (C)   Scatter coals other than in receptacles provided; or










   (D)   Burn wood found in a park, except as provided by the city in
designated containers. 
(Ord. 2056, passed 1-24-78)  Penalty, see § 95.99










95.13  CAMPING.




   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp in a park other than in an
area designated, and with the written permission of the city.





(Ord. 2056, passed 1-24-78)  Penalty, see § 95.99









95.14  WEAPONS.




   No  person in a  park shall carry on or about his person firearms,
air or gas guns, or discharge any missile throwing device except in areas so
designated for archery purposes.  This section shall not apply to any duly
appointed or acting law enforcement officer while in the lawful performance
of his duties. 





(Ord. 2056, passed l-24-78) Penalty, see § 95.99









95.15  COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES.




   No person shall sell or offer for sale any article, privilege, or
service in a park, without written permission from the city.





(Ord. 2056, passed 1-24-78)  Penalty, see § 95.99









95.16  HOURS.




   No person shall enter into or remain in an area of a park at the time
when the area is not open to the public.  Hours shall be established by the
city manager, and posted in the park.  The parks and recreation director or
police shift supervisor in charge at the time shall be authorized to close a
park if the public safety requires. 
(Ord. 2056, passed 1-24-78)  Penalty, see § 95.99









95.17  TRAFFIC.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:




      (1)   Operate a motor vehicle, whether licensed or unlicensed,
in a park, except on and within the paths and roads provided for motor
vehicles.  No person shall drive a motor vehicle, licensed or unlicensed, on
paths or roads to be only for the use of specific types of vehicles.





      (2)   Operate a motor vehicle in a park in excess of the
posted speed limit.





      (3)   Park any vehicle in a park except in places designated
by the city for that purpose.





      (4)   Park or leave a vehicle in an area of a park at a time
when the area is not open to the public.





      (5)   Drive a vehicle on a road or path in a park in a
direction other than the direction indicated by signs designating the road or
path a one-way road.





      (6)   Operate  a motorized bicycle, commonly known as a
“Moped,” as the term is defined in R.C. § 4511.01(G), on lands, paved
walks, or paths on any property owned or controlled by the city, except
within those areas specifically designated for motorized vehicular traffic.





      (7)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to
vehicles used in the maintenance of city property, nor to city vehicles
operated on city property by city employees, nor to vehicles operated on city
property pursuant to a public event sponsored or approved by the city, nor to
emergency or police vehicles.










   (B)   Any vehicle parked in violation of this section may be removed
by a police officer to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(Ord. 2056, passed 1-24-78)  Penalty, see § 95.99





Cross-reference:





   Use of motor vehicles in city parks, § 72.41









95.18  WATER AREAS.




   It shall be unlawful for any person to swim in any park pond, or to
operate any boat on any park ponds, except with written permission.





(Ord. 2056, passed 1-24-78)  Penalty, see § 95.99









95.19  BEER OR INTOXICATING LIQUOR.




   (A)   No person shall sell or consume any intoxicating liquor or
beer in or upon a city owned or controlled park, playground, building, or
other premises.










   (B)   No person shall possess or have control over any intoxicating
liquor or beer in or upon any city owned or controlled park, playground,
building, or other premises. 
(Ord. 2056, passed 1-24-78)  Penalty, see § 95.99









95.20  HORSES AND OTHER ANIMALS; HUNTING.




   (A)   No person being the owner of or having charge or care of a
horse, mule, jackass, or other animal, shall take them or permit them to be
in or upon any city owned or operated park or recreational facility.










   (B)   No  person shall hunt, trap, or in any other way abuse,
molest, injure, or chase or destroy any animal or bird within a park. This
section shall not apply to any public safety or humane society officers
acting within the scope of their authority.





(Ord. 2056, passed 1-24-78)  Penalty, see § 95.99









95.21  APPLICABILITY OF OTHER ORDINANCES.




   This chapter shall not be construed to preclude the applicability of
any other provision of the city ordinances or state statutes, unless the
provision is inconsistent with the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 2056, passed 1-24-78)  Penalty, see § 95.99










SWIMMING POOL









95.30  FEES.




   (A)   The following fees are hereby established for use of the West
Carrollton Swimming Pool:




 




(1)

 

Daily Admission Rates





 


 

Resident

 

Resident
(after 5 p.m.)





 

Children (0 - 3 years of age)

 

Free

 

Free





 

Youth (age 4 to 17)

 

$3.00

 

$1.50





 

Adult (age 18 and over)

 

$3.75

 

$2.00





 

Senior (age 55 and over)

 

$3.00

 

$1.50





 


 

Non-Resident

 

Non-Resident
(after 5 p.m.)





 

Children (0 - 3 years of age)

 

Free

 

Free





 

Youth (age 4 to 17)

 

$4.25

 

$2.25





 

Adult (age 18 and over)

 

$5.00

 

$2.50





 

Senior (age 55 and over)

 

$4.25

 

$2.25




(2)

 

10 Admission Passes





 


 

Resident

 

Non-Resident





 

Youth (age 4 - 17)

 

$27.00

 

$38.25





 

Adult (age 18 and over)

 

33.75

 

45.00





 

Senior (age 55 and over)

 

27.00

 

38.25




(3)

 

Pre-Season Passes (Prior to Pool Opening)





 


 

Resident

 

Non-Resident





 

Youth

 

$55.00

 

$70.00





 

Adult

 

65.00

 

80.00





 

Senior

 

55.00

 

70.00





 

Family (4 pass limit)

 

140.00

 

170.00





 

(each extra person over limit)

 

20.00

 

30.00




(4)

 

Season Passes (After Pool Opens)





 


 

Resident

 

Non-Resident





 

Youth

 

$60.00

 

$75.00





 

Adult

 

70.00

 

85.00





 

Senior

 

60.00

 

75.00





 

Family (4 pass limit)

 

150.00

 

180.00





 

(each extra person over limit)

 

20.00

 

30.00











Family Pass is limited to a maximum of 4 passes in any combination of
adult(s) or children permanently residing in the same household.  Additional
adult(s) or children permanently residing in same household are subject to
the above “extra person” fee.










Note:  50% discount on season pass purchase after July 24, 2006, for the
2006 pool season.










West Carrollton YMCA Discount:





   Current members of the West Carrollton YMCA shall receive a 15%
discount on the purchase of both pre-season and season pool passes.  This
includes both resident rates and non-resident rates.





(Res. 5-2006.  Passed 2-28-05.)










City Employee Discount:





   Employees of the City of West Carrollton shall receive a 50% discount
on both Pre-Season Passes and Season Passes.





(Res. 20-2006.  Passed 6-27-06.)




 



 


 

Resident

 

Non-Resident




(5)

 

Swim Lessons





 

Youth and adult

 

$30.00

 

$35.00




(6)

 

Birthday Party Rates:





 

Youth

 

$5.25

 

$6.00





 

Adult

 

6.00

 

6.75










      (7)   Special Group Rental Fee





         (a)   Residents: $175.00 per hour, minimum charge
$350.00, plus a $50.00 deposit, for 100 or fewer persons; $200.00 per hour,
minimum charge $400.00, plus a $50.00 deposit, for more than 100 persons;
$225.00 per hour, minimum charge $450.00, plus a $50.00 deposit, for more
than 300 persons.





         (b)   Non-residents: $175.00 per hour; minimum charge
$350.00, plus a $50.00 deposit, for 100 or fewer persons; $200.00 per hour,
minimum charge $400.00, plus a $50.00 deposit, for more than 100 persons;
$225.00 per hour, minimum charge $450.00, plus a $50.00 deposit for more than
300 persons.










   (B)   The resident fee will be given to nonresidents who either pay
city income tax or property taxes on property which they own within the city.










   (C)   Time and manner of use will be according to rules and
regulations established and approved by the Director of Parks and Recreation.





(Res.  5-2006.  Passed 2-28-06.)









95.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not already provided shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor, and
shall be fined not more than $100. 





(Ord. 2056, passed 1-24-78)
























CHAPTER 96
LOST OR ABANDONED PROPERTY









Section










96.01   City's possession of lost or abandoned property





96.02   Locating the owner





96.03   Establishing right to property





96.04   Disposal of unclaimed property




 



96.01  CITY'S POSSESSION OF LOST OR  ABANDONED PROPERTY.




   When the city comes into possession of property that has been lost,
abandoned, stolen, or lawfully seized or forfeited, the property shall be
safely kept until it is no longer needed as evidence and then disposed of
according to rules and regulations established by the City Manager.





(Ord. 2465, passed 9-11-84)









96.02  LOCATING THE OWNER.




   The city shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or person
entitled to possession of the property and to notify him of when and where it
may be claimed.  If the owner or person entitled to possession of the
property is unknown, the city shall advertise in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city once per week for three consecutive weeks, briefly
describing the property in possession of the city, and inviting persons to
view and establish their right to it.





(Ord. 2465, passed 9-11-84)









96.03  ESTABLISHING RIGHT TO PROPERTY.




   In order to establish his right to such property, a person must file a
claim with the city within 30 days of the date of the last publication notice
and shall be filed under rules and regulations adopted by the City Manager.





(Ord. 2465, passed 9-11-84)









96.04  DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.




   If no claim to such property is filed within the time herein stated, or
if the City Manager determines that no valid claim to such property has been
filed, then the property shall be disposed of according to rules and
regulations adopted by the City Manager.





(Ord. 2465, passed 9-11-84)
























CHAPTER 97
RIGHTS OF WAY









Section










97.01   Declaration of findings and purpose, scope and definitions





97.02   General requirements





97.03   Certification of registration applications and responsibilities





97.04   Termination of certificate of registration





97.05   Revocable street permit requirements





97.06   Indemnification and liability





97.07   Penalties for violation, liquidated damages and rights of appeal.




 



97.01 DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE, SCOPE AND  DEFINITIONS.




   (A)    Findings and Purpose.





      (1)   The City of West Carrollton, Ohio is vitally concerned
with the use of the various Rights of Way in the City as such Rights of Way
are a valuable and limited resource, which must be utilized to promote the
public health, safety and welfare, including the  economic development of
the City.





      (2)   Changes in the utilities and communication industries
have increased the demand and need for access to Public Rights of Way and
placement of Facilities and structures herein.





      (3)   It is necessary to comprehensively plan and manage
access to, and structures and Facilities in, the Public Rights of Way to
promote efficiency, lessen the public inconvenience of uncoordinated work in
the Rights of Way, and promote public safety.





      (4)   In recognition of the limited space available in the
City Rights of Way, the City shall promote the collocation of utilities to
minimize intrusions into the Rights of Way.





      (5)   While not a principal purpose of this chapter, an
ingredient or component of this chapter is to protect the public welfare by
protecting real estate from impairment and destruction of value by taking
into account aesthetic considerations in the requirement by the City, when it
would be practical in the opinion of the City, the underground  placement of
any Element of a public or private Utility System located in the Public
Rights of Way may be required.





      (6)   The City has rights under the Laws and Constitution of
the State of Ohio, including but not limited to Article 18, Sections 3, 4,
and 7, to regulate public and private entities which use the Public Rights of
Way.










   (B)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all users
of the Rights of Way as provided herein, except as provided elsewhere in the
Codified Ordinances of City of West Carrollton. To the extent that any
provision in this chapter conflicts with other provisions of the Codified
Ordinances of West Carrollton, or provisions of the Ohio Revised Code, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.










   (C)    Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter of the Codified
Ordinances of City of West Carrollton, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meanings as set forth herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future
tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in
the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will"
are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meanings. References hereafter to "Sections" are, unless
otherwise specified, references to Sections in this chapter. Defined terms
remain defined terms whether or not capitalized.





      (1)   Certificate of Registration means a document issued by
the City to a Utility Service Provider required before any Element of its
Utility System is permitted to be located in the City Public Right of Way.





      (2)   City means the City of West Carrollton, Ohio.





      (3)   City Council means the elected legislative
decision-making body for the City of West Carrollton, Ohio.





      (4)   City Manager means the administrative head of the
municipal government known as the City of West Carrollton, Ohio, or the
official designee appointed by the City Manager to implement all or some of
the provisions of this chapter.





      (5)   Codified Ordinances means the Code of Ordinances of the
City of West Carrollton, Ohio.





      (6)   Element means any tangible thing located in the Public
Right of Way that is part of a Utility System. Electromagnetic radiation that
is not visible to the human eye shall not be considered a tangible thing.





      (7)   Equipment means any Element of a Utility System.





      (8)   Facility or Facilities means any tangible thing located
in the Public Right of Way that is part of a Utility System. Electromagnetic
radiation that is not visible to the human eye shall not be considered a
tangible thing.





      (9)   Law(s) means any local, state, or federal legislation,
judicial or administrative order, certificates, statute, constitution,
ordinance, resolution, regulation, rule, tariff, or other requirement in
effect either at the time of execution of this Title or at any time during
the location of, and/or while a Provider's Facilities are located in, the
Public Rights of Way.





      (10)   Permit means a Revocable Street Permit.





      (11)   Person means any natural or corporate person, business
association, or other business entity including, but not limited to, a
partnership, a sole proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or
private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the
foregoing, or any other legal entity.





      (12)    Provider means a Utility Service Provider.





      (13)    Public Right(s) of Way or Right(s) of Way means the
surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any
real property in which the City has an interest in Law or equity, whether
held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public,
including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway,
freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, path, parkway, river, tunnel, viaduct,
bridge, conduit, easement, or any other place, area, or real property owned
by or under the legal or equitable control of the City that, consistent with
the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of
constructing, operating, repairing or replacing a public or private Utility
System. Public Rights of Way shall not include a public building, public
park, or other public property or easement that has not been dedicated to a
compatible use, except to the extent the use or occupation of such property
is specifically granted in a Permit or approved by Law.





      (14)    Revocable Street Permit means the Permit for special
licenses and privileges that must be obtained from the City Manager pursuant
to City of West Carrollton Codified Ordinance Chapter 92, et seq., which is
entitled "Street and Sidewalk Excavations and Obstructions"and to this
chapter of the Codified Ordinances.





      (15)    System means a Utility System.





      (16)    Title means a Chapter or Title of the Codified
Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton, Ohio.





      (17)    Utility Service Provider means a Person that owns,
operates, or controls a Utility System.





      (18)    Utility System means a functionally related group of
Facilities or Elements that deliver a service, such as but not limited to,
water, sanitary sewage collection, storm water collection, gas, fuel, heat,
steam, electricity, electric powered trolley bus, electric  powered light or
heavy rail transit, telephone, integrated service digital network (ISDN),
cellular telephone, personal communication services (PCS), competitive access
Providers (CAPs) or competitive local exchange carriers (CLECs) that provide
telephone service, paging and signaling systems, satellite phone service,
radio, television, cable television, digital television (DTV), video, open
video services (OVS), wireless television systems, direct broadcast satellite
(DBS) video systems, telecommunications, data transmission, fibre optic
network information transmission, private fibre optic data transmission lines
between buildings, computer interconnection, roadway traffic signal
interconnection, Internet computer access including e- mail communications,
rail transportation, or water transportation. 
(Ord. 3166. Passed 8-8-2000.)









97.02  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Administration. The City Manager shall be the principal City
official responsible for the administration of this chapter except as
otherwise provided herein. The City Manager may delegate any or all of the
duties hereunder to an official designee.










   (B)    Utility Service Provider Required to Have Certificate of
Registration. No Utility Service Provider shall occupy or use the City Public
Rights of Way without having a valid Certificate of Registration issued by
City pursuant to this chapter. Use shall include construction, maintenance,
or the performance of any work on a Utility System.










   (C)    Utility System in Place Without a Valid Certificate of
Registration. Beginning one year after the effective date of this section,
any Utility System or Element of a Utility System located in a Public Right
of Way in the City for which a valid Certificate of Registration for the
Utility Service Provider is required and has not been obtained from the City
shall be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the Public Right
of Way. The City may exercise any remedies or rights it has, including, but
not limited  to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the Utility
System or any Element of the Utility System; and/or prosecuting the violator.










   (D)    When Permit Required by a Utility Service Provider.





      (1)   If the location or proposed location of any Element of a
public or private Utility System is in a Public Right of Way, then, the
consent of the City, evidenced by the issuance by the City of a Revocable
Street Permit in accordance with Chapter 92 of the Codified Ordinances, must
be obtained by that Utility Service Provider before the construction,
demolition or removal of any Element of the Utility System is permitted or
any excavation by that Utility Service Provider in the Public Right of Way is
permitted.





      (2)   This chapter does not require any Utility Service
Provider that, as of the effective date of this section, occupies, or has
obtained the consent of a City to occupy, a Public Right of Way in the City,
to apply for additional or continued consent of the City as to any existing
lines, poles, pipes, conduits, ducts, Equipment, and related appurtenances
and Facilities that are in place on the effective date of this section.










   (E)    Utility Service Provider Not Exempt from Permit Requirement
or Revocation of The Permit. No language or provisions set forth in City of
West Carrollton Codified Ordinance Chapter 92, et seq. shall be interpreted
as exempting a Utility Service Provider from the requirement of obtaining a
Revocable Street Permit or providing a Utility Service Provider an exception
to the power of the City Manager to revoke any such Permit issued.










   (F)   Exemptions.





      (1)   The City shall not be required to obtain a Certificate
of Registration for any Utility System for which the City is the Utility
Service Provider.





      (2)   In the case where a Utility Service Provider has a valid
franchise agreement with the City and the City Manager is of the opinion that
one or more of the requirements of this chapter of the Codified Ordinances
are adequately addressed in that franchise agreement; then, the City Manager,
at his or her sole discretion, may exempt such a Utility Service Provider
from one or more of the requirements of this chapter of the Codified
Ordinances.










   (G)    Severability. If any Section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof. If a regulatory body or a court of competent
jurisdiction should determine by a final, non-appealable order that any
Permit, right or any portions of this chapter are illegal or unenforceable,
then any such Permit or right granted or deemed to exist hereunder shall be
considered as a Revocable Street Permit with a mutual right in either party
to terminate without cause upon giving sixty (60) days written notice to the
other. The requirements and conditions of such a Revocable Street Permit
shall be the same requirements and conditions as set forth in the Permit,
right or registration, respectively, except for conditions relating to the
term of the Permit and the right of termination. If a Permit or right shall
be considered a Revocable Street Permit as provided  herein, the Provider
must acknowledge the authority of the City to issue such Permit and the power
to revoke it.










   (H)     Reservation of Regulatory And Police Powers. The City, by
the granting of a Permit, or by issuing a Certificate of Registration under
this Title, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or
lessen the lawful  powers and rights, which it has or may hereafter have,
which are vested in the City under the  Constitution and Laws of the United
States, state of Ohio, and under the Charter of the City of  West Carrollton
to regulate the use of the Rights of Way. The Provider by its acceptance of a
Permit, or by applying for and being issued a Certificate of Registration,
agrees that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power,
or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or
reserved to the City, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the
exercise thereof by the City at any time. A Provider is deemed to acknowledge
that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the City
to adopt and enforce general  ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare
of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general
Laws enacted by the City pursuant to such powers.










   (I)     Method of Service. Any notice or order of the City or City
Manager shall be deemed to be properly  served if a copy thereof is
delivered personally; or successfully transmitted via facsimile transmission
to the last known fax number of the Person to be served; or left at the usual
place of business of the Person to whom it is to be served upon and with
someone who is 18 years of age or order; or sent by certified, pre-paid U.S.
mail to the last known address; or if the notice is attempted to be served by
certified, pre-paid U.S. mail and then returned showing that the letter was
not delivered, or the certified letter is not returned within fourteen (14)
days after the date of mailing, then notice may be sent by regular, pre-paid,
first-class U.S. mail; or if the notice is attempted to be served by regular,
first class U.S. mail, postage prepaid, the letter is then returned showing
that the letter was not delivered, or is not returned within fourteen (14)
days after the date of mailing, then notice shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in or about the structure, building, premises or property affected by
such notice.










   (J)     Applies to All Providers. This Title shall apply to all
Providers unless expressly exempted.










   (K)     Police Powers. All Persons’ rights are subject to the
police powers of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. All Persons shall
comply with all applicable Laws enacted by the City pursuant to its police or
other powers. In particular, all Persons shall comply with City zoning and
other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of
Facilities.










   (L)   Compliance. No Person shall be relieved of his/her obligation
to comply with any of the provisions of this Title by reason of any failure
of the City to enforce prompt compliance.










   (M)   Choice of Law And Forum. This Title and the terms and
conditions of any Certificate of Registration or Permit shall be construed
and enforced in accordance with the substantive Laws of the State of Ohio.
All Providers, as a condition for the grant of any Permit or issuance of any
Certificate of Registration, agree that all disputes shall be resolved in the
court of competent jurisdiction in  Montgomery County, Ohio or as otherwise
agreed to in writing by the City.










   (N)    Force Majeure. In the event any Person's performance of any
of the terms, conditions, or obligations required by this chapter is
prevented by a cause or event not within such Person's  control, such
inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions
shall be imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this Chapter, causes
or events not within the control of a Provider shall include, without
limitation, acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances,
explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods,
earthquakes, landslides, and fires.










   (O)    No Warranty. The City makes no representation or warranty
regarding its right to authorize the construction of Facilities on any
particular Rights of Way. The burden and responsibility for making such
determination shall be upon the Person constructing Facilities in the Rights
of Way.










   (P)    Continuing Obligation and Holdover. In the event a Provider
continues to operate all or any part of the Facilities after the term of a
Certificate of Registration, such Provider shall continue to comply with all
applicable provisions of this Title and other laws throughout the period of
such continued operation, provided that any such continued operation shall in
no way be construed as a renewal or other extension of the Certificate of
Registration, nor as a limitation on the remedies, if any, available to the
City as a result of such continued operation after the term, including, but
not limited to, damages and restitution. Any conflict between the issuance of
a Certificate of Registration or of a Permit and any other present or future
lawful exercise of the City's regulatory or police powers shall be resolved
in favor of the latter.










   (Q)     Appeals. All appeals provided for by this chapter and any
notification to the City required by this chapter shall be in writing and
sent via certified mail to the City Manager as specified in





Section 97.07.










   (R)    City Standards. As part of City required standards wherever
Rights of Way are under construction, if deemed advisable and practicable by
the City Manager, the City may install all such Facilities deemed necessary
to accommodate future Provider needs. Any such installed Facilities shall be
City property and may be conveyed to any Person under such terms and
conditions as are deemed advisable by the City Manager.










   (S)     Chapter And Section Headings. Chapter and Section headings
are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of
this chapter.





(Ord. 3166. Passed 8-8-2000.)









97.03 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION APPLICATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.




   (A)    Certificate of Registration Applications.





      (1)   Unless exempted in this chapter, a valid Certificate of
Registration shall be required for each Utility Service Provider with any
Element of a Utility System located in a Public Right of Way in the City.





      (2)   The Utility Service Provider shall apply to the City
Manager for a Certificate of Registration or the renewal of a Certificate of
Registration. The City Manager shall determine the form of the application.
An application shall include the following information and fee:





         (a)   Detailed identification information about the
Utility Service Provider; a copy of the current incorporation certificate of
the applicant, if applicable; both regular and emergency contact information
for the Utility Service Provider; a brief description of each utility service
provided or proposed to be provided; a copy of each approval required by law,
by any applicable authority, to provide any utility service described in the
application; evidence of reasonable insurance coverage by the Utility Service
Provider; and, any other relevant information the City Manager deems
necessary to determine the fitness of the Utility Service Provider.





         (b)   If requested by the City Manager or the applicant,
the applicant Utility Service Provider and the City shall meet to coordinate
future plans for the Public Right of Way between the Utility Service Provider
and the City.





         (c)   An application fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00) shall be paid to the City at the time an application for a
Certificate of Registration is filed with the City. No part of an application
fee is returnable to the applicant.










   (B)    Maximum Decision Time. Unless the applicant agrees to an
extension of the maximum decision time, the City shall have a maximum time
period of one hundred twenty (120) consecutive calender days from the date a
complete application for a Certificate of Registration by a Utility Service
Provider is received by the City to make a decision on the application.
Unless the applicant  agrees to an extension of the maximum decision time,
failure of the City to make a decision on an application for a Certificate of
Registration shall be considered the same as an approval of the application
by the City.










   (C)    Criteria for Issuance. In deciding whether to issue a
Certificate of Registration, the City Manager shall consider: whether the
issuing of the Certificate of Registration will contribute to the  health,
safety, and welfare of the City and its citizens; whether issuing of the
Certificate of Registration will be consistent with this chapter; whether the
applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all
certificates and other authorizations required by law in order to construct
and operate a system in the manner proposed by the applicant; whether the
applicant is delinquent on any taxes or other obligations owed to the City,
Montgomery County, Ohio, or the State of Ohio; whether the applicant has the
requisite financial, managerial, and technical ability to fulfill all the
obligations under this Ordinance and the issuance of a Certificate of
Registration; and, any other applicable law.









   (D)    Denial of Application. The City Manager shall have right to
deny an application for a Certificate of Registration for adequate cause. If
requested in writing by the applicant, the City Manager must provide to the
applicant in written form specific factual findings in support of the
decision by the City Manager to deny the application for a Certificate of
Registration. Any decision by the City Manager to deny an application for a
Certificate of Registration is appealable by the applicant to the City
Council in the manner set forth in Section 97.07.









       (E)    Expiration of Certificate of Registration. Unless
terminated by the City at an earlier date, a Certificate of Registration
shall expire one year from the date of issuance by the City.










   (F)     Responsibilities of a Utility Service Provider With a Valid
Certificate of Registration.





      (1)   When required by the Codified Ordinances, a Utility
Service Provider with a valid Certificate of Registration must obtain a
Revocable Street Permit.





      (2)   The Provider must keep all information required in the
application by the City current.





      (3)   When requested by the City, a public or private Utility
Service Provider with a Utility System Element located or proposed to be
located in a Public Right of Way in the City must meet with the City to
coordinate future plans for the Public Right of Way between the Utility
Service Provider and the City.





      (4)   A Utility Service Provider with any Utility System
Element located or proposed to be located in a Right of Way in the City must
provide the City with up-to-date accurate plans in sufficient detail and in a
format acceptable to the City showing the location of  all Elements of the
Utility System located in the Right of Way in the City. 





      (5)   In addition to a Certificate of Registration, Providers
shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations, or
licenses necessary for the offering or provision of such services from the
appropriate federal, state and local authorities and upon the City's
reasonable request, shall provide copies of such documents to the City.





      (6)   A Certificate of Registration issued pursuant to this
chapter shall not entitle a Provider to use, alter, convert to, or interfere
with, the Facilities, easements, poles, conduits, lines, pipelines, wires,
fiber, cable, or any other real or personal property of any kind whatsoever
under the management or control of the City or under the management or
control of another Utility Provider that is legally occupying the City Right
of Way.










   (G)     Nature of Issuance.  A Certificate of Registration shall
not convey equitable or legal title in the  Rights of Way. A Certificate of
Registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy Rights of Way
in the City for the limited purpose and for the limited period stated in the
Certificate of Registration and in accordance with this chapter and any
associated Permit. For those Providers with a valid gas or electric
franchise, the provisions of a Certificate of  Registration shall be deemed
as regulatory in nature and shall not be interpreted to limit the right to
occupy the Rights of Way which may have been granted by such franchise. The
rights to occupy the Right of Way itself may not be subdivided or subleased;
provided, however, that two or more Providers may collocate Facilities in the
same area of the Rights of Way so long  as each such Provider complies with
the provisions of this chapter. A Certificate of Registration does not excuse
a Provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements
before collocating its Facilities on Facilities of others, including the
City's Facilities. A Certificate of Registration does not prevent a Provider
from leasing space in or on the Provider's System, so long as the sharing of
Facilities does not cause a violation of Law, including the provisions of
this chapter. A Certificate of Registration does not excuse a Provider from
complying with any provisions of this chapter and other applicable Law.










   (H)   Relocation of Equipment.





      (1)   A Provider must promptly and at its own expense, with
due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate
its Equipment and Facilities in the Right of Way whenever the City Manager
requests such removal and relocation, and shall restore the Right of Way to
the same condition it was in prior to said removal or relocation.





The City Manager may make such request to prevent interference by the
Company's Equipment or Facilities with (i) a present or future City use of
the Right of Way, (ii) a public improvement undertaken by the City, (iii) an
economic development project in which the City has an interest or investment,
(iv) when the public health, safety and welfare require it, or (v) when
necessary to prevent interference with the safety and convenience of ordinary
travel over the Right of Way.





      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Person shall not be
required to remove or relocate its Equipment from any Right of Way which has
been vacated in favor of a non-municipal entity unless and until the
reasonable costs thereof are first paid to the Person therefor.










   (I)    Pre-excavation Equipment Location. Before the start date of
any Right of Way excavation, each Provider who has Equipment in the area to
be excavated shall contact Ohio Utility Protection Service (OUPS) and shall
mark the horizontal and approximate vertical placement of all said Equipment.
Any Provider whose Equipment is estimated to be less than twenty (20) inches
below a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the
excavation contractor to establish the exact location of its Equipment and
the best procedure for excavation.










   (J)    Damage to Other Equipment.





      (1)   When the City does or causes to be done work in the
Right of Way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move a
Provider's Equipment to protect it, the City Manager shall notify the local
representative as early as is reasonably possible. The costs associated
therewith will be billed to that Provider and must be paid within thirty (30)
days from the date of billing.





      (2)   Each Provider shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any Equipment in the Right of Way which it or its Equipment
damages. Each Provider shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
damage to the Equipment of another Provider caused during the City's response
to an emergency occasioned by that Provider's Equipment.










   (K)    Right of Way Vacation.





      (1)   If the City vacates a Right of Way which contains the
Equipment of a Provider, and if the vacation does not require the relocation
of the Provider's Equipment, the City shall reserve, to and for itself and
all Providers having Equipment in the vacated Right of Way, the right to
install, maintain and operate any Equipment in the vacated Right of Way and
to enter upon such Right of Way at any time for the purpose of
reconstructing, inspecting, maintaining or repairing the same.





      (2)   If the vacation requires the relocation of the
Provider's Equipment; and (a) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by
the Provider, the Provider must pay the relocation costs; or (b) if the
vacation proceedings are initiated by the City, the Provider must pay the
relocation costs unless otherwise agreed to by the City and the Provider; or
(c) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by a Person or Persons other
than the Provider, such other Person or Persons must pay the relocation costs.










   (L)   Discontinued Operations And Abandoned Equipment.





      (1)   Discontinued Operations. A Provider who has determined
to discontinue its operations in the City must either:





         (a)   Provide information satisfactory to the City
Manager that the Provider's obligations for its Equipment in the Right of Way
under this Title have been lawfully assumed by another Provider; or





         (b)   Submit to the City Manager a proposal and
instruments for transferring ownership of its Equipment to the City. If a
Provider proceeds under this clause, the City may, at its option: purchase
the Equipment; require the Provider, at its own expense, to remove it; or
require the Provider to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the
City for reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the
Equipment.





      (2)   Abandoned Equipment. Equipment of a Provider who fails
to comply with the discontinued operations provisions of this chapter and
which remains unused shall be deemed to be abandoned. Unused Equipment means
Facilities located in the Rights of Way which have remained unused for a
period of two years and for which the Provider is unable to: (i) provide the
City with a credible plan detailing the procedure by which the Provider
intends to begin actively using such Facilities within the next twelve
months; or (ii) that it has a  potential purchaser or user of the Facilities
who will be actively using the Facilities within the next twelve months; or
(iii) that the availability of such Facilities is required by the Provider
to  adequately and efficiently operate its System. Abandoned Equipment is
deemed to be a nuisance. The City may exercise any remedies or rights it has
at law or in equity, including, but not limited to: (i) abating the nuisance;
(ii) taking possession of the Equipment and restoring it to a useable
condition; or (iii) requiring removal of the Equipment by the Provider, or
the Provider's successor in interest.





      (3)   Removal. Any Provider who has unused and abandoned
Equipment in  any Right of Way shall remove it from that Right of Way during
the next scheduled excavation, or at such different time as designated by the
City Manager, unless this requirement is waived by the City Manager.





      (4)   In the event of any conflict with the provisions of
subsection (L) hereof with Federal law known as the Miller Act, the
provisions of the Miller Act shall control.





(Ord. 3166. Passed 8-8-2000.)









97.04  TERMINATION OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.




   (A)     Written Notice of Violation. The City Manager shall give
written notice of violation to a Provider if it is determined that a Provider
has: violated any material provision or requirement of the issuance or
acceptance of a Certificate of Registration or any Law of the City, state, or
federal  government; or attempted to evade any provision or requirement of
the issuance of a Certificate of Registration or the acceptance of it; or
practiced any fraud or deceit upon the City; or made a material
misrepresentation of fact in its Application for a Certificate of
Registration.










   (B)   Failure to Cure Violation. If a Provider fails to cure a
violation within thirty (30) calendar days after such notice is served by the
City then such violation shall be a material breach and City may exercise any
remedies or rights it has at Law or in equity to terminate the Certificate of
Registration. If the City Manager decides there is cause or reason to
terminate, the following procedure shall be followed:





      (1)   City shall serve a Provider with a written notice of the
reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a Provider a minimum
of ten (10) calendar days to cure its breach.





      (2)   If the Provider fails to cure within ten (10) calendar
days, the City Manager may declare the Certificate of Registration terminated.





      (3)   The determination of the City Manager shall be final.





(Ord. 3166. Passed 8-8-2000.)









97.05  REVOCABLE STREET PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)     Application for Permit. An application for a Revocable
Street Permit shall be in accordance with Chapter 92 of the Codified
Ordinances including any additional requirements contained in this Chapter 97
of the Codified Ordinances.










   (B)    Permit Requirements. The requirements in this chapter shall
be in addition to any requirement set forth in Codified Ordinances Chapter
92, et seq. 





      (1)   A Utility Service Provider must have a valid Certificate
of Registration on File with the City, or be exempt under Section 97.02(F),
before the City may issue a Revocable Street Permit.





      (2)   When practical, in the opinion of the City, the policy
of the City is to require the underground location of a new Utility System
Element in the Public Right of Way.





      (3)   The construction, demolition, or removal of any Element
of a Utility System in a Public Right of Way by a Utility Service Provider
must be accomplished in a practical manner which, in the opinion of the City,
results in the least potential amount of damage and disruption of the Public
Right of Way.





      (4)   The Permit applicant shall provide a specific timetable
for the work covered under the Permit application to be accomplished
including: detailed plans, accurate scale drawings, and specifications in
sufficient detail acceptable to the City to describe the area of work covered
in the Permit application. In addition, the City may require the applicant to
provide up-to-date, accurate, comprehensive master plans of the existing and
proposed Utility System. These master plans are intended to allow the City to
consider the broader context of the Utility Service Provider's plans upon
which the Permit application is based.










   (C)     Limitations on Placement of Utility System Elements And/or
Permissive Denial of Permit.





      (1)   To protect the public health, safety, and welfare in
recognition of the limitation of space in the Public Right of Way, the City
Manager shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of a new
Utility System or additional Elements of an existing Utility System within a
Public Right of Way if there is insufficient space to accommodate all of the
requests of Persons to occupy and use the Public Right of Way. In making such
decisions, the City Manager shall strive to the extent possible to
accommodate all existing and potential users of the Public Right of Way, but
shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the
public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the
Public Right of Way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities,
the protection of existing Elements of Utility Systems in the Public Right of
Way, and future City plans for public improvements and development projects
which have been determined to be in the public interest.





      (2)   The City Manager may deny a Permit to protect the public
health, safety and welfare, to prevent interference with the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel over the Public Right of Way, or when
necessary to protect the Public Right of Way and its users. The City Manager,
in his or her discretion, may consider one of more of the following factors:
the extent to which Public Right of Way space where the Permit is sought is
available; the competing demands for the particular space in the Right of
Way; the availability of other locations in the Public Right of Way or in
other public rights of way for the Utility System Elements of the Permit
applicant; the applicability of ordinance or other regulations of the Right
of Way that affect location of Utility System Elements in the Right of Way;
the degree  of compliance of the applicant with the terms and conditions of
its franchise, this Title, and other applicable ordinances and regulations;
the degree of disruption to surrounding communities and businesses that will
result from the use of that part of the Public Right of Way; the condition
and age of the Public Right of Way, and whether and when it is scheduled for
total or partial reconstruction; the balancing of the costs of disruption to
the public and damage to the Public Right of Way, against the benefits to
that part of the public served by the expansion into additional parts of the
Public Right of Way; and the feasibility of accomplishing the desired goal
outside of the Public Right of Way. 
(Ord. 3166. Passed 8-8-2000.)









97.06  INDEMNIFICATION AND  LIABILITY.




   (A)    City Does Not Accept Liability. By reason of the acceptance
of an application or the grant of a Permit, the City does not assume any
liability: for injuries to Persons, damage to property, or loss of Service
claims; or for claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the
installation, presence, maintenance, or operation of Facilities.










   (B)   Indemnification. By applying for and being issued a
Certificate of Registration with the City a Provider agrees, or by accepting
a Permit a Provider is required and agrees, to defend, indemnify, and hold
harmless the City's agents, elected officials, officers, employees,
volunteers and subcontractors from all costs, liabilities, claims, and suits
for damages of any kind arising out of the construction, presence,
installation, maintenance, repair or operation of its Facilities, or out of
any activity undertaken in or near a Rights of Way, whether any act or
omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by a Permit,
excepting only negligent acts or omissions that are willful and wanton or
intentional torts and for which immunity is not provided by the Ohio Revised
Code for such acts, omissions, or intentional torts. This exception shall not
extend to acts, omissions, or intentional torts occurring as a result of or
in response to an emergency. A Provider further agrees that it will not
bring, nor  cause to be brought, any action, suit or other proceeding
claiming damages, or seeking any other relief against the City's agents,
elected officials, officers, employees, volunteers and subcontractors or any
claim nor for any award arising out of the presence, installation,
maintenance or operation of its Facilities, or any activity undertaken in or
near a Right of Way, whether the act or omission complained of is authorized,
allowed or prohibited by a  Permit. This Chapter is not, as to third
parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the
Provider or to the City; and the Provider, in defending any action on behalf
of the City, if allowable by Law, shall be entitled to assert in any action
every defense or immunity that the City could assert in its own behalf. Any
and all exercises of the above shall be consistent with, but not limited to,
the following:





      (1)   To the fullest extent permitted by Law, each Provider
shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the City, its agents, elected officials, officers, employees,
volunteers and subcontractors from and against any and all lawsuits, claims
(including without limitation Workers’ Compensation claims against the City
or others), causes of action, liability, and judgments for injury or damages
including but not limited to expenses for reasonable legal fees and
disbursements assumed by the City related to the following:





         (a)   Injuries or damages to persons or property, in any
way arising out of or through the acts or omissions of Provider, its
subcontractors, agents or employees attributable to the occupation by the
Provider of the Rights of Way, to which Provider's negligence shall in any
way contribute, and regardless of whether the City's negligence or the
negligence of any other party shall have contributed to such claim, cause of
action, judgment, injury or damage.





         (b)   Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right
of privacy, for defamation of Person, firm or corporation, or the violation
or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or
patent or any other right of any Person, firm and corporation by the
Provider, by excluding claims arising out of or related to City programming.





         (c)   Arising out of Provider's failure to comply with
the provisions of any Law applicable to the Provider.





      (2)   The foregoing indemnification is conditioned upon the
City:





         (a)   Giving Provider reasonable notice of any claim or
the commencement of any action, suit or proceeding for which indemnification
is sought;





         (b)   Affording the Provider the opportunity to fully
participate in any discussions concerning any compromise, settlement, or
other resolution or disposition of any claim or proceeding subject to
indemnification, as well as the sole right to approve any compromise or
settlement or financial commitment, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld;





         (c)   Cooperating in the defense of such claim and
making available to the Provider all pertinent information under the City's
control.





      (3)   The City shall have the right to employ separate counsel
in any such  action or proceeding and to participate in the investigation
and defense thereof, and the Provider shall pay all reasonable fees and
expense of such separate counsel if employed.





(Ord. 3166. Passed 8-8-2000.)









97.07  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION, LIQUIDATED DAMAGES, AND RIGHTS OF APPEAL.




   (A)    Penalties For Violation. It shall be unlawful to violate any
provision of this chapter. Violation of any provision of this chapter or
failure to comply with any requirement of this chapter (including a violation
of a condition or safeguard established in connection with a Certificate of
Registration, Permit, or any other City approval) shall constitute a
misdemeanor of the second degree. Each and every failure to comply shall be
considered a distinct and separate offense. Each day a violation continues
shall be considered a distinct and separate offense.










   (B)   Non-exclusive Remedy. The remedies provided in this chapter
are not exclusive or in lieu of other rights and remedies that the City may
have. The City is hereby authorized at any time to seek legal and equitable
relief for actual or threatened injury to the Rights of Way, including
damages to the Rights of Way, whether caused by a violation or any of the
provisions of this Title or other provisions of applicable Law. 










   (C)    Liquidated Damages. In addition to any other penalties set
forth in this chapter, and the remedy of specific performance which may be
enforced in a court of competent jurisdiction, the City Manager may assess an
additional penalty of civil forfeiture for failure to comply with any
provision of this chapter. Said penalty shall be a monetary sum, payable to
the City, in the amount of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per twenty-four
(24) hour day of violation and any  subsequent portion of a day less than
twenty-four (24) hours in length. Prior to assessing said penalty, the City
Manager shall provide written notice to the Provider detailing the failure to
comply with a specific provision of this chapter. Said notice shall indicate
that said penalty shall be assessed in fifteen (15) calendar days after
receipt of service of the notice if compliance is not achieved. If a Provider
desires to challenge said penalty, Provider shall request a hearing before
the City Manager within ten (10) days of service of the notice. Said hearing
shall be held within thirty (30) days of the Provider's request. If Provider
requests such hearing before  the City Manager, said penalty shall be
temporarily suspended. However, if, after the hearing, the City Manager
determines that Provider failed to comply with the specific provision of this
chapter referenced in the notice, said penalty shall be assessed starting
fifteen (15) calendar days after service of the notice referenced in this
Chapter and continuing for each day thereafter until compliance is achieved.
The determination of the City Manager shall be final.










   (D)    Rights of Appeal.





      (1)   Authorization. The following decisions of the City
Manager pursuant to this chapter are appealable to the City Council: (i) the
decision of the City Manager with respect to the issuance of an exemption to
the requirement of a Certificate of Registration under Section 97.02(F)(2);
(ii) the denial of an application for a Certificate of Registration under
Section 97.03(D); (iii) denial of a Permit under Section 97.05(C)(2) and (iv)
denial of an exception under Section 97.02(F). An appeal from the decision of
the City Manager with respect to any of these decisions may be taken to the
City Council by any aggrieved Provider.





      (2)   Filing Fee. The filing fee for any appeal under this
chapter shall be One Hundred and 00/100 Dollars ($100.00).





      (3)   Time for Appeals. Appeals to the City Council shall be
filed within thirty (30) days from the decision of the City Manager by filing
a written notice of appeal with the Clerk of the City Council. The notice of
appeal shall specify the grounds for such appeal, and shall be on the form
prescribed by the Clerk of the City Council. Upon receipt of an appropriately
completed notice of appeal and filing fee, the Clerk of the City Council
shall transmit to the members of the City Council all papers constituting the
record upon which the decisions being appealed were based.





      (4)   Hearing on Appeal. The City Council shall schedule the
hearing for the appeal within a reasonable period of time at a regularly-
scheduled City Council meeting or at a special City Council meeting. Written
notice of the hearing shall be sent to the aggrieved Provider at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing. The failure of delivery of such notice,
however, shall not invalidate any subsequent proceedings. The aggrieved
Provider or its representative may appear and be heard at the hearing, and
present any evidence the Provider desires in support of its position.





      (5)   Decision on Appeals. The City Council may affirm,
reverse, or modify, in whole or in part, the decision appealed from, and to
that end, the City Council shall have all the powers of the City Manager with
respect to such decision. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of
the City Council shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision of the
City Manager under this chapter. The City Council shall render a written
decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay after the close of the
hearing, and in all cases within thirty (30) days after the close of the
hearing.





      (6)   Records of Appeals. The Clerk of the City Council shall
maintain complete records of all actions of the City Council with respect to
appeals. 
(Ord. 3166. Passed 8-8-2000.)

























CHAPTER 98
EMERGENCY SERVICES









Section










98.01   Fees; policies.




 



 



98.01  FEES; POLICIES.




   (A)   The fees as set forth and established in Section 37.19 of
Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
West Carrollton, are to be charged for the provision of public safety
services at the scenes of motor vehicle accidents and other emergency
services provided by the City.










   (B)   The following policies are hereby established by Council to
govern the collection procedures to be used by the City in recovering said
charges:










      (1)   City personnel will make reasonable efforts to obtain
the address and insurance information of all recipients of emergency services
at scenes of motor vehicle accidents and other emergency services.










      (2)   All recipients of emergency services will be sent an
informational letter explaining the charges established herein and requesting
additional insurance information as necessary.










      (3)   Claims will be filed with recipients’ insurance
carriers for reimbursement of charges.










      (4)   Recipients will be furnished a statement showing
insurance payment collected.










      (5)   Under no circumstances will threats of litigation be
issued or suits be filed by the City in an effort to collect charges
established herein, without prior approval of Council.










   (C)   All revenue for emergency services collected by the City shall
be used for the purpose of providing and maintaining emergency services
within the City.  (Ord. 3268.  Passed 5-11-04; amend. Ord. 3436.  Passed
12-22- 09.)
























 



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS









Chapter










Chap. 110.   SOLICITORS










Chap. 111.   ICE CREAM PEDDLERS










Chap. 112.   TAXICABS










Chap. 113.   HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX










Chap. 114.   CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE










Chap. 115.   ALARM SYSTEMS










Chap. 116.   TAX ABATEMENT










Chap. 117.   MASSAGE SERVICES ESTABLISHMENTS










Chap. 118.   COMPETITIVE VIDEO SERVICE AUTHORIZATIONS










          Chap. 119.   CULTIVATING, PROCESSING OR DISPENSING





      MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROHIBITED







































CHAPTER 110
SOLICITORS









Section










110.01   Identification card required





110.02   Application information; card, issuance and term





110.03   Card refusal or revocation; appeal and hearing by council





110.99   Penalty




 



110.01  IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED.




   No person shall enter upon the premises of any residence in the city
for the purpose of soliciting orders for or selling goods, wares,
merchandise, or services of any kind or character, unless such person shall
have first obtained an identification card as hereinafter provided. 
Provided, however, that the owner or his agent of any product of his own
raising or the manufacturer of any article manufactured by him shall not be
required to obtain the identification card herein required.  Not-for-profit
groups shall not be required to obtain the identification card herein
required.
('70 Code, § 715.01)  (Ord. 2362, passed 2-8-83; Am. Ord. 2938, passed
4-26-94)  Penalty, see § 110.99









110.02  APPLICATION INFORMATION; CARD,  ISSUANCE AND TERM.




   (A)   Whoever desires the issuance of an identification card
required by § 110.01 shall file with the Police Chief a written application
on a form to be provided, correctly containing the following information:





      (1)   Full name of the applicant.





      (2)   Address.





      (3)   Birthdate, height, weight and color of eyes and hair.





      (4)   If the applicant uses a motor vehicle, the make, model,
year and current registration number thereof.





      (5)   State of issuance of driver's license and number thereof.





      (6)   Name and address of employer.





      (7)   Brief description of goods, wares, merchandise or
services involved.





      (8)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any
crime and, if so, the nature thereof and penalties therefor.





      (9)   Whether the applicant has previously been employed to
conduct solicitation of orders or door to door sales, and, if so, the name of
the company represented and the goods, wares, merchandise or services
involved.





      (10)   Whether the applicant has ever been denied a permit or
identification card for soliciting orders or door to door sales by any other
governmental agency or jurisdiction or whether such a permit or card, if
issued, has been revoked by such other governmental agency or jurisdiction.










   (B)   The Police Chief or his representative shall investigate all
applicants for an identification card and if such investigation reveals that
the applicant has ever been convicted in any jurisdiction of a theft offense,
an offense involving moral turpitude, or an offense of violence, or has
previously been denied an identification card or permit from any other
governmental agency or jurisdiction, or had such a card or permit revoked for
any reason after issuance, or if he should find that valid complaints have
been registered with any agency concerning the manner in which the applicant
solicits orders for or sells goods, wares, merchandise, or services of any
kind or character, or if he should find that the applicant has failed to
truthfully answer any question on his application, the Chief of Police shall
have the right to refuse to issue an identification card to such applicant. 
Any person who has been refused an identification card may appeal such
decision to the City Council, as provided in § 110.03 (B).










   (C)   Upon compliance with the foregoing, and upon a finding that
none of the grounds exist for refusal of issuance of an identification card
or that none of the grounds which are reasons for revocation in § 110.03
exist, an identification card shall be issued by the Police Chief to the
applicant, which shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of
issuance.  All persons who have been issued an identification card shall
wear it so it is visible at all times while they are soliciting within the
city.










   (D)   The application referred to in § 110.02(A) above shall be
accompanied by an application fee as set forth in Section 37.20 of Chapter
37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West
Carrollton.  This application fee shall be nonrefundable.










   (E)   Solicitors shall not conduct business in the city between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.  (Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)









110.03  CARD REFUSAL OR REVOCATION; APPEAL AND HEARING BY COUNCIL.




   (A)   Any identification card may be revoked by the Police Chief at
any time for conditions or considerations which, had they existed at the time
of issuance, would have been valid grounds for its denial; for any
misrepresentation of a material fact in the application discovered after
issuance of the identification card; for violation of any provision of this
chapter or other law or ordinance relating to the operation of the business
or enterprise for which the identification card has been issued; or upon
valid complaints that the person who obtained the identification card is
harassing, abusing, or in any manner becoming a nuisance to the residents of
the city in the manner in which the soliciting of orders is being conducted;
or upon conviction of an applicant, for any federal, state or city law or
ordinance involving moral turpitude.










   (B)   Any person who is refused an identification card or if an
identification card is issued and subsequently revoked may, within 10 days
after receipt of a rejection or revocation notice, appeal to Council by
filing with the Clerk of Council a signed written statement briefly setting
forth his ground of appeal.  Council shall give the appellant due notice of
a hearing thereof by certified mail. The appellant may appear before Council
in person or by attorney, and the decision of Council shall be final.





(Ord. 2362, passed 2-8-83; Am. Ord. 2613, passed 8-25-87)









110.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any provision of this  Chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.





(Ord. 2362, passed 2-8-83; Am. Ord. 2613, passed 8-25-87)





Statutory reference:





   Penalty for fourth-degree misdemeanor, see R.C. § 2929.21
























CHAPTER 111
ICE CREAM PEDDLERS









Section










111.01   Identification card required; exception





111.02   Application for card; issuance and term





111.03   Card revocation; appeals





111.04   Noise-producing devices on moving vehicles





111.05   Sale to persons in street prohibited





111.06   Hours of operations





111.99   Penalty




 



111.01  IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED;  EXCEPTION.




   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or dispense from a vehicle to any
other person, any ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets, prepared ice cream
drinks, frozen desserts, and other similar products unless the person shall
have first obtained an identification card as required herein.  However, the
owner or his agent of any product or manufacturer of any article produced or
manufactured by him shall not be required to obtain the identification card
herein required.





(Ord. 2516, passed 7-23-85)  Penalty, see § 111.99









111.02  APPLICATION FOR CARD; ISSUANCE  AND TERM.




   (A)   Whoever desires the issuance of an identification card
required by this chapter shall file with the Police Chief a written
application on a form to be provided, correctly containing the following
information.





      (1)   Full name of the applicant.





      (2)   Address.





      (3)   Birthdate, height, weight, and color of eyes and hair.





      (4)   If the applicant uses a motor vehicle, the make, model,
year, and current registration number thereof.





      (5)   State of issuance of driver's license and number thereof.





      (6)   Name and address of employer.





      (7)   Brief description of goods, wares, or merchandise
involved.





      (8)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any
crime and, if so, the nature thereof and penalties therefor.





      (9)   Whether the applicant has previously been employed to
peddle ice cream or conduct solicitation of orders or door-to-door sales,
and, if so, the name of the company represented and the goods, wares, or
merchandise involved.





      (10)   Whether the applicant has ever been denied a permit or
identification card for soliciting orders or door-to-door sales by any other
governmental agency or jurisdiction or whether such a permit or card, if
issued, has been revoked by the other governmental agency or jurisdiction.










   (B)   The Police Chief or his representative shall investigate all
applicants for an identification card.  If the investigation reveals that
the applicant has ever been previously denied an identification card or
permit from any other governmental agency or jurisdiction or had such a card
or permit revoked for any reason after issuance, or if he should find that
valid complaints have been registered with any agency concerning the manner
in which the applicant peddles or merchandises his wares, the Chief of Police
shall have the right to refuse to issue an identification card to the
applicant.  Any person who has been refused an identification card may
appeal the decision to the City Council, as provided in § 111.03(B).










   (C)   Upon compliance with  the  foregoing,  and upon a finding
that none of the grounds exists for refusal of issuance of an identification
card or that none of the grounds which are reasons for revocation in §
111.03 exists, an identification card shall be issued by the Police Chief to
the applicant, which shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of
issuance.





(Ord. 2516, passed 7-23-85)









111.03  CARD REVOCATION; APPEALS.




   (A)   Any identification card may be revoked by the Police Chief at
any time for conditions or considerations which, had they existed at the time
of issuance, would have been valid grounds for its denial; for any
misrepresentation of a material fact in the application discovered after
issuance of the identification card; for violation of any provision of this
chapter or other law or ordinance relating to the operation of the business
or enterprise for which the identification card has been issued; or upon
valid complaints that the person who obtained the identification card is
harassing, abusing, or in any manner becoming a nuisance to the residents of
the city in the manner in which the sale of merchandise of orders is being
conducted; or upon conviction of an applicant, of any federal, state, or city
law or ordinance involving moral turpitude.










   (B)   Any person whose identification card is revoked may, within
ten days after receipt of the revocation notice, appeal to Council by filing
with the Clerk of Council a signed written statement briefly setting forth
his ground of appeal.  Council shall give the appellant due notice of a
hearing thereof by certified mail.  The appellant may appear before Council
in person or by attorney, and the decision of Council shall be final.





(Ord. 2516, passed 7-23-85)









111.04  NOISE-PRODUCING DEVICES ON MOVING VEHICLES.




   Noise-producing devices employed by vendors or peddlers using motor
vehicles, pushcarts, or tricycles for the sale of ice cream, popsicles, ice
sherbets, prepared ice cream drinks, frozen desserts, and other similar
products shall not be used or operated when the motor vehicle, pushcart, or
tricycle is in motion.





(Ord. 2516, passed 7-23-85)  Penalty, see § 111.99









111.05  SALE TO PERSONS IN STREET PROHIBITED.




   Vendors or peddlers employing motor vehicles, pushcarts, or tricycles
for sale or offering for sale of ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets, prepared
ice cream drinks, frozen desserts, and other similar products shall not sell
or offer for sale any such products to any person when the person is within
any public street or right-of-way normally used by motor vehicles.





(Ord. 2516, passed 7-23-85)  Penalty, see § 111.99









111.06  HOURS OF OPERATIONS.




   No vendor or peddler using motor vehicles, pushcarts, or tricycles for
the sale of ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets, prepared ice cream drinks,
frozen desserts, and other similar products shall offer the products for sale
on any public street, sidewalk, or public area in the city except between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. daily.





(Ord. 2516, passed 7-23-85)  Penalty, see § 111.99









111.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
minor misdemeanor for a first offense, and shall be guilty of a fourth degree
misdemeanor for any subsequent offense.





(Ord. 2516, passed 7-23-85)
























CHAPTER 112
TAXICABS









Section










112.01   Taxicab defined





112.02   License required





112.03   Application information





112.04   Liability insurance requirements





112.05   Driver's requirements





112.06   Taxicab license fee





112.07   Maintenance and inspection of taxicabs





112.08   Fare approval and posting





112.09   Refusal to pay fare





112.10   License suspension or revocation





112.99   Penalty




 



112.01  TAXICAB DEFINED.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.










   TAXICAB.  Every mechanically propelled vehicle not operated on a fixed
track, which is used or advertised to be used in the occupation of carrying
passengers for hire along other than a fixed route, with no fixed or definite
schedule. 





('70 Code, § 725.01)









112.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.




   No person, association, or corporation, either as principal or agent,
shall use or occupy any street, alley, or public place within the city with
any taxicab, without first obtaining a license to do so.





('70 Code, § 725.02)  Penalty, see § 112.99









112.03  APPLICATION INFORMATION.




   Application for a taxicab license shall be in writing to the city
manager, with a statement of the number of taxicabs to be operated, together
with the year, make, type, motor number,  and  state  license number of
each vehicle, and the names of the drivers to be employed to operate such
taxicabs. 





('70 Code, § 725.03)









112.04  LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of any taxicab
within the city unless such person files proof with the city manager of
liability insurance and maintains such insurance in effect for each such
taxicab.  The liability insurance shall be issued by a responsible insurance
company, approved as to sufficiency by the city manager and as to legality by
the law director, and shall provide indemnity for or protection to the
applicant against loss resulting from the ownership, maintenance, or use of
the vehicle as a taxicab in the amount of $50,000 because of bodily injury to
or death of one person in any one accident, in the amount of $100,000 because
of bodily injury to or death of 2 or more persons in any one accident, and in
the amount of $10,000 because of injury to property of others in any one
accident.  The insurance policy shall contain a clause obligating the
insurance company to give 10 days' written notice to the city manager prior
to cancellation, change of policy terms, or expiration.  A taxicab license
shall automatically expire and the licensee shall be in violation hereof for
the cancellation, change of policy terms, or expiration of insurance without
notice as provided herein.










   (B)   In lieu of liability insurance as required herein, an
applicant may furnish a bond binding the principal and sureties to liability
for the payment of judgments in the respective amounts provided for above,
provided the bond and sureties are approved as to sufficiency by the city
manager and as to legality by the law director. 
('70 Code, § 725.04)  Penalty, see § 112.99









112.05  DRIVER'S REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)   No person shall employ, for the purpose  of operating a
taxicab, any person unless he is of good moral character, has not been
convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude and is 18 years of age or
older.  No person not qualified as provided herein shall operate any taxicab
within the city.










   (B)   A taxicab driver's right to drive a taxicab may be suspended
or revoked by the city manager for repeated violations of city ordinances or
state laws regulating the operation of motor vehicles.
('70 Code, § 725.05)  Penalty, see § 112.99









112.06  TAXICAB LICENSE FEE.




   Upon satisfying all other requirements, the city manager in his
discretion may issue a taxicab license to an applicant upon the payment of a
fee as set forth in Section 37.21 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the
Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton for each taxicab to be
operated within the city.  Licenses shall be issued for the calendar year
only.  No license shall be transferable and no rebates shall be made for any
unused portion of a license.  (Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)  Penalty, see
§ 112.99









112.07  MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION OF  TAXICABS.




   All owners and operators of taxicabs shall maintain their equipment in
good mechanical condition at all times; shall not operate vehicles without
adequate brakes and lights; and shall not permit the operation of such
vehicles in a defective mechanical condition which might affect the safe
operation thereof.  City police officers shall have the right at all times
to inspect taxicabs for mechanical defects.  Failure to comply with the
provisions of this section shall be just cause for suspension or revocation
of a taxicab license at the discretion of the city manager. 
('70 Code, § 725.07)  Penalty, see § 112.99









112.08  FARE APPROVAL AND POSTING.




   The maximum fares to be charged passengers of taxicabs shall be
submitted to and approved by the city manager.  The approved rate schedule
shall be printed by the licensee and conspicuously displayed on the interior
of each taxicab in view of the passengers.  No owner or operator of a
taxicab shall charge in excess of the approved rate schedule. 
('70 Code, § 725.08)  Penalty, see § 112.99









112.09  REFUSAL TO PAY FARE.




   No person, with intent to defraud the driver or owner of a taxicab,
shall engage or hire a taxicab and fail or refuse to pay the fare therefor on
demand.  Refusal to pay the fare or leaving the taxicab without paying the
fare, upon termination of the trip, shall be prima facie evidence of such
fraudulent intent. 
('70 Code, § 725.09)  Penalty, see § 112.99









112.10  LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.




   A taxicab license may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the
city manager when the licensee is convicted or pleads guilty to a violation
of this chapter or any other ordinance or state law.  The city manager may
also suspend or revoke such license when in his judgment the public safety
and convenience requires such suspension or revocation. 
('70 Code, § 725.10)









112.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more
than $50.  Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate
offense. 
('70 Code, § 725.99)
























CHAPTER 113
HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX









Section










113.01   Definitions





113.02   Rate of tax





113.03   Exemptions





113.04   Prohibitions against false evidence of tax exempt status





113.05   Tax to be separately stated and charged





113.06   Registration





113.07   Records, inspection, destruction





113.08   Reporting and remitting





113.09   Penalties and interest





113.10   Failure to collect and report tax, determination of tax by
director of finance





113.11   Appeal





113.12   Actions to collect





113.13   Refunds





113.14   Moneys received, where credited





113.99   Penalty




 



113.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.










   (A)   DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.  The director of finance of the city.










   (B)   HOTEL or MOTEL.  Every establishment kept, used, maintained,
advertised or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping
accommodations are offered for a consideration to guests, in which 5 or more
rooms are used for the accommodation of the guests, whether the rooms are in
one or several structures.










   (C)   OCCUPANCY.  The use or possession, or the right to the use or
possession of any room or rooms or space or portion thereof, in any hotel or
motel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.  The use or possession or
right to use or possess any room or any suite of connecting rooms as office
space, banquet or private dining rooms, or exhibit, sample or display space
shall not be considered occupancy within the meaning of this definition
unless the person exercising occupancy uses or possesses, or has the right to
use or possess all or any portion of the room or suite of rooms for dwelling,
lodging or sleeping purposes.










   (D)   RENT.  The consideration received for occupancy valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash,
credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount
for which the occupant is liable for the occupancy without any deduction
therefrom whatsoever.










   (E)   OPERATOR.  The person who is the proprietor of the hotel or
motel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, licensee, mortgagee in
possession, or any other capacity.  Where the operator performs his
functions through a managing agent of any type or character, other than an
employee, the managing agent shall be deemed an operator for the purposes of
this chapter, and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his
principal.  Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the
principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be
compliance by both.










   (F)   TRANSIENT GUESTS.  Persons occupying a room or rooms for
sleeping accommodations for less than 30 consecutive days.
(Ord. 1826, passed 2-26-74)









113.02  RATE OF TAX.




   (A)   For the purpose of providing revenue with which to meet the
needs of the city, for the use of the general fund of the city, there is
levied a tax of 3% on all rents received by a hotel or motel for lodging
furnished to transient guests.










   (B)   The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient guest to the
city, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator as trustee for
the city, or to the city.










   (C)   The transient guest shall pay the tax to the operator of the
hotel or motel at the time the rent is paid.  If the rent is paid in
installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each
installment.  The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient guests ceasing
to occupy space in the hotel or motel.  If for any reason the tax due is not
paid to the operator of the hotel or motel, the director of finance may
require that the tax shall be paid directly to the director of finance. 
(Ord. 1826, passed 2-26-74)









113.03  EXEMPTIONS.




   (A)   No tax shall be imposed under this chapter:





      (1)   Upon rents not within the taxing power of the city under
the constitution or laws of this state or the United States;





      (2)    Upon rents paid by this state or any of its political
subdivisions.










   (B)   No exemption claimed under the above divisions of this section
shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is
collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the director
of finance.  All claims of exemption shall be made in the manner prescribed
by the director of finance. 
(Ord. 1826, passed 2-26-74)









113.04  PROHIBITION AGAINST FALSE EVIDENCE OF TAX EXEMPT STATUS.




   (A)   No transient guest shall refuse to pay the full and exact tax
as required by this chapter, or present to the operator false evidence
indicating that the lodging as furnished is not subject to the tax.










   (B)   If the transaction is claimed to be exempt, the transient
guest must furnish to the operator, and the operator must obtain from the
transient guest, a certificate specifying the reason that the sale is not
legally subject to the tax.  If no certificate is obtained, it shall be
presumed the tax applies. 
(Ord. 1826, passed 2-26-74) Penalty, see § 113.99









113.05  TAX TO BE SEPARATELY STATED AND CHARGED.




   (A)   The tax to be collected shall be stated and charged separately
from the rent and shown separately on any record thereof, at the time when
the occupancy is arranged or contracted and charged for, and upon every
evidence of occupancy or any bill or statement or charge made for the
occupancy issued or delivered by the operator, and the tax shall be paid by
the occupant to the operator as trustee for and on account of the city, and
the operator shall be liable for the collection thereof and for the tax.










   (B)   No operator of a hotel or motel shall advertise or state in
any manner, whether directly or indirectly that the tax or any part thereof
will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to
the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner
thereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 1826, passed 2-26-74)









113.06  REGISTRATION.




   Within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, or within 30
days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any
hotel or motel renting lodging to transient guests shall register the hotel
or motel with the director of finance and obtain from him a “transient
occupancy registration certificate” to be at all times posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises.  The certificate shall, among other
things, state the following:





   (A)   The name of the operator;










   (B)   The address of the hotel or motel;










   (C)   The date upon which the certificate was issued;










   (D)   “This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies
that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of
the hotel-motel tax ordinance by registering with the director of finance of
the city for the purpose of collecting from transient guests the hotel-motel
tax and remitting the tax to the director of finance.  This certificate does
not constitute a permit.”
(Ord. 1826, passed 2-26-74)  Penalty, see § 113.99









113.07  RECORDS, INSPECTION, DESTRUCTION.




   Each operator shall keep complete and accurate records of lodging
furnished, together with a record of the tax collected thereon, which shall
be the amount due under this chapter, and shall keep all invoices, and other
pertinent documents.  If the operator furnishes lodging not subject to the
tax, the operator's records shall show the identity of the transient guest,
if the sale was not exempted by reason of the identity, or the nature of the
transaction if exempted for any other reason.  The records and other
documents shall be open during business hours for inspection by the director
of finance, or his agents, and shall be preserved for a period of 4 years,
unless the director of finance, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by any orders requesting that the records be kept for
a longer period of time.





(Ord. 1826, passed 2-26-74)









113.08  REPORTING AND REMITTING.




   (A)   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of each month
make and file a return for the preceding month, on forms prescribed by the
director of finance, showing the receipts from furnishing lodging, the amount
of tax due from the operator to the city for the period covered by the
return, and the other information as the director of finance deems necessary
for the proper administration of this chapter.  The director of finance may
extend the time for making and filing returns.  Returns shall be filed by
delivering or mailing the same to the director of finance together with
payment of the full amount of tax shown to be due thereon.










   (B)   The director of finance may authorize operators whose tax
liability is not such to merit monthly returns, as determined by the director
of finance upon the basis of administrative costs of the city, to make and
file returns at less frequent intervals.  The authorization shall be in
writing and shall indicate the intervals at which returns are to be filed.










   (C)   All claims for exemptions from tax filed by transient guests
with the operator during the reporting period shall be filed with the return.










   (D)   All returns and payments  submitted  by each operator shall
be treated as confidential by the





director of finance and shall not be released by him except upon order of a
court of competent jurisdiction or to an officer or agent of the United
States, the State of Ohio, the County of Montgomery or the City of West
Carrollton, for official use only.










   (E)   If for any reason, the hotel or motel shall cease doing
business in the city, all returns and payments are due immediately upon
cessation of business.










   (F)   All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter
shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is
made to the director of finance.










     (G)   The director of finance, if he deems it necessary in order
to insure the payment of the tax imposed by this chapter may require returns
and payments to be made for other than monthly periods.  The returns shall
be signed by the operator or his authorized agent. 
(Ord. 1826, passed 2-26-74)  Penalty, see § 113.99









113.09  PENALTIES AND INTEREST.




   (A)   Original delinquency.  Any operator who fails to remit any
tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty
equal to 10% of the amount of the tax, in addition to the tax.










   (B)   Continued delinquency.  Any operator who fails to remit any
delinquent remittances on or before a period of 30 days following the date on
which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency
penalty equal to 10% of the amount of the tax and previous penalty in
addition to the tax and the 10% penalty first imposed.  An additional
penalty equal to 10% of the total tax and penalty of the previous 30 day
period shall be added for each successive 30 day period that the account
remains delinquent.










   (C)   Fraud.  If the director of finance determines that the
nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a
penalty equal to 25% of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in
addition to the penalties stated in divisions (A) and (B) of this section.










   (D)   Interest.  In addition to the previous penalties imposed, any
operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay
interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month, or fraction thereof, on the
amount of the tax exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the
remittance first became delinquent until paid.










   (E)   Penalties during pendency of hearing or appeal.  No penalty
provided under the terms of this chapter shall be imposed during the pendency
of any hearing provided for herein, nor during the pendency of any appeal to
the city manager provided for herein. 
(Ord. 1826, passed 2-26-74)









113.10  FAILURE TO COLLECT AND REPORT TAX, DETERMINATION OF TAX BY DIRECTOR
OF FINANCE.




   If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax and to make,
within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the
tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the director of finance
shall proceed in a manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information
upon which to base his estimate of the tax due.  As soon as the director of
finance shall procure the facts and information as he is able to obtain on
which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable
by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make the
report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against the
operator the tax, interest, and penalties provided for by this chapter.  In
case the determination is made, the director of finance shall give a notice
of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the
United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at
his last known place of business.  The operator may within 10 days after the
serving or mailing of the notice make application in writing to the direction
or finance for a hearing on the amount assessed.  If application by the
operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax,
interest and penalties, if any, determined by the director of finance shall
become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable.  If the
application is made, the director of finance shall give not less than 5 days
written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause
at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein
should not be fixed for the tax, interest and penalties.  At the hearing,
the operator may appear and offer evidence why the specified tax, interest
and penalties should not be fixed.  After the hearing, the director of
finance shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter
give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of the
determination and the amount of the tax, interest and penalties.  The amount
determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days unless an appeal is taken
as provided in § 113.11. 
(Ord. 1826, passed 2-26-74) Penalty, see § 113.99









113.11  APPEAL.




   Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the director of finance with
respect to the amount of the tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal
to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with him within 15 days of
the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due.  The city manager
shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal, and shall give notice in
writing to the operator at his last known place of business.  The findings
of the city manager shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon
the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of
hearing.  Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable
upon the service of notice. 
(Ord. 1826, passed 2-26-74)









113.12  ACTIONS TO COLLECT.




   Any tax required to be paid by a transient guest under the provisions
of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient guest to the
city.  Any tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city
shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city.  Any person owing
money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an
action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of the amount. 
(Ord. 1826, passed 2-26-74)









113.13  REFUNDS.




   (A)   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty has been
overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally
collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as
provided in divisions (B) and (C) of this section provided a claim in writing
therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which
the claim is founded, is filed with the director of finance within 3 years of
the date of payment.  The claim shall be on forms furnished by the 
director  of finance.










   (B)   An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or
erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a
manner prescribed by the director of finance that the person from whom the
tax has been collected was not a transient guest; provided, however, that
neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax
so collected has either been refunded to the transient guest or credited to
rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.










   (C)   A transient guest may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or
paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the
city by filing of a claim in the manner provided in division (A) of this
section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient guest directly to
the director of finance, or when the transient guest having paid the tax to
the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the director of finance that
the transient guest has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who
collected the tax.










   (D)   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section
unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing
entitlement thereto. 





(Ord. 1826, passed 2-26-74)









113.14  MONEYS RECEIVED, WHERE CREDITED.




   The moneys received under the provisions of this chapter shall be
credited to the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. 1826, passed 2-26-74)









113.99  PENALTY.




   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than
$500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.





(Ord. 1826, passed 2-26-74)
























CHAPTER 114
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE









Section










General Provisions










114.01   Definitions





114.02   Short title





114.03   Purpose





114.04   Procedure for grant of franchise





114.05   Parallel and companion ordinances





114.06   Purpose of Miami Valley Cable Council





114.07   Length of franchise





114.08   Franchise territory










Conditions of Occupancy of the Public Ways










114.10   Construction codes and standards





114.11   Company to exercise reasonable care and diligence





114.12   Overhead and underground construction





114.13   Tree trimming





114.14   Relocation to accommodate public and private improvements





114.15   Right of inspection and restoration










Services and Facilities










114.20   System configuration





114.21   Subscriber services





114.22   PEG access equipment and facilities





114.23   Technical assistance and other inducements for users of
institutional network





114.24   Interconnections










Construction Timetable and Line Extension Policy










114.25   Construction timetable





114.26   Line extensions for areas annexed after the date hereof










Rates and Franchise Fees










114.30   Changes in rates for basic subscriber service





114.31   Rates for other than basic subscriber service





114.32   All rates to be non-discriminatory





114.33   Free service to schools and city-occupied buildings





114.34   Advance charges and deposits





114.35   Disconnection





114.36   Refunds to subscribers





114.37   Franchise fee










Local Business Office, Maintenance Standards,  and Complaint Procedures










114.40   Local business office





114.41   Service maintenance standards





114.42   Complaint procedure










Indemnification, Insurance, Bonding, and Escrow Fund










114.45   General indemnification





114.46   Liability insurance





114.47   Performance bond





114.48   Proof of insurance and bonding





114.49   Liquidated damages; assessment of insurance bonding and
liquidated damage amounts





114.50   Right to combine performance bonds and escrowed funds under
parallel ordinances










Books, Records, and Reports










114.55   Books and records





114.56   Reports










Transfer, Assignments, and Transactions Affecting Control of Company










114.60   Council approval required for assignment or transfer of franchise
and for certain transactions affecting company's ownership





114.61   Procedure for council approval of transfers





114.62   Rights of assignment and transfer to and by mortgagees or pledgees





114.63   Notification of council in the event of certain transactions
indirectly affecting control of company










Renewals










114.65   Notice of company's desire to renew





114.66   Renewal applications





114.67   Procedure for considering renewal application





114.68   Continuity of service





114.69   Removal of facilities in the event of non-renewal










Revocation for Cause










114.70   Events constituting grounds for revocation





114.71   Notice, time to correct, and due process required in revocation





114.72   Removal of facilities in the event of revocation










City Action Required to Ratify  Certain Council Decisions










114.75   Decisions requiring city ratification





114.76   Council's decisions presumed well-considered





114.77   Timeliness of city ratification










Rights of Individuals Protected










114.80   Discriminatory practices prohibited





114.81   Cable tapping and monitoring prohibited without permission of
subscriber





114.82   Sale of subscriber lists prohibited





114.83   Censorship prohibited on access channels





114.84   Liability for obscenity, defamation, or invasion of privacy on
access channels










Resolution of Disputes










114.85   Intent





114.86   Fact finding





114.87   Mediation; arbitration





114.88   Selection procedures





114.89   Fees and expenses










Miscellaneous Provisions










114.90   Powers of court to enforce compliance with franchise





114.91   Nonenforcement by city





114.92   Compliance with all applicable laws and regulations





114.93   Subsequent action by state or federal agencies





114.94   Delegation of functions





114.95   Notice





114.96   Amendments





114.97   Force majeure




 




GENERAL PROVISIONS




 



114.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.





   (A)   ACCESS CHANNELS.  Those channels set aside for public,
educational, and government access programming.










   (B)   BASIC SUBSCRIBER SERVICE.  Any service tier which includes
the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.










   (C)   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM OR SYSTEMS.  A network of coaxial
cables or other conductors, equipment, and appurtenances which is capable of
receiving, transmitting, and originating sounds, pictures, writings, data,
signals, and other intelligence.










   (D)   CHANNEL.  A signaling path of 6 megahertz provided by a cable
television system to relay class I-IV signals, as defined by the FCC.










   (E)   CITY.  The city of West Carrollton, Ohio, a municipal
corporation in and of the State of Ohio, in its present incorporated form or
in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged, or reincorporated form, and
its duly authorized officials acting on its behalf.










   (F)   COMPANY.  The recipient of the franchise granted hereunder,
Continental Cablevision of Miami Valley, Inc., and its lawful successors or
assigns.










   (G)   COUNCIL.  The Miami Valley Cable Television Council
established pursuant to the companion ordinances referenced in § 114.05.










   (H)   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission or its successor.










   (I)   GOOD CAUSE.  The set of facts and circumstances which, in an
individual case, a reasonable man would adjudge to be beyond the company's
reasonable control and which would therefore represent a justifiable excuse
of performance.  Depending on the facts and circumstances, good cause may
include, but shall not be limited to, delays or interruptions arising from
necessary utility changes, rearrangements, power outages, the fulfillment of
governmental or regulatory restrictions or requirements, national emergency,
uncontrollable material shortages, fire, earthquake, or the elements and acts
of God.










   (J)   GROSS REVENUES.  All revenues derived from the operation of
the cable system.










   (K)   NORMAL SERVICE INTERVAL.  The period between the time that
the company is notified by a subscriber of a reception deficiency and the
second close of business day following the receipt of the notice, provided
that the subscriber or his representative is available, during this period,
at the premises to be serviced.










   (L)   PUBLIC WAYS.  The surface, the air space above the surface
and the area below the surface of any public streets, sidewalks, other public
rights-of-way or public places, and public utility easements.










   (M)   SUBSCRIBER.  Any person receiving for any purpose the basic
subscriber service of the company's cable television system.










   (N)   USER.  Any person who utilizes the company's cable television
system for any purpose other than reception of basic subscriber service,
including but  not  limited  to,  the  production  and distribution of
information on the governmental, educational, and public access channels, or
the use under channel lease, or otherwise, of the company's facilities to
transmit or receive pay television, alarm, facsimile, data, or other
communications services.
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.02  SHORT TITLE.




   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Cable Television
Franchise Grant to Continental Cablevision of Ohio, Inc.”
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.03  PURPOSE.




   The purpose of this chapter is to grant a non-exclusive franchise to
Continental Cablevision of Ohio, Inc., and to provide for the regulation and
control of the cable television system in the city in the public interest. 
This franchise, upon approval by the city and the company, constitutes a
mutual agreement between the parties.
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.04  PROCEDURE FOR GRANT OF FRANCHISE.




   Upon consideration of the company's request to extend the franchise and
after duly considering the company's character, legal, financial, technical,
and other qualifications, the city does hereby grant an extension of a
non-exclusive franchise to Continental Cablevision of Ohio, Inc.  The city
reserves the right to grant a similar franchise or use of the public ways to
any person or group of persons at any time during the period of this
franchise.  The company and the city agree that such extension does not
change the grandfathered status of this franchise under the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 USC, Section 521, et seq.  The company
further agrees not to challenge such status or argue to the contrary before
any court or regulatory agency of competent jurisdiction.





(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.05  PARALLEL AND COMPANION  ORDINANCES.




   This chapter is one of several substantially identical ordinances
(parallel ordinances) of Bellbrook, Centerville, Kettering, Miamisburg,
Moraine, Oakwood, Springboro, and West Carrollton, Ohio, who were recipients
of the company's application to provide regional cable television services. 
It is contemplated that the cities enacting these parallel ordinances will
also enact ordinances (companion ordinances) delegating regulatory
responsibility and authority under the parallel ordinances to the Miami
Valley Cable Council.  Notwithstanding any other provisions herein, this
chapter shall be contingent upon and shall become effective only upon the
passage of parallel and companion ordinances by a sufficient number of the
above-named municipalities to entitle the company to serve a minimum of
25,000 occupied dwelling units.
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.06  PURPOSE OF MIAMI VALLEY CABLE  COUNCIL.




   The Miami Valley Cable Council shall foster cooperation among the
municipal corporations granting cable television franchises to Continental
Cablevision of Ohio, Inc. and shall administer all regulatory functions
assigned to it herein on behalf of each municipal corporation.  The company
shall, when proper notice is given, appear at all public hearings scheduled
by the council to review or evaluate the company's activities or
performance. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.07  LENGTH OF FRANCHISE.




   (A)   This extends the franchise ending on June 30, 1991, for an
additional period of 15 years, ending June 30, 2006.  This franchise is
considered by the city and the company to be an extension of the franchise
ending June 30, 1991.










   (B)   This extends the franchise for the Village of Springboro
ending on August 19, 1997, for an additional period of nine years, ending
June 30, 2006.  This franchise is considered by the village and the company
to be an extension of the franchise ending August 19, 1997.










   (C)   This extends the franchise for the City of Bellbrook ending on
April 7, 2000, for an additional period of six years, ending June 30, 2006. 
This franchise is considered by the city and the company to be an extension
of the franchise ending April 7, 2000.





(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.08  FRANCHISE TERRITORY.









   This franchise is for the present territorial limits of the city and
any area annexed thereto during the term of this franchise. (Ord. 1907,
passed 5-27-75; Am. Ord. 2574, passed l-13-87)










CONDITIONS OF OCCUPANCY OF THE PUBLIC WAYS









114.10  CONSTRUCTION CODES AND  STANDARDS.




   (A)   Methods of construction, installation, and maintenance of the
company's cable television system shall comply with the National Electrical
Safety Code, National Bureau of Standards Handbook 81 (part 2), United States
Department of Commerce, November 1, 1961, to the extent that the code is
consistent with local law affecting the construction, installation, and
maintenance of electric supply and communication lines.










   (B)   Any tower constructed for use in the company's cable
television system shall comply with the standards continued in Structural
Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures, EIA
Standards RS-222-A, as published by the engineering department of the
Electronic Industries Association, 2201 I Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 
20006.










   (C)   All methods of construction, installation, and maintenance of
the company's cable television system shall also comply with all applicable
laws and rules of the state and of the city.  The city reserves the right,
from time to time, to issue, by duly adopted ordinance, reasonable rules and
regulations concerning the construction, operation, and maintenance of the
system as are consistent with the provisions of this chapter and necessary to
protect its residents' rights to the peaceful enjoyment of the public ways. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.11  COMPANY TO EXERCISE REASONABLE CARE AND DILIGENCE.




   In the construction, installation, maintenance, removal, or repair of
the facilities herein contemplated, the company shall exercise reasonable
care and diligence to avoid damage, injury, or nuisance to persons or
property and shall install and maintain its facilities in a workmanlike
manner so as to minimize the public inconvenience and so as not to interfere
with any facilities of the city.  The company shall comply with all existing
city regulations pertaining to the use of the public ways and shall, at its
own expense, carefully guard and protect all public ways entered and opened
by it so as to prevent injury to persons or damage to property while work
therein is being performed.  All the public ways shall be restored to their
former condition by the company as soon as is practicable after completion of
work. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.12  OVERHEAD AND UNDERGROUND  CONSTRUCTION.




   (A)   The company shall be permitted to place its cables, wires, or
other equipment overhead when local or state law permits overhead
construction and other like facilities are overhead.  The company shall
place its cables, wires, or other equipment underground when local or state
law requires underground placement and where all other like facilities are
underground.










   (B)   The city and the council shall use their best efforts with
pole owners to promote the joint use of poles so as to assure the broadest
possible wiring of premises within the city.  The company shall not erect
any new pole without first obtaining the city's written approval of the
location, type, and specifications thereof.










   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this franchise, if, in
any part of the city, satisfactory aerial or underground easement rights over
private property cannot be obtained on reasonable terms, the company shall
have no obligation to build its system or provide service in the area. 










   (D)   Any poles owned by the company shall be available for use by
the city at no charge and for lease to other parties at a reasonable fee, so
long as the use complies with all applicable safety standards.





         





   (E)   All municipally-owned poles and conduits installed within the
city shall be made available for attachment or use by the company at just and
reasonable rates which shall be equivalent to those paid to other utilities. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.13  TREE TRIMMING.




   The company shall have the right hereunder to trim trees in and
overhanging the public ways, in a workmanlike manner, so as to protect its
facilities from abrasive contact.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city,
at its option, may, following written notice to the company, undertake the
trimming at the company's expense.
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.14  RELOCATION TO ACCOMMODATE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS.




   The company shall, upon reasonable notice and without expense to the
city, relocate its facilities to accommodate the public works or improvements
as the city shall in its judgment designate.  The company shall, at the
expense of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city,
temporarily raise, lower, or remove its wires to permit the moving of the
building.  In the event, the company shall be given not less than 14 days'
advance written notice to arrange for the temporary wire changes.  The
company's estimated charges for the work shall be payable not less than 48
hours in advance. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.15  RIGHT OF INSPECTION AND  RESTORATION.




   The city shall have the right to supervise or inspect all work
performed by the company or its agents upon public ways to insure compliance
with this chapter.  In the event the inspection reveals that the company has
failed, in the city's judgment, to fulfill its obligations under §§ 114.10
through 114.15, the city shall notify the council, and the council shall in
turn notify the company, in writing, of its specific deficiencies.  Absent
commencement of corrective action by the company within 48 hours of receipt
of the notification, the city, at the direction of the council, may undertake
the necessary repairs or restorations at the company's sole expense. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)










SERVICES AND FACILITIES









114.20  SYSTEM CONFIGURATION.




   (A)   The company shall establish a cable television system serving
the cities covered by this and parallel ordinances.  The system shall have
the capability of interconnection with any other system for the transmission
of video and audio signals.










   (B)   The company shall institute its basic subscriber service on
what shall be know as Cable A.  On Cable A, the company shall provide
subscribers with a converter by which means the subscribers will be able to
receive a minimum of 30 channels.  The converter or other device will be
designed to permit closed circuit and selective viewing through the deletion
or addition of filters or tuning elements.  Cable A shall also provide up to
4 reverse transmission channels to feed local programming to the city's hub.










   (C)   The company shall construct an institutional network on what
shall be referred to as Cable B.  Cable B shall be capable of delivering 17
channels in the forward direction and transmitting, in the reverse direction,
18 channels for video or non-video uses on either an open or closed circuit
basis.  Attachment A to Ordinance 2574, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the city clerk, lists the institutions to which Cable B will
initially be available. The company shall provide the appropriate connectors
and extend cable to an access point within each institution, but the users of
Cable B will provide their own terminal equipment.










   (D)   Assuming demand in excess of what can be reasonably
accommodated on Cables A and/or B, the company shall provide, at a time and
upon terms to be mutually agreed upon by the company and the council, an
additional subscriber service cable to be designated Cable C and/or an
additional





institutional service cable to be designated Cable D.










   (E)   The company will extend the institutional service to the
Village of Springboro and to other communities served by the company's
integrated south of Dayton cable system which join the council according to
the engineering design on terms mutually agreeable to the council and the
company, per attachment B to Ordinance 2574, a copy of which is on file in
the office of the city clerk.










   (F)   At the time of rebuild, the company shall submit a proposed
system design pursuant to § 114.25.  The system design shall be capable of
providing an institutional service, but may propose alternative(s) to cable B
for providing the service.





(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.21  SUBSCRIBER SERVICES.




   (A)   The company will continue to offer the wide diversity of
programming and information on its system as reflected in its services
provided December 30, 1985.  The company reserves the right during the
franchise term to add new services and to replace services and to otherwise
modify its channel lineup, but it will maintain the mix, quality, and level
of service, and the broad categories of programming represented by its
December 30, 1985, services.  In addition, the company shall provide:





      (1)   An audio override capability for transmission of
emergency messages and alerts;





      (2)   One governmental access channel, one educational access
channel, and one public access channel on the distribution hub contemplated
by this franchise;





      (3)   And as utilization requires, one governmental access
channel, one educational access channel, and one public access channel to be
used jointly under this and parallel ordinances;





      (4)   The company shall have available such channels for
commercial use and leased access as are required by law;





      (5)   Should the law permit, the council shall have the right
to promulgate such broad guidelines as it deems necessary to promote the
widest diversity of programming services;





      (6)   The council permits the company to program any unused
PEG access channels upon the following terms and conditions:





         (a)   That the company program such unused PEG access
channels with non-pay television programming services from the following
categories:  arts and culture, public affairs, educational and
instructional, children's programming, and science and nature.





         (b)   That all local credits for these programming
services include reference to both the company and the council and any fees
for cablecasting these programming services be borne by the company.





         (c)   Should the need arise for the PEG access channel
capacity, that the council may request the return of any PEG access channel
for PEG access programming, provided, however, that the council must give the
company, in writing, six months' prior notice.





         (d)   The company shall provide six months', when
possible, prior written notice to council in the event it ceases programming
on a PEG access channel.  Further, should the company decide to remove any
non-pay programming service, the company will first make the channel
available to the council for PEG access use should there be a demonstrated
need for the channel, limited to the number of PEG access channels being used
by the company. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.22  PEG ACCESS EQUIPMENT AND  FACILITIES.




   (A)   The company is responsible for the normal repair and
replacement of PEG access equipment the company provides to the council. 
The company will comply with requests for replacement equipment by ordering
the equipment within 45 days of receiving, in writing, the requests. 
Replacement equipment shall be equivalent to the equipment being replaced. 
If the equipment is obsolete or no longer practical, other equipment may be
substituted by mutual agreement.










   (B)   In order to secure a suitable PEG access facility, the company
shall provide $420,000 to the council for the construction  or 
purchase/renovation and the equipping of such a facility, with the funds to
be paid upon receipt by the company of invoices or statements for equipment
and facility construction.  The PEG access facility shall be designed and
constructed/renovated to the council's specifications, and the company shall
be responsible for awarding all contracts for construction/renovation and for
paying all invoices, subject to approval by the council.  Until such time as
a suitable PEG access facility is occupied, the company shall pay no less
than 66% of the monthly rental expense for the existing PEG access facility.










   (C)   The company is responsible for all maintenance of mobile
cablecasting vans provided to the council for PEG access.  The council shall
insure the vans and shall be responsible for the gasoline and oil to operate
the vehicles.  The van currently owned by the council shall be replaced by
the company, at a cost not to exceed $16,667, on the second anniversary of
the adoption of the parallel ordinances by all of the cities.  Upon the
adoption of the parallel ordinances by all of the cities, the company shall
provide a second van, at a cost not to exceed $16,667, to the council.  Upon
activation of the educational access channel, the company will provide a
third van, at a cost not to exceed $16,667, to the council.  Each van, at
the company's expense, will thereafter be replaced with an equivalent van
with necessary modifications after six years of operation.  Upon
demonstrated need, the company will provide one step van or equivalent
vehicle in lieu of a standard van, per attachment C to Ordinance 2574, a copy
of which is on file in the office of the city clerk.










   (D)   After the educational access channel is activated, the company
will provide $30,000 to the council for the use in purchasing additional
video production equipment for the participating public school districts. 
The equipment shall be the property of the council, but shall be dedicated to
the production of educational access programming so long as a channel is
dedicated to educational access.










   (E)   All PEG access equipment and cablecasting vans which are
inoperable, obsolete, or otherwise unusable and which have been declared
surplus by the council shall be returned to the company.





(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.23  TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND OTHER  INDUCEMENTS FOR USERS OF 
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK.




   The company shall provide technical assistance to facilitate the
maximum use of the institutional network on Cable B. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.24  INTERCONNECTIONS.




   (A)   The city's system shall be interconnected with the systems of
other cities under parallel ordinances.  Additionally, at the council's
request, the system shall be interconnected with affiliated systems in North
Dayton, Huber Heights, Fairborn, and Xenia, Ohio.  At the council's request,
the system shall also be connected with the system in Dayton.  The design of
such interconnects shall be subject to the mutual approval of the council and
the company.










   (B)   The company shall use its best efforts to cooperate with any
interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority, state or
federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter established for the purpose
of regulating, facilitating, financing, or otherwise providing for the
interconnection of systems beyond the boundaries of the city. 










   (C)   The company will make a good faith effort, by correspondence
and in person, to interconnect the South Dayton Cable System with the cable
system serving the City of Germantown, with the cost of the interconnection
to be borne equally by the two cable companies.  The company shall provide
copies of all correspondence and reports of meeting to the council.





(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)










CONSTRUCTION TIMETABLE AND LINE EXTENSION POLICY









114.25  CONSTRUCTION TIMETABLE.




   (A)   The company agrees to maintain its cable television system in
conformity with the generally accepted state of the art technology for
systems of comparable size and age to the system serving the city.










   (B)   In June, 1991, the company shall submit a proposal for
rebuilding or upgrading the cable television system serving the city, which
proposal shall replace § 114.20 hereof and shall be reasonable to meet the
future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the
cost of meeting the needs and interests.  The rebuild/upgrade shall
incorporate the generally accepted state of the art technology for systems of
comparable size.  The rebuild/upgrade shall commence no later than June,
1992, and shall be completed within three years, subject to extension for
good cause.










   (C)   The company may, however, submit with its proposal a request
that the commencement of the rebuild/upgrade be delayed.  The request shall
evaluate the need and justification for rebuilding/upgrading the cable
system.  Based upon that report and any other material which it deems
necessary and which it will provide to the company, the council shall
determine whether the system rebuild/upgrade is necessary at that time and
reasonably meets the future cable-related community needs and interests,
taking into account the cost of meeting the needs and interests.  The
council may modify the rebuild/upgrade requirements or delay the commencement
of construction for periods of not less than two years and not more than five
years, if the rebuild is not necessary at that time or does not meet the
criteria established herein.










   (D)   The criteria the council shall use for making such a judgment
shall include, but not necessarily be limited to:





      (1)   The technical reliability of the cable television
service, as determined by such standards as the number of system outages, the
quality of the cable signal, and whether the cable television system can
reasonably be expected to continue to provide reliable service for the period
of the requested delay;





      (2)   Whether the system conforms to the generally accepted
technological state of the art for systems of comparable size and will
accommodate the future cable-related needs and interests of the community;





      (3)   Whether the system has the ability to accommodate, both
in channel capacity and in technological performance, the current programming
service developments in the market; and





      (4)   Whether the  rebuild/upgrade  and  the provision of
such service would present a clear and convincingly unreasonable financial
burden to either the company or to the subscribers and any other matters
relevant to the financial feasibility and practicality of rebuild/upgrade.










   (E)   As part of the review process, the council may require the
services of independent consultants to evaluate the condition of the system
and any financial and other data pertinent to the rebuild/upgrade.  The
consultants shall be mutually chosen by the company and the council, with the
cost to be equally borne by the company and the council.










   (F)   If the company and the council are unable to agree on the need
for or scope of the rebuild/upgrade of the cable television system serving
the city, they may elect to submit the issue to binding arbitration pursuant
to § 114.87(B) hereof. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.26  LINE EXTENSIONS FOR AREAS ANNEXED AFTER THE DATE HEREOF.




   (A)   The company shall provide basic subscriber service to all
dwelling units located within any annexed territories where the density is at
least 50 housing units per strand mile of system.  The charges for the
service shall be the same as those for the previously incorporated sections
of the city, except that where the density is under 50 housing units per
strand mile or the proportion of aerial to underground cable in the annexed
area is less than exists in the city prior to the date of the annexation, the
company shall, upon request and subject to the prior approval of the council,
establish a schedule of rates and charges whereby service will be offered to
potential subscribers in the annexed area.










   (B)   The company shall have no obligation hereunder to provide
service in any area if the area cannot, for technical reasons, be served from
the company's existing head-end(s). 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)










RATES AND FRANCHISE FEES









114.30  CHANGES IN RATES FOR BASIC  SUBSCRIBER SERVICE.




   If the ownership or control of the company has changed from that
existing on the effective date of the franchise, as extended (other than a
change not resulting in a change in ultimate control), and if the regulation
of basic subscriber rates is permitted by federal law in the jurisdictions of
the council, the council reserves the right to proscribe any rate increase
except those approved in accordance with the following procedures:





   (A)   The company may petition the council for a change in rates by
filing a revised rate schedule including its justification(s) for the
proposed new schedule.










   (B)   Within 10 days of notification by the council of the place and
time established for a hearing on the petition, the company shall notify its
subscribers of the same by announcement on at least 2 channels of its system,
between the hours of 7:00 and 9:00 p.m., for 5 consecutive days.  Following
all proper notice, but in no event later than 90 days from the date of the
petition, the council shall hold an appropriate public hearing to consider
the proposed new rates, at which hearing all parties desiring to be heard,
including the company, shall be heard on any matters relating to the
performance of this chapter, the company's services, and the proposed new
rates.










   (C)   Within 90 days after the hearing, the council shall render a
written decision on the company's petition, either accepting, rejecting, or
modifying the same and reciting the basis of its decision.










   (D)   If the council fails to act within 6 months of the date of the
company's petition pursuant to division (A) above, the company shall
thereafter be entitled to put its proposed new rates into effect on a
provisional basis, provided that it shall keep a full and accurate accounting
of all income resulting from the provisional rates and shall be obliged for a
period of up to 6 months thereafter to refund the amount by which the
provisional rates exceed the rates ultimately established by the council. 
Upon request by the council, the company shall provide a bond or other
reasonable surety in an amount not to exceed the previously existing rates to
ensure  that  possible refunds due under this division shall be promptly
made.










   (E)   The criteria for the council's decision in such matters shall
be the establishment of rates which are “fair and reasonable” to both the
company and its subscribers and shall be generally defined as the minimum
rates necessary to meet all applicable costs of service, including a fair
return on all invested capital, all assuming efficient and economical
management.  Such criteria shall include:





      (1)   The ability of the company to render system services and
to derive a reasonable profit therefrom under the existing rate schedule and
under the proposed rate schedule;





      (2)   The revenues and profits derived from system services;





      (3)   The efficiency of the company;





      (4)   The quality of the services offered by the company;





      (5)   The replacement cost of the system less depreciation;





      (6)   A fair rate of return with respect to the cost of
borrowing and the rates of return on investments having similar risks to that
of cable communications;





      (7)   The extent to which the company had adhered to the terms
of this franchise;





      (8)   Fairness to residents, subscribers, and users;





      (9)   Capital expenditures by the company in providing updated
technology and service to subscribers; and





      (10)   Other factors that the council may deem relevant.





(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.31  RATES FOR OTHER THAN BASIC  SUBSCRIBER SERVICE.




   At least 90 days in advance of the offering of any service or equipment
other than basic subscriber service, the company shall file with the council
a schedule of the rates and charges and the rules relating to the other
services and equipment and shall not alter the same on less than 90 days'
notice and only in accordance with the then applicable rules and regulations
of the FCC and/or other agencies of competent jurisdiction.  If, at any
time, the applicable federal or state law would permit council regulation of
the rates in accordance with the procedures in § 114.30, the regulation
shall be authorized hereunder. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.32  ALL RATES TO BE NON- DISCRIMINATORY.




   The company shall administer any and all rates and charges so as not to
give preference to or discriminate among subscribers of like category or
class.  Nothing in the foregoing shall be deemed to prevent the company from
establishing:





   (A)   Special temporary reduced rates for periodic promotional
offers to attract new subscribers, or for subscribers who pay promptly;










   (B)   Reasonable policies for deposits, penalties, or denial of
service where a particular subscriber has proven a bona fide credit problem;










   (C)   With the prior approval of the council, special schedules of
rates and charges for service to premises in annexed areas not meeting the
density standards established in § 114.26, provided that the same are not
inconsistent with applicable FCC rules and regulations; or










   (D)   Separate rates for commercial and non-commercial users of
access channels. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.33  FREE SERVICE TO SCHOOLS AND CITY-OCCUPIED BUILDINGS.




   Each public and private school located in the city shall be given, upon
request, one free outlet and subscription to the system's basic subscriber
service.  All city-occupied buildings shall receive, upon request, the same
free service as schools; this shall include, but not be limited to, the
courts, correctional systems, publicly supported health facilities, public
safety facilities,  publicly  supported  day  care  centers  and
publicly supported libraries. Additional outlets and service shall be
governed by the other rate provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.34  ADVANCE CHARGES AND DEPOSITS.




   The company may require subscribers to pay for basic subscriber service
one month in advance.  No other advance payment or deposit shall be required
by the company for basic subscriber service, except as provided in § 114.32
(B). 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.35  DISCONNECTION.




   Except as otherwise provided by the council, there shall be no charge
for the disconnection of any installation or outlet.  If any subscriber
fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber fee, or any other properly due
fee or charge, the company may disconnect the subscriber's service outlet,
provided, however, that the disconnection shall not be effected until 45 days
after the due date of the delinquent fee or charge and shall include 5 days'
written notice of the intent to disconnect properly mailed to the subscriber
in question.  After disconnection, upon payment in full of the delinquent
fee or charge, any reasonable collection expense or penalty, and the payment
of a reconnection charge, the company shall promptly reinstate the
subscriber's cable service. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.36  REFUNDS TO SUBSCRIBERS.




   (A)   If any subscriber terminates the basic subscriber service
during the first 12 months of service because of the failure of the company
to render service in accordance with the standards set forth in § 114.41,
the company shall refund to the subscriber an amount equal to the
installation or reconnection charges paid, if any, by the subscriber
multiplied by the fraction derived by dividing the month(s) remaining before
the annual anniversary of service, divided by 12.










   (B)   If any subscriber terminates basic subscriber service prior to
the end of a prepaid period, all unearned service fees as of the date the
company receives notice of the termination  shall be refunded to the
subscriber.





(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.37  FRANCHISE FEE.




   (A)   As consideration for the franchise granted herein, the company
shall pay to the council an amount equal to 5% of the company's gross
revenues.










   (B)   In the event that the law, in the future, permits some larger
basis for computing this fee, the council shall, at its election, be entitled
to collect additional moneys upon 90 days' prior written notice to the
company, and the company shall be entitled to pass through the amount of any
such increase to the subscribers.










   (C)   It is the intent of the council to utilize franchise fees as
necessary, to defray the costs of local regulation of the company, to support
the development of the access channels and generally to encourage development
of the system.










   (D)   Payments due under this provision shall be payable 45 days
after the end of each calendar quarter.  Each payment shall be accompanied
by a report, certified by an officer of the company, showing the basis for
the computation thereof.










   (E)   No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord
that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, and all amounts paid
shall be subject to audit and recomputation by the council from a period of
one year after receipt thereof. In the event that recomputation results in
additional fees owed, the amount shall be subject to a 10% per annum interest
charge.










   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as relieving the
company of its liability for other properly applicable local taxes. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)










LOCAL BUSINESS OFFICE, MAINTENANCE





STANDARDS AND COMPLAINT PROCEDURES









114.40  LOCAL BUSINESS OFFICE.




   The company shall maintain its  principal  office within the
corporate limits of one of the cities granting this or a parallel ordinance
which office shall be open during normal business hours. The office shall
have a publicly listed telephone which can be reached toll-free from all
cities covered by this and parallel ordinances, and shall be so operated that
complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received and
processed with a minimum delay.  Provision shall also be made for
telephonically receiving service interruption calls on a 24-hour basis.





(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.41  SERVICE MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.




   (A)   The company shall render prompt and efficient service and
repairs, and shall voluntarily interrupt service only for good cause and for
the shortest time possible.  The interruptions, insofar as possible, shall
be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use.










   (B)   Without additional charges to subscribers, the company shall
maintain its facilities in good working order and repair.  Any verbal,
telephonic, or written complaint relating to the quality or continuity of
service shall be attended to within a normal service interval.  In the event
that the complaints are not responded to, or service is not restored to the
levels required by the FCC during the normal service interval, the subscriber
shall be entitled to a rebate of 1/30 of his monthly service fee for each day
or part thereof between the end of the normal service interval and the time
service is restored to the standards.










   (C)   The company shall maintain the existing system and any rebuilt
system installed and operated pursuant to § 114.25, in conformance with the
following technical standards:





      (1)   C/N - 36 db





      (2)   Gain vs. Freq. 1 Ch. - ±2 db from .75 MHz to 4 MHz





      (3)   Gain vs. Freq. Sys. - 12 db





      (4)   2nd Order Dist. - 54 db





      (5)   Hum. Mod. - <5%





      (6)   Carrier to Triple Beat - 52 db





      (7)   System Leakage -





         Up to 54 MHz, - 15 mv/m @ 100 ft.





         54 to 216 MHz, - 20 mv/m @ 10 ft.





         Above 216 MHz, - 15 mv/m @ 100 ft.





      (8)   Subscriber Isol - 18 db





      (9)   Sys. Level Stab. - 12 db in a 24-hour period





      (10)   Min. Signal Level - 0 db mv





      (11)   Aural Carrier Level - 13-17 db below visual signal level





      (12)   Vis. Car. Freq. - 1.25 MHz from lower boundaries ±250
KHz





      (13)   Aur. Car. Freq. - 4.5 MHz + 1 KHz from visual carrier










   (D)   The company shall perform proof of performance tests for the
cable system following the rebuild and at other times at least annually
throughout the life of this franchise on one subscriber television location
per member city, located throughout the service area.  At least half of
these locations shall be at the far end of the distribution trunk cables. 
The company shall give 30 days notice to the council prior to conducting the
tests.  The council may specify locations to be tested, and the tests may be
witnessed by representatives of the council.  A written report of the
results of the tests shall be filed with the council within seven days of
such tests, and a written report as to corrective measures shall be filed
either contemporaneously or within seven days after the filing of the initial
test report.  If any of the tests fail to meet the performance
specifications, the company shall take immediate corrective action, retest
those locations, and advise the council of the action and results. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.42  COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.




   (A)   Any subscriber, user, programmer, or member  of  the 
general  public  who  has  a complaint regarding the quality of cable
television service,  equipment  malfunctions, billings,  or  any other
matters, which remains unresolved for 30 days after it has been brought to
the company's attention, in writing, may file a complaint, in writing, with
the council's designee, the “complaint officer,” who shall have primary
responsibility for the continuing administration of complaint procedures
hereunder.










   (B)   Upon the filing of a complaint, the complaint officer shall
notify the company and make an investigation to determine whether or not
there is probable cause to credit the allegations.  If he determines after
the investigation that there is probable cause to credit the allegations of
the complaint, he shall so notify the company and complainant and shall
promptly endeavor to resolve the matter by conciliation and persuasion.  In
the event the complaint officer is unable to obtain conciliation within a
reasonable time, he shall, with the consent of the complainant, promptly
notify the council of the complaint.  The council shall, within 10 days
following the receipt of the notice, schedule a hearing at which it shall
receive evidence to determine if there is a legitimate complaint.  Not later
than 14 days after the conclusion of a hearing the council shall make public
its decision which shall include a written statement of its findings. 
Hearings may be ex parte if after reasonable notice the company does not
appear.  Findings and decisions of the council shall be advisory only, and
nothing shall prohibit the complaint officer from continuing at any time his
efforts to reach conciliation.










   (C)   The company shall notify each subscriber at the time of
initial installation of the council's established complaint procedure,
including the name, address, and local telephone number of the council's
complaint officer. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)










INDEMNIFICATION, INSURANCE, BONDING, AND ESCROW FUND









114.45  GENERAL INDEMNIFICATION.




   The company shall save and keep the city and the council and their
officials, agents, and employees free and harmless from any loss, expense, or
damage to person or property arising out of, or resulting from, the operation
of the cable system or any provision of the franchise.  The company shall,
at its sole cost, defend  and  indemnify  the  city  and  the council
from any charges, claims, suits, cases of action, penalties, fines, and costs
(including, but not limited to, reasonable legal fees and court costs) caused
by, or arising out of this franchise or the construction, operation, or
maintenance of the cable system pursuant thereto, provided, however, the
company shall have no obligation to pay damages, penalties, or fines which
are levied on the city/council as a result of a finding that its officials,
employees, or agents were involved in willful misconduct or fraud. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.46  LIABILITY INSURANCE.




   The company shall maintain and, within 30 days of the effective date of
this chapter, specifically agrees to maintain, throughout the term of this
franchise, liability insurance insuring the city, the council and the company
with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned in § 114.45 above in the
minimum amounts of:










   (A)   $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death to any one person,
within the limit of $2,000,000 for injury or death resulting from any one
accident.










   (B)   $2,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one
accident. 










   (C)   From time to time, this insurance coverage shall be increased
or decreased to ensure that adequate coverage is purchased to reflect the
effects of inflation or deflation and the likelihood of damage awards.





(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.47  PERFORMANCE BOND.




   The company shall establish and maintain throughout the term hereof the
following bonds:





   (A)   During rebuild construction (in other words from the date of
commencement of construction through the proof of performance test following
construction), a labor and material bond in the sum of $1,000,000 which shall
be used to insure the satisfactory completion of construction;










   (B)   A  faithful  performance  bond  running  to the city in
the sum of $50,000 conditioned  upon  the faithful performance of the
company of all terms and conditions of this franchise and upon the further
condition that, in the event the company fails to comply with any law,
ordinance, rule or regulation governing this franchise, there shall be
recoverable, jointly and severally, from the principal and surety of the
bond, any damage or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full
amount of property of the company, plus costs and reasonable attorney's fees
up to the full amount of the bond.










   (C)   For any period of time other than rebuild construction, an
annual blanket bond in the amount of $2,000.  The blanket bond is to cover
any excavation or cutting into by the company in any street right-of-way area
in the city for that calendar year.  An additional permit bond shall be
charged by the city for the excavation of any portion of any street
right-of-way based upon the current cost of resurfacing the area with like
material according to the following schedule:




 


4" Concrete Sidewalk               $  4.00/S.F.



6" Concrete Sidewalk             5.00/S.F.



Concrete Drive Approach          7.50/S.F



Sodding, Including Top Soil          4.00/S.F.



6" Concrete Pavement         60.00/S.F.



9" Concrete Pavement         90.00/S.F.



Asphalt Residential Pavement      50.00/S.F.



Asphalt Thoroughfare Pavement   90.00/S.F.










   (D)   In 1991 and at other times pursuant to § 114.49(B), the
city/council shall review these dollar amounts and make adjustments to meet
changes in current costs. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-87; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.48  PROOF OF INSURANCE AND BONDING.




   Within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter, the company shall
furnish proof to the council that a satisfactory insurance policy and
performance bond have been obtained.  The insurance policy and performance
bond shall be approved by the council, and a copy of the insurance policy and
performance bond along with written evidence of payment of the required
premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the council.  The insurance
policy and bond shall specify that at least 30 days' prior written notice
shall be filed  with  the council of any intention not to renew, to cancel,
or to make a material change therein. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.49  LIQUIDATED DAMAGES; ASSESSMENT OF INSURANCE BONDING AND LIQUIDATED
DAMAGE AMOUNTS.




   (A)   By acceptance of a franchise granted hereunder, the company
understands and agrees that failure to comply with any time and performance
requirements, as stipulated in this ordinance or in the franchise, will
result in damage to the city, and that it is and will be impracticable to
determine the actual amount of such damage in the event of delay or
non-performance.  The company therefore agrees that it shall pay to the
city, or the council on behalf of the city, the following amounts which shall
be chargeable to the company:





      (1)   Failure to timely commence or complete the rebuilding of
the cable system as set forth in § 114.25 - $200 per day.  In addition to
the liquidated damages, the franchise term shall be reduced one month for
each month that the company defaults in the commencement or completion of
construction of a rebuilt cable system as herein provided.





      (2)   Failure to provide or replace the PEG access equipment
as specified in § 114.22 - $50 per day or part thereof.





      (3)   Failure to provide the PEG access facilities as
specified in § 114.22 - $50 per day or part thereof.










   (B)   At the fifth, tenth, and fifteenth anniversary of the
effective date of the franchise, or upon the assignment of the franchise or
the transfer of control of the company (other than an assignment or transfer
not resulting in a change in ultimate control), the city/council shall have
the right to reassess the dollar amounts contained in §§ 114.46, 114.47,
and 114.49(A) and to make increases if the producer price index (formerly the
wholesale price index) for all urban consumers (PPI-U), or its successor,
increases by 50% or more as compared to the PPI-U in October 1986. 
Furthermore, the council reserves the right upon such assignment or transfer
of control to apply liquidated damages to additional categories of violations
in § 114.49(A) and to negotiate with the company a dollar amount for each
category. 
(Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.50  RIGHT TO COMBINE PERFORMANCE  BONDS AND ESCROWED FUNDS UNDER
PARALLEL ORDINANCES.




   The city may, at its option, join with the cities under parallel
ordinances to require a joint performance bond which shall be subject to all
of the provisions contained in §§ 114.47 through 114.49(A), except that all
dollar amounts shall be equal to the aggregate of the amounts provided in all
parallel ordinances.  The council shall apportion any amounts recovered as
damages under the joint bond among the cities under this and parallel
ordinances. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)










BOOKS, RECORDS, AND REPORTS









114.55  BOOKS AND RECORDS.




   The company's operations under all parallel ordinances shall be viewed
as one financial and reporting unit, and its books and records shall be kept
in such a way as to show the activities of this unit separate from any other
activities of the company.  The council shall have the right to inspect, at
any time during normal business hours, all books, records, maps, plans,
income tax returns, financial statements, and other like materials of the
company which relate to its operations hereunder, including expenses
attributed to the system by any parent corporation.  Access to the
aforementioned records or any reports to be provided pursuant to § 114.56
shall not be denied on the basis that the records or reports contain
“proprietary” information.  However, the council shall treat all
information obtained from the company with the same degree of confidentiality
as would be accorded similar information by the FCC. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.56  REPORTS.




   (A)   The company shall file with the city and the council true and
accurate plant maps of the system to be constructed hereunder and shall keep
the same as current as practicable.










   (B)   Not later than 120 days after the end of each fiscal year or
60  days  following  the  required filing date with the FCC, whichever is
later, the company shall make available to the council for inspection any
forms, reports, or other filings it makes with the FCC. 










   (C)   The company shall file with the council copies of all
complaints, petitions, or orders of the FCC, EEOC, or FAA, in which the
company is a named party and the company's response, thereto, if any, all
within 10 days of the company's receipt or filing of the same.










   (D)   Upon reasonable notice, the company shall appear at any
meetings or public hearings called by the council to review or evaluate the
company's activities or performance.










   (E)   All complaints, petitions, or orders received by the city, the
council, or the complaint officer related to the company's activities
hereunder shall be forwarded to the company and answered by it with a copy to
the original addressee within 10 days of receipt. 










   (F)   Within 90 days of the end of each fiscal year, the company
shall file with the council:





      (1)   A financial report for the system serving the council
cities.  The report shall include a statement of assets and income
statement, certified as to accuracy by the chief financial officer of the
company;





      (2)   The current list of names and addresses of the company's
principal management personnel; and





      (3)   The current list of all persons owning a 3% or greater
ownership interest in the system serving the council cities.





(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)










TRANSFER, ASSIGNMENTS AND TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING





CONTROL OF THE COMPANY









114.60  COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR  ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE
AND FOR CERTAIN TRANSACTIONS  AFFECTING COMPANY'S OWNERSHIP.




   Council approval, pursuant to the provisions of § 114.61, shall be
required prior to:





   (A)   The assignment or transfer of this franchise, in which event
city ratification, pursuant to §§ 114.75 through 114.77, shall also be
required;










   (B)   The issuance by the company of more than 20% of its voting
stock to any person or group of persons other than Continental Cablevisions,
Inc. (CCI);










   (C)   The transfer by CCI of more than 20% of the company's
outstanding stock to any other person or group of persons;










   (D)   Any judicial action or proceeding resulting in the transfer of
more than 20% of the voting stock of the company; and










   (E)   Any other transfer of stock or ownership interest which
results in a change in de jure or de facto control of the company.





(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.61  PROCEDURE FOR COUNCIL APPROVAL OF TRANSFERS.




   The following procedures shall be followed in the council's
consideration of the transactions described in § 114.60 above:





   (A)   Applications for the council's approval shall be made at least
90 days prior to the effective date of the transaction and shall contain the
information and supporting documentation as would be reasonably necessary for
the council's consideration based on the criteria specified in division (C)
below;










   (B)   Within 90 days of receipt of an application pursuant to
division (A) above, and following a properly noticed public hearing affording
due process, the council shall, by written resolution, issue its approval or
disapproval of the proposed transaction, stating therein the basis of its
decision;










   (C)   Council's approval or disapproval of the requested transaction
shall be based on a determination of whether or not the proposed transferee
possesses the character, legal, financial, and technical qualifications then
required by federal, state, or local law to operate a cable television
system.  Council's approval of the transaction shall not be unreasonably
withheld. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed l-13-87)









114.62  RIGHTS OF ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSFER TO AND BY MORTGAGEES OR PLEDGEES.




   Nothing in §§ 114.60 and 114.61 shall in any way limit CCI's right to
pledge, mortgage, or hypothecate its interests in the company to a recognized
financial institution to secure borrowed funds or the institution's rights to
foreclose on, hold, sell, assign, or transfer such interests.  Provided,
however, that the mortgagee, pledgee, or its transferee or assignee shall be
subject to all of the terms of this chapter, and provided further that within
6 months from the date of foreclosure by any mortgagee or pledgee, the party
or its transferee shall have been reviewed and approved by the council
pursuant to the procedures enumerated in § 114.61 above. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.63  NOTIFICATION OF COUNCIL IN THE  EVENT OF CERTAIN TRANSACTIONS
INDIRECTLY AFFECTING CONTROL OF COMPANY.




   The stockholders of the company and CCI shall notify the council of any
transaction which results in a transfer or assignment of more than 20% of the
voting stock of their respective corporations.
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)










RENEWALS









114.65  NOTICE OF COMPANY'S DESIRE TO  RENEW.




   The council may decide that the franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter should be renewed or extended, the company shall notify the council
at least 8 months, or at such earlier date as council may request (but not
more than 36 months), prior to the expiration of this franchise or any
renewal extension thereof.  Failure to make such a timely application shall
be cause for the forfeiture of renewal and extension rights hereunder, unless
otherwise waived by the council.
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.66  RENEWAL APPLICATIONS.




   The company's renewal application, when filed, shall demonstrate the
following:





   (A) That it has been and continues to be in substantial compliance with
the terms, conditions, and limitations of this chapter;










   (B)   That its system has been installed, constructed, maintained,
and operated in accordance with the accepted standards of the industry and
this chapter;










   (C)   That it has the character, legal, technical, financial, and
other qualifications then required by federal, state, or local law to
continue to maintain and operate its system, and to extend the same as the
state of the art progresses so as to assure its subscribers of high quality
service; and










   (D)   That is has made a good faith effort to provide services and
facilities which accommodate the demonstrated needs of subscribers as
reasonably ascertained by the council, provided, however, that the company
shall have no obligation to have provided services, beyond those contemplated
in § 114.21 which adversely impact the economic viability of the system. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.67  PROCEDURE FOR CONSIDERING RENEWAL APPLICATION.




   Upon a filing consistent with §§ 114.65 and 114.66 above, the council
shall, prior to the consideration of any other applications, consider and act
upon the company's requested renewal in conformance with 47 USC, Section 546,
and the following procedure:





   (A)   Within 90 days of the receipt of the application, the council
shall, following appropriate public notice, hold a public hearing affording
due process on the company's application at which interested parties,
including the company, shall be afforded an opportunity to present oral or
written comments.










   (B)    By written resolution reciting the basis of its findings, the
council shall report to the city, within 90 days of the public hearing, that
it:





      (1)   Has found that the public interest is no longer served
by the continuation of the system's communications services within the city,
and therefore has decided that any services should not be enfranchised within
the city limits during the year succeeding the date of the company's
termination of service; or





      (2)   Has found that the company has substantially failed to
meet the criteria for renewal established in § 114.66, and therefore has
decided that the company's renewal application should be denied; or





      (3)   Has found that the company has substantially met the
criteria established in § 114.66, except where prevented by conditions
beyond its reasonable control, and therefore has decided that this franchise
should be renewed. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.68  CONTINUITY OF SERVICE.




   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, including its
possible expiration, the company shall be obliged and entitled to continue to
operate its system until 90 days after the city's action pursuant to §§
114.75 through 114.77 below on the council's decision under §§ 114.65
through 114.69. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.69  REMOVAL OF FACILITIES IN THE EVENT OF NON-RENEWAL.




   (A)   In the event that the city ratifies the council's decision not
to renew this franchise, the council may require the company to continue
operations for a period not to exceed 12 months from the date of the
council's decision.  In the event of the non-renewal, the company shall have
2 years from the date it ceases operations to remove, at its own expense, all
portions of its system from all public ways within the city and to restore
the public ways to a condition reasonably satisfactory to the city.










   (B)   In the event the city denies the company's request for renewal
or revokes the franchise for cause, the city, or the council authorized by
the city, shall have the option to purchase the cable system assets.  If
this option is exercised, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at fair
market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going
concern, but with no value allocated to the franchise itself, except that, if
the franchise is revoked for cause, the acquisition shall be at an equitable
price, pursuant to 47 USC, Section 547b.  In order to exercise this option,
the city, or the council authorized by the city, must notify the company in
writing within 60 days of the date the denial or revocation is ordered by the
city or council; closing on any such sale shall occur within six months after
the order of non-renewal or revocation becomes final.





(Amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)










REVOCATION FOR CAUSE









114.70  EVENTS CONSTITUTING GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION.




   The council reserves the right to decide that this franchise and all
rights and privileges of the company hereunder should be revoked in the event
that the company:





   (A)   Fails to complete construction as specified herein;










   (B)   Breaches or violates any material provision of this chapter or
other valid and enforceable ordinances or regulations of the city;










   (C)   Practices fraud or deception upon the city or the council,
which actions may include any attempt to purposefully evade or avoid any of
the provisions of this chapter;










   (D)   Is adjudged bankrupt, has a receiver appointed for it, makes
an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or has a significant amount of
its property sold under execution or other legal process or seized by
creditors; or










   (E)   Is in default in the making of payments under this chapter.
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.71  NOTICE, TIME TO CORRECT, AND DUE PROCESS REQUIRED IN REVOCATION.




   In the event the city believes there is a reasonable probability that
grounds for revocation of this franchise exist, the city, or the council
authorized by the city, shall notify the company in writing, setting forth
the nature and facts relating to the grounds for such revocation.  Within 30
days following such written notice, the company may furnish evidence
reasonably satisfactory to the council that corrective action has been taken
or is being actively or expeditiously pursued, or that the alleged violations
did not occur, or that the alleged violations were beyond the company's
control.  If the company does not do so or if the council is not satisfied
with the response, the council shall establish a date, time, and place for
the conduct of a public hearing on the grounds for revocation, with the date
of the public hearing no sooner than 30 days or not later than 60 days
following the expiration of such 30-day period. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.72  REMOVAL OF FACILITIES IN THE EVENT OF REVOCATION.




   In the event that the city ratifies the council's decision that this
franchise should be revoked, the council may require the company to continue
operating for a period not to exceed 12 months from the date of the council's
decision.  In the event of the revocation, the company shall have 2 years
from the date on which it ceases operations to remove, at its own expense,
all portions of its system from all public ways within the city and to
restore the public ways to a condition reasonably satisfactory to the city. 
(Amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)










CITY ACTION REQUIRED TO RATIFY CERTAIN COUNCIL DECISIONS









114.75  DECISIONS REQUIRING CITY  RATIFICATION.




   City action, by duly adopted ordinance, shall be required to ratify the
following council actions:





   (A)   Approvals of assignments or transfers of this franchise as
specified in § 114.60 (A);










   (B)   Decisions to renew or not to renew this franchise as provided
in §§ 114.65 through 114.69;










   (C)   Decisions to revoke this franchise as provided in §§ 114.70
through 114.72;










   (D)   Renewal or extension of the franchise. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.76  COUNCIL'S DECISIONS PRESUMED WELL CONSIDERED.




   In its deliberations on the matters specified in § 114.75, the city
shall accept the decisions of the council as the considered judgment of an
informed and reasonable party, and, absent special showings to the contrary,
shall act to ratify the council's decisions.





(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.77  TIMELINESS OF CITY RATIFICATION.




   (A)   After receiving council's decision on the matters specified in
§ 114.75, the city shall promptly review and act upon the matters, and
shall, in any event, act within 90 days of the council's decision.










   (B)   During the interval between the actions of the council and the
city on the matters, all parties shall be entitled to proceed in reliance on
the council's decision, except that neither the council nor the city nor the
company shall be held liable for any damages resulting from its reliance on
the decision during the interval, provided that the council shall have acted
within the time period specified in §§ 114.61 (B) or 114.67, as applicable,
and that the city shall have acted within the time period specified in





division (A).
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)










RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS PROTECTED









114.80  DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED.




   The company shall not deny service or access, or otherwise discriminate
against its subscribers, users, or employees on the basis of race, color,
religion, national origin, or sex.  The company shall strictly adhere to the
equal employment opportunity requirements of 47 USC, Section 544, or other
applicable federal or state laws.
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.81  CABLE TAPPING AND MONITORING  PROHIBITED WITHOUT PERMISSION OF 
SUBSCRIBER.




   (A)   In order to protect the privacy of the subscribers to the
company's system, the company shall comply with the requirements of 47 USC,
Section 551, and other applicable state and federal requirements.










   (B)   Neither the company nor the city nor the council shall tap
and/or monitor or arrange for the tapping and/or monitoring or permit, either
expressly or impliedly, any other person to tap and/or monitor any cable,
line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose
whatsoever, without the express permission of the subscriber. 
Notwithstanding the preceding sentences, the company shall be entitled to
conduct system-wide or individually addressed “sweeps” for the purpose of
verifying system integrity, controlling return-path transmissions, or billing
for pay services. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.82  SALE OF SUBSCRIBER LISTS PROHIBITED.




   The company shall not, without the specific authorization of the
subscriber(s) involved, sell, or otherwise make available to any person or
group of persons lists of the names and addresses of its subscribers, or any
list which identifies  the  viewing habits of any individual subscriber,
except as the same is necessary for the construction, marketing, and
maintenance of the company's facilities and services hereunder and the
concomitant billing of subscribers for the services, or as the same may be
necessary to give leased access channel users sufficient and pertinent
information to make full use of the leased access channel. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.83  CENSORSHIP PROHIBITED ON ACCESS CHANNELS.




   The company shall exercise no control over program content on any of
the access channels. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.84  LIABILITY FOR OBSCENITY, DEFAMATION, OR INVASION OF PRIVACY ON
ACCESS CHANNELS.




   Liability for obscenity, defamation, or invasion of privacy on any
access channels shall rest with the person or group of persons utilizing the
access channels. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)










RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES









114.85  INTENT.




   It is the intent of this subchapter to provide for the orderly
resolution of any controversy or dispute between the council, the city, and
the company arising out of the enforcement or interpretation of this chapter
or any rule, regulation, or procedure relating to cable communications
matters.  Fact finding, mediation, and arbitration shall be the means of
resolving such controversies or disputes wherever possible.  Neither of
these methods, however, shall be the first resort of the parties, but shall
be undertaken only after a reasonable time has been expended in good faith
negotiation.  If both parties mutually agree, fact finding and/or mediation
may be skipped. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.86  FACT FINDING.




   Any controversy or dispute, upon the election of either the council,
the city, or the company, shall be submitted to an expert individual
acceptable to both parties for an investigation of the facts and a report
thereof.  The fact finding shall be for the purpose of developing better
information for the use of both parties and shall not be binding. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.87  MEDIATION; ARBITRATION.




   (A)   Any controversy or dispute, upon the election of either the
council, the city, or the company, shall be submitted to an expert
individual, acceptable to the parties, for the purpose of facilitating
discussion and receiving new perspectives on the issues and new proposals for
compromise.  The mediation shall not be binding.










   (B)   Any controversy or dispute, upon the election of either the
council, the city or the company, may be submitted to arbitration in
accordance with guidelines established by the American Arbitration
Association.  Any decisions reached through arbitration shall be binding on
both parties, and shall be subject to confirmation, vacation, modification,
or correction in accordance with Chapter 2711 of the Ohio Revised code.  In
addition, an award based upon a mistake of law may be set aside by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.88  SELECTION PROCEDURES.




   In fact finding or mediation, the parties shall each present a maximum
of 3 names for possible service as the expert.  If there is no agreement on
any of the names, the American Arbitration Association shall select a person
to fulfill the function of expert.  In arbitration, the parties shall select
an arbitrator according to the procedures of the American Arbitration
Association. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.89  FEES AND EXPENSES.




   The expense of fact finding and mediation, including  the  fees 
of  experts,  shall  be  equally borne by the council, the city, and 
the  company.  In addition, the cost of expert witnesses shall be borne by
that party, but all other expenses shall be equally borne by the council and
the company. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)










MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS









114.90  POWERS OF COURT TO ENFORCE  COMPLIANCE WITH FRANCHISE.




   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any party hereto
from pursuing its full legal rights and enforcing compliance with the terms
of this franchise. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.91  NONENFORCEMENT BY CITY.




   The company shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with the
provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of the city or the
council to enforce prompt compliance, nor shall any inaction by the city or
the council be deemed to waive or void any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.92  COMPLIANCE WITH ALL APPLICABLE  LAWS AND REGULATIONS.




   During the term of this franchise, the company shall comply with all
present and future applicable laws, rules, and regulations, and any
amendments thereto, promulgated by any federal, state, or local authority of
competent jurisdiction, including but not limited to the laws, rules, and
regulations of the FCC and the city. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.93  SUBSEQUENT ACTION BY STATE OR  FEDERAL AGENCIES.




   Should this state, the FCC, or any other agency of competent
jurisdiction require the company to perform or cease to perform any act,
compliance with which requirement would be inconsistent with any provision of
this chapter, the company shall comply with the requirement and shall so
notify the council.  Any mandatory modification of FCC franchise standards
resulting from amendments by the commission shall be incorporated into this
chapter within one year of adoption of the modification, or at the time of
franchise renewal, whichever occurs first.





(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.94  DELEGATION OF FUNCTIONS.




   In accordance with the city charter, the city may delegate any of its
functions or responsibilities, pursuant to this chapter, to a board,
commission or officer, which designee shall have a right of appeal to the
city council. 
(Ord. 1907, passed 5-27-75; amend. Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.95  NOTICE.




   Whenever, under the terms of the franchise, a provision is made for
notice of any kind, it shall be sufficient if such notice is in writing,
addressed to the appropriate party at the current address and sent by
registered or certified mail with postage prepaid.





(Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.96  AMENDMENTS.




   Amendments to this franchise may be initiated by the council or the
company in accordance with 47 U.S.C., Section 545.





(Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)









114.97  FORCE MAJEURE.




   Prevention or delay of any performance under this franchise due to
circumstances beyond the control of the company or the cities, including
weather, acts of God, strikes, and similar unforeseen circumstances, but not
including economic hardship or inability to secure materials, shall not be
deemed to be noncompliance with or a violation of this franchise.





(Ord. 2574, passed 1-13-87)
























CHAPTER 115
ALARM SYSTEMS









Section










115.01   Definitions





115.02   Alarm permits





115.03   Automatic dialing devices





115.04   Equipment maintenance and inspection of alarm systems





115.05   Suspension, revocation, and appeals procedure for permits





115.06   Liability of city





115.07   Exemptions





115.99   Penalty




 



115.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.










   ALARM PERMIT.  A permit issued by the Chief of Police or Fire Chief to
any owner or other person in control of a building, property, or part
thereof, located in the city, to install and maintain an alarm system.










   ALARM PERMIT HOLDER.  A person, organization, or company who has a
permit issued to him by the Chief of Police or Fire Chief.





(Ord. 2318.  Passed 6-8-82.)










   ALARM SYSTEM.  Any assembly of equipment and devices which signals so
as to be seen or heard outside the protected building or space the presence
of fire, smoke, robbery, burglary, vandalism, or unauthorized intrusion;
includes the 9-1-1 telephone system and equipment, however, it specifically
excludes pay telephones. 





(Ord. 3242.  Passed 5-27-03.)










   APPROPRIATE CHIEF.  The Chief of Police or the Fire Chief.










   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE.  A device which is interconnected to a
telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number
and transmit by voice, message, or code signal an emergency message
indicating a need for emergency response.





(Ord. 2318.  Passed 6-8-82.)










   FALSE ALARM.  An alarm signal or message initiated and transmitted
either automatically or manually through an alarm system, to the city
eliciting response by police or fire when fire, smoke, robbery, burglary,
vandalism, or unauthorized intrusion does not, in fact, exist, but does not
include an alarm signal caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, or other
catastrophic acts of God not reasonably subject to control by the alarm
manufacturer, installer, or alarm permit holder.  False alarms include 9-1-1
telephone calls. 
(Ord. 3242.  Passed 5-27-03.)










   INTERCONNECTED ALARM SYSTEM.  An alarm system which directly or
indirectly, automatically or manually, uses a telephone line to transmit an
alarm or message on activation of the alarm system.










   LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM.  An alarm system that when activated only sounds a
horn, bell, buzzer, or other type of audible or visible alarm that is
designed to be audible or visible beyond the premises being served, but which
does not result in the transmission of a signal to any other location.





(Ord. 2318, passed 6-8-82)









115.02  ALARM PERMITS.




   (A)   Any residence or building or part thereof located within the
city may be equipped with an alarm system for the purpose of detecting and
signaling the presence of a fire or unauthorized intrusion.










   (B)   Before an alarm system is installed in a residence or
building, the owner must apply for a permit from either the Chief of Police
or the Fire Chief.  The appropriate Chief shall prescribe the form of the
application and request such information as is necessary to evaluate and act
on the permit application.  The information contained in an alarm permit
application shall be securely maintained and restricted to inspection only by
the Chief of Police, Fire Chief, or their designated representative.










   (C)   Any person, organization, or business which currently has an
alarm system installed in their residence or place of business shall apply
for an alarm permit within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter.










   (D)   When there has occurred any material change in the information
previously submitted with respect to such alarm system, it shall be the duty
of the occupant of a building served by an alarm system within ten days after
a change in information previously submitted to the city to file an
application supplement containing accurate current information with respect
to the data required by the respective Chief.





(Ord. 2318, passed 6-8-82)  Penalty, see § 115.99









115.03  AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICES.




   (A)   The city may subscribe to one or more telephone lines for
burglar alarms, or for fire alarm purposes, or for similar purposes; and when
any line is designated as provided for above, persons may, on proper
application and compliance with applicable laws, be granted a permit to
install a device or devices which automatically select the designated
telephone line for the purpose of playing a recorded message or to otherwise
report an intrusion or other emergency.  An annual interconnect fee shall be
established by the City Manager, in such amount as to reimburse the city for
the cost of any telephone lines dedicated to automatic dialing devices. 
Such fee shall be revised at the beginning of every fiscal year to reflect
the most recent cost experience.










   (B)   No person shall use or cause to be used, any telephone device
or telephone attachment that automatically selects any telephone line
allocated by the telephone company to the city or any of its departments or
divisions, except a telephone line which shall be specifically designated by
the City Manager for such purpose.  Such designated telephone lines shall
terminate at the municipal communications center in the West Carrollton Civic
Center.










   (C)   All automatic dialing devices shall be programmed to use the
designated telephone line within 30 days of notification of designation by
the City Manager; additionally the message format must be approved by the
appropriate Chief prior to interconnection.





(Ord. 2318, passed 6-8-82)  Penalty, see § 115.99









115.04  EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION OF ALARM SYSTEMS.




   All equipment used in installations for which a permit is required
shall meet the applicable standards of the Underwriters Laboratories of the
United States and of Canada, Factory Mutual, or the National Fire Protection
Association, or other recognized industry standard.  Applicant may be
required to submit evidence to the appropriate Chief of the reliability and
suitability of the equipment.





(Ord. 2318, passed 6-8-82)









115.05  SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, AND  APPEALS PROCEDURE FOR PERMITS.




   (A)   Before a permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be
suspended, or revoked for any reason except as prescribed in § 115.99 (C), a
hearing must be held before the appropriate Chief.  A notice setting forth
the time, place, and nature of the hearing shall be sent to the alarm permit
holder no less than seven days prior to the hearing.  The hearing shall be
held within 20 days following the date of the notice.










   (B)   After the hearing, the appropriate Chief shall either dismiss
the case or shall forward a recommendation of revocation or suspension to the
City Manager.  Within ten days after receiving the recommendation, the City
Manager shall approve or disapprove the recommendation and notify the permit
holder accordingly.










   (C)   Any decision made by the City Manager pursuant to this section
may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the Clerk of
Council within five days of receipt of the City Manager's decision.  Such
appeal shall be heard by the City Council within 30 days after the filing of
the appeal and that body may affirm, amend, or reverse the decision or take
other action deemed appropriate.










   (D)   At the end of the revocation or suspension period, the alarm
permit holder will be required, if the holder intends to continue using his
alarm system, to first refile an application and have it approved by the
appropriate Chief.





(Ord. 2318, passed 6-8-82)









115.06  LIABILITY OF CITY.




   The issuance of any permits in conjunction with this chapter shall not
constitute acceptance by the city of any liability to maintain any equipment,
to answer alarms, or for anything in connection therewith.





(Ord. 2318, passed 6-8-82)









115.07  EXEMPTIONS.




   (A)   The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to home
smoke detectors not intended to be heard outside the dwelling unit, nor to
local alarm systems or audible alarms affixed to automobiles, boats, boat
trailers, and recreation vehicles or other similar motor vehicles.










   (B)   In the event of a conflict between the requirements of this
chapter and any other ordinances or regulations of the city or any other
governmental agency, the more stringent requirement shall be applicable and
enforced.





(Ord. 2318, passed 6-8-82)









115.99  PENALTY.




   (A)   No person shall operate an alarm system without first
obtaining a permit as required by this chapter, or after having a permit
revoked or suspended, and after exhausting the right of appeal, fail to
disconnect the alarm system.  Violation of this section shall be a minor
misdemeanor.  Each day of such unpermitted use shall constitute a separate
violation.










   (B)   No more than three chargeable false alarms shall be conveyed
from any premises having an alarm permit during any 12-month period.  An
alarm will be classified as false if the responding police or fire personnel
see no evidence of fire, smoke, robbery, burglary, vandalism, or unauthorized
intrusion.  If the permit holder proves that the alarm was caused by an
event not reasonably foreseeable and which could not have been prevented by
the proper adjustment or presetting of the sensor threshold, the alarm will
be designated a non-chargeable false alarm.  During any 12-month period no
penalty shall be imposed for the first, second, or third chargeable false
alarms.










      (1)   If any alarm system or telephone system produces four
false alarms in any twelve-month period, a civil penalty as set forth in
Section 37.22 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances
of the City of West Carrollton will be assessed to the alarm user.










      (2)   If any alarm system or telephone system produces five
false alarms in any twelve-month period, a civil penalty as set forth in
Section 37.22 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances
of the City of West Carrollton will be assessed to the alarm user.










      (3)   If any alarm system or telephone system produces six
false alarms in any twelve-month period, a civil penalty as set forth in
Section 37.22 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances
of the City of West Carrollton will be assessed to the alarm user.










      (4)   If any alarm system or telephone system produces seven
false alarms in any twelve-month period, a civil penalty as set forth in
Section 37.22 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances
of the City of West Carrollton will be assessed to the alarm user.










      (5)   If any alarm system or telephone system produces eight
or more false alarms in any twelve- month period, a civil penalty as set
forth in Section 37.22 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified
Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton will be assessed to the alarm user
for each occurrence.










   (C)   (1)   Following the fourth or subsequent officially
chargeable false alarms in any 12-month period, the Chief of Police or Fire
Chief will review the alarm holder’s permit and recommend to the City
Manager, continuance of the permit or revoking of the permit for up to a
maximum of six months.  The alarm permit holder may appeal the City
Manager’s decision to City Council as provided for in §115.05.  City
Council’s decision shall be final.










      (2)   No permit holder shall fail to disconnect his alarm
system on order of the appropriate chief as set forth herein.  Violation of
this section shall be a misdemeanor of the third degree.










   (D)   No alarm permit holder shall knowingly allow his alarm system
to be used by any person to create a false alarm as defined in Section
138.07. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.  In addition to any other penalty prescribed by Section 130.99, the
alarm permit held by such permit holder may be suspended or revoked for up to
one year.





(Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)
























CHAPTER 116
TAX ABATEMENT









Section










116.01   General guidelines





116.02   Area characteristic guidelines





116.03   Procedural guidelines




 



116.01  GENERAL GUIDELINES.




   (A)   Tax abatement may be used to attract new businesses and
industries where the total benefits to the citizens of the city are greater
than the real property taxes abated.










   (B)   Tax abatement bay be granted when, in the judgement of the
Council, it is determined that such incentive is necessary to attract
businesses or industry to the city, and that failure to grant the abatement
would result in business or industry locating elsewhere.










   (C)   Tax abatement may be used when it is necessary to retain
existing businesses or industry or help them expand.  The amount of real
property taxes abated must be less than would be lost if the business or
industry moved from the city and, in the case of expansion, the taxes abated
must be less than the tax revenues to be gained by the expansion.





(Res. 11-91, passed 5-14-91)









116.02 AREA CHARACTERISTIC GUIDELINES.




   (A)   Individual  Community Reinvestment Areas  (CRA) shall be
relatively compact and contain a minimum land area of approximately five
acres.










   (B)   Community Reinvestment Areas shall already be served by public
water, sewer and other essential infrastructure, or be able to provide for
these services immediately.










   (C)   Community Reinvestment Areas shall be used primarily to
encourage development in manufacturing districts.










   (D)   Community Reinvestment Areas shall include only existing
developed residential areas in which maintenance and reconstruction are
discouraged.  Vacant residential  land shall not be  included in Community
Reinvestment Areas except to encourage the infill of parcels in otherwise
developed neighborhoods.










   (E)   Community Reinvestment Areas should not work to encourage the
continuation or expansion of non-conforming uses.





(Res. 11-91, passed 5-14-91)









116.03  PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES.




   (A)   Survey made of housing in city.  (R.C. § 3735.66) 










   (B)   The city will continue to advise the applicable school board
of proposed tax abatement requests.










   (C)   Public hearing held on intent to establish or expand a CRA.










   (D)   Resolution passed by Council.





      (1)   Defining boundaries of new or expanded CRA. (R.C. §
3735.66)





      (2)   Determination that this area contains housing facilities
or structures of historical significance, and that new housing construction
and repair of existing facilities or structures are discourages. 
(R.C. § 3735.65(B))





      (3)   Defines types of development activities eligible for
abatement and number of years. 
(R.C. § 3735.67) 





      (4)   Designates a “housing officer” to administer the CRA.
(R.C. § 3735.66)





      (5)   Sets date after which control may determine that no
additional tax abatement applications may be accepted.










   (E)   Resolution is published in newspaper of general circulation,
one per week for two weeks.
(R.C. § 3735.66)










   (F)   Certified copy of resolution is forwarded to County Auditor
within 10 days.










   (G)   Notice of creation of CRA mailed to all property owners within
ten days.










   (H)   Housing Council appointed for each CRA.  Normally, the City
Council will serve as the Housing Council. 
(R.C. § 3735.69)










   (I)   Annual inspection of abated properties is made by housing
officer and findings reported to Housing Council. 
(R.C. § 3735.69)










   (J)   Annual reminder of location in the CRA is mailed to all
property owners.





(Res. 11-91, passed 5-14-91)
























CHAPTER 117
MASSAGE SERVICES ESTABLISHMENTS









Section









117.01   Definitions



117.02   Permit required; prohibited conduct; exemptions



117.03   Permit application process



117.04   Issuance of permit; expiration and renewal



117.05   Facility requirements



117.06   Prohibitions



117.07   Transfer of permit; change of information



117.08   Inspections



117.09   Penalties; revocation of permit



117.10   Appeals; hearings


















117.01  DEFINITIONS.









   For the purpose of this Chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.










   (A)   APPLICANT means a person who has applied for a permit to
operate a massage services establishment, or any individual who applies
perform massages at a massage establishment in the City of West Carrollton.










   (B)   LICENSED MASSAGE THERIPIST means any person who is licensed
under Chapter 4731 of the Ohio Revised Code to practice massage therapy in
the State of Ohio.










   (C)   MASSAGE means any method of exerting pressure on, stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating the external
soft tissue of the body with the hands, or with the aid of any mechanical or
electrical apparatus or appliance in exchange for anything of value.










   (D)   MASSAGE SERVICES ESTABLISHMENT means a place of business or
establishment permitted under this section, and the City of West Carrollton
Zoning Code, where massage therapy services are provided.










   (E)   MASSEUR or MASSEUSE means any individual who performs massages
at a massage establishment.










   (F)   MASSAGE THERAPY means the treatment of disorders of the human
body by the manipulation of soft tissue through the systematic external
application of massage techniques including touch, stroking, friction,
vibration, percussion, kneading, stretching, compression and joint movements
within normal physiologic range of motion; and adjunctive thereto, the
external application of water, heat, cold, topical preparations, and
mechanical devices.










   (G)   SEXUAL or GENITAL AREA means the genitalia pubic area, anus,
perineum of any person and the breasts of a female.





(Ord. 3630.  Passed 3-27-18.)









117.02 PERMIT REQUIRED; PROHIBITED CONDUCT; EXEMPTIONS.









   (A)    After the effective date of this revised chapter all licensed
massage therapists and massage service establishments operating in the City
of West Carrollton shall obtain a permit to operate on or before December
31st.










   (B)    It shall be unlawful for any person to offer or perform
massage therapy or massage services in the City of West Carrollton unless
that person is a licensed massage therapist with the State of Ohio.










   (C)    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage
services establishment in the City of West Carrollton unless both of the
following apply:










      (1)    The owner or manager is a licensed massage therapist in
the State of Ohio.










      (2)    Massage therapy and massage services provided in the
massage services establishment are performed exclusively by a licensed
massage therapist in the State of Ohio.










   (D)    It shall be unlawful to employ a person to perform massage
therapy or massage  services in a massage service establishment in the City
of West Carrollton unless that person is a licensed massage therapist in the
State of Ohio.










   (E)    It shall be unlawful for that person to operate a massage
services establishment in the City of West Carrollton without obtaining a
Zoning Occupancy Certificate to operate a massage services establishment from
the City of West Carrollton Planning and Community Development Department.










   (F)    Prohibited Conduct. No person that is providing massage
services in the City of West Carrollton shall knowingly do any of the
following at, upon or within a massage services establishment or elsewhere:





      





      (1)    Place his or her hand upon, touch with any part of his
or her body, fondle in any manner, or massage the sexual or genital area of
any other person;










      (2)    Perform, offer, or agree to perform any act which would
require the touching of





the sexual or genital area of any other person;










      (3)    Touch, offer, or agree to touch the sexual or genital
area of any other person with any mechanical or electrical apparatus or
appliance;










      (4)    Wear unclean clothing, no clothing, transparent
clothing, or clothing that otherwise reveals the sexual or genital areas of
the masseur or masseuse;










      (5)    Uncover, or allow the sexual or genital area of any
other person to be uncovered  while providing a massage;










      (6)    Perform, offer, or agree to perform a massage with or
without compensation to





any individual less than eighteen years of age without parental consent.










   (G)    Exceptions. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to
the following:










      (1)    Hospitals, medical facilities and public health centers
(all as defined by Ohio Revised Code 3701.01);










      (2)    A person licensed or registered by the State of Ohio
Medical Board (other than a Massage Therapist) while performing his/her
licensed or registered profession;










      (3)    A licensed cosmetologist, registered barber, registered
barber apprentice, licensed chiropractor, licensed podiatrist, licensed
nurse, or any other licensed health professional while performing his/her
licensed or registered profession;





and










      (4)    A person working under the direct supervision of
individuals or establishments mentioned in this subsection (G) while
performing his/her licensed profession.










      (5)    As used in this subsection (G) "licensed" means
licensed, certified, or registered to practice in the State of Ohio.





(Ord. 3630.  Passed 3-27-18.)









117.03   PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS.









   (A)    The Chief of Police, or his/her designee, is responsible for
granting, denying, revoking, and renewing Massage Services Establishment
permits. A person who wishes to operate a massage services establishment must
submit a current valid Zoning Occupancy Certificate to the City of West
CarroJlton Chief of Police or his/her designee and an Application for Massage
Services Establishment. The Application for Massage Service Establishment
shall be accompanied by the following information:










      (1)    Full legal name and current residential address of the
applicant(s);










      (2)    The address of the proposed massage services
establishment;










      (3)    The names of any persons who will perform massage
therapy at the massage services establishment and copies of all licenses of
those persons;










      (4)    A list of other services to be offered at the massage
services establishment;










      (5)    The website of the massage services establishment, if
applicable;










      (6)    All felony and misdemeanor convictions of the applicant
excluding traffic offenses;










      (7)    A copy of the license provided by the State Medical
Board of Ohio for the owner and/or manager and each person who will practice
massage therapy at the massage services establishment;










      (8)    A printed form signed by each and every owner of the
real property which is the





proposed location of the massage services establishment, whereby each owner
certifies that he/ she understands and acknowledges that a massage services
establishment will be located on said parcel of real property, and;










      (9)    Any other information requested at the time of
application.










   (B)    Each individual that performs Massage Services in the City
shall be required to obtain a permit from the Chief of Police or designee.
Such permits are nontransferable. Before any individual may be issued a
permit, he or she shall submit on a form to be provided by the City the
following information;










      (1)    The individual’s name and a personal or business
address where mail may be delivered;










      (2)    The address where massage services will be performed;
and .










      (3)    A copy of the license provided by the State Medical
Board of Ohio.










      (4)    For renewals, a statement that the applicant has not
violated any provision of this Chapter.










   (C)    A permit granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to
annual renewal by the Chief of Police upon the written permit application of
the individual and a finding by the Chief of Police that the individual has
not committed any act during the existence of the previous permit period
which would be grounds to deny the initial permit application.










   (D)    Applications shall be submitted and approved before a massage
services establishment can be operated and massage services offered.










   (E)    Massage service establishments that were in operation prior
to the effective date of this section must submit an application not later
than 90 days after the effective date of this section.










   (F)    Once an application is submitted, the applicant shall receive
a response in writing no later than 30 days after the submission.










   (G)    In the event that the application is denied, the applicant
may submit a new application.










   (H)    Fees for the application shall be listed in the City of West
Carrollton General Fee Schedule, Chapter 37 of the Codified Ordinances of the
City of West Carrollton.





(Ord. 3630.  Passed 3-27-18.)









117.04 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; EXPIRATION A AND RENEWAL.









   (A)    Upon approval of an application, an applicant shall be
provided with a Massage Services





Establishment permit to operate a massage service establishment or a Massage
Services provider permit (as the case may be).










   (B)    Each permit shall contain the following information:










      (1)    The name of the applicant and address of the massage
services establishment where services will be performed;










      (2)    A unique identification number;










      (3)    A signature from an administrator; and










      (4)    The effective dates of the permit.










   (C)    Each permit shall be valid for a maximum of one year.
Regardless of the date issued all permits shall expire on December 31st of
the year they were issued.










   (D)    No later than 30 days before the expiration date of a permit
to operate a massage services establishment or provide massage services, the
permit holder shall submit a new application pursuant to Section 117.03 of
this section.










   (E)    Upon approval of the application, the applicant shall be
provided with a new permit to operate a massage services establishment.










   (F)    Said permit must be conspicuously displayed and visible upon
entering the massage services establishment.





(Ord. 3630.  Passed 3-27-18.)









117.05 FACILITY REQUIREMENTS.









   (A)    A permit issued under Section 117.04 of this section must be
displayed in a conspicuous location within the massage services establishment.










   (B)    All table and surfaces in the massage services establishment
shall be clean and disinfected.










   (C)    Clean linen, towels, and other materials used in connection
with provided massage therapy services shall be stored in a closed cabinet.










   (D)    The permit holder shall comply with any other requirement for
operation as a business that is set forth in the Codified Ordinances of the
City of West Carrollton.





(Ord. 3630.  Passed 3-27-18.)









117.06 PROHIBITIONS.









   (A)    No individual shall advertise or offer massage services,
massage therapy, relaxation massage, or a related service unless that
individual is a state-licensed massage therapist and holds a valid permit
issued under Section 117.04 of this Chapter.










   (B)    No individual shall advertise massage services or a related
service using sexual or provocative words or images. No individual shall
advertise massage services or a related service with the suggestion or
promise of a sexual service or activity.










   (C)    No person who has been issued a permit to operate a massage
services establishment shall employ any individual under the age of 18.





(Ord. 3630.  Passed 3-27-18.)









117.07 TRANSFER of PERMIT; CHANGE OF INFORMATION.









   (A)    An individual may transfer a permit to operate a massage
services establishment to another individual by submitting a request in
writing to the  City of West Carrollton; a fee may be assessed for the
transfer of permit as listed in the City of West Carrollton General Fee
Schedule, Chapter 37 of the City of West Carrollton Codified Ordinances.










   (B)    The City of West Carrollton shall respond within 10 days of
receipt of the transfer request. If the transfer of permit is approved, then
a new permit shall be issued.










   (C)    The expiration date of the permit shall not be extended in
the event that the permit is transferred.










   (D)    In the event that information submitted as part of the
application process changes, the permit holder shall notify the City of West
Carrollton within 10 days of such a change.










   (E)    Failure to update information in a timely manner may result
in a suspension or revocation of a permit and a first-degree misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during on which or which
a violation on noncompliance occurs or continues.





(Ord. 3630.  Passed 3-27-18.)









117.08  INSPECTIONS.









   (A)    Any of the following individuals may conduct inspections to
determine compliance with this Chapter and other applicable state and local
laws.










      (1)    A police officer;










      (2)    The Montgomery County Health Commissioner or designee;










      (3)    A building inspector or Code Enforcement Officer
appointed by the City of West Carrollton;










      (4)    Any other person authorized by the City of West
Carrollton to conduct inspections of a massage services establishment; or










      (5)    A representative of the State Medical Board of Ohio.










   (B)    Inspections may be conducted at any time.










   (C)    Inspections shall be conducted at least once per year to
determine compliance with this Chapter.










   (D)    Permit holders shall be given 10 days from the date of
inspection to correct any violations of this Chapter. Permit holders shall
immediately correct any issues found to be out of compliance with Section
117.05 of this Chapter.





(Ord. 3630.  Passed 3-27-18.)









117.09  PENALTIES; REVOCATION of PERMIT.









   (A)    Any individual who advertises, offers or performs massage
therapy or massage services in violation of this Chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during on which or which a violation of non-compliance occurs or
continues.










   (B)    Any individual who holds a permit under Section 117.04 of
this Chapter who violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.










   A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during on which
or which a violation of non-compliance occurs or continues.










   (C)    In addition to a fine, the following actions may be taken
against an individual who holds a permit under Section 117.04 of this Chapter
and violates any provision of this section:










      (1)    An additional fine may be assessed;










      (2)    A permit to operate a massage services establishment
may be suspended for up to 90 days; and










      (3)    After a third offense, a permit to operate a massage
services establishment may  be revoked.





(Ord. 3630.  Passed 3-27-18.)









117.10 APPEALS; HEARINGS.









   (A)    Appeals.










      (1)    Any individual may appeal the denial or revocation of a
permit to operate a massage service establishment or provide massage services.










      (2)    Any individual who holds a permit to operate a massage
services establishment may appeal the findings of an inspection conducted
under Section 117.08 of this Chapter.










      (3)    Any individual may appeal a penalty assessed under
Section 117.09 of this Chapter.










   (B)    Hearings.










      (1)    If an applicant has been denied a permit to operate a
massage services establishment, or provide massage services, failed an
inspection, or received a penalty under Section 117.09, the applicant or
permitee shall, within 3 business days, have the right to appeal to City
Council from such denial, revocation, or suspension. Notice of appeal shall
be filed in writing with the Chief of Police who shall fix the time and place
for the hearing at the next meeting of City Council but not later than 15
days thereafter. The Chief shall notify the Clerk of Council of the time and
place of such hearing. Four members of Council shall constitute a quorum to
hear such appeal. The appellant may appear and be heard in person or by
counsel. If, after the hearing, a majority of the members of Council present
at such a meeting declare in favor of the appellant, such permit shall be
forthwith issued or fully reinstated, as the case may be.










      (2)    If the majority of the members of City Council declare
in opposition of the appellant, then the appellant may appeal such order to
the County Court of Common Pleas. The appeal shall be in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 2506.





(Ord. 3630.  Passed 3-27-18.)
























CHAPTER 118
COMPETITIVE VIDEO SERVICE AUTHORIZATIONS









Section










118.01   Definitions





118.02   VSP Fee, percentage and audit





118.03   VSP Fee notice provision





118.04   MVCC Management authorization





118.05   MVCC Management authorization





118.06   VSP access provision





118.07   Access programming requirement





118.08   Fee payment requirements





118.09   PEG origination point





118.10   Notice requirement





118.11   Application to incumbent cable providers





118.12   Customer service standards





118.99   Penalty




 



118.01  DEFINITIONS.




   As used in this chapter:





   (A)   “Incumbent Cable Provider” means any person who on the
effective date of this Section is the holder of a cable franchise agreement
with the City as granted pursuant to requirements of 47 U.S.C. 541.










   (B)   “Miami Valley Communications Council or MVCC” means the
Miami Valley Communications Council which currently represents its eight
member cities of Centerville, Germantown, Kettering, Miamisburg, Moraine,
Oakwood, Springboro, and West Carrollton.  MVCC is governed by a policy
making body consisting of delegates representing the eight member cities. 
MVCC additionally maintains agreements with eighteen other Miami Valley
political subdivisions who participate as affiliate members.  MVCC is
managed by an appointed Executive Director and his/her staff.










   (C)   “PEG” means the Activities or Actions performed for the
benefit of public, educational and government video programming by the City
or MVCC.










   (D)   “Video Service” means the service defined in R.C. Section
1332.21(J).










   (E)   “Video Service Authorization” or “VSA” means the
authorization granted to a video service provider in accordance with the
requirements of R.C. Sections 1332.21 to 1332.34 et seq.










   (F)   “Video Service  Provider Fee” or “VSP Fee” means the
fee paid by a VSP in accordance with the requirements of R.C. Section 1332.32.










   (G)   “Video Service Provider or VSP” means a person, firm or
corporation granted a video service authorization under R.C. Sections 1332.21
to 1332.34 et seq.





(Ord. 3358.  Passed 11-13-07.)









118.02  VSP FEE, PERCENTAGE AND AUDIT.




   (A)   Not sooner than forty-five nor later than sixty days after the
end of each calendar quarter, a video service provider shall pay a video
service provider fee to the City.  The fee shall be calculated quarterly by
determining the provider’s gross revenue for the preceding calendar quarter
as described in division (B) of this section and multiplying the result by
the percentage specified in division (C)(1) or (2) of this section.










   (B)   Gross revenue shall be computed in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles.





      (1)   Gross revenue shall consist of all of the following
revenue for the calendar quarter that is collected by the provider for video
service from all its subscribers having service addresses within the City:





         (a)   Recurring monthly charges for video service;





         (b)   Event-based charges for video service, including,
but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges;





         (c)   Charges for rental of set top boxes and other
video service equipment;





         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation and repair;





         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.





         (f)   Advertising revenues.  For these purposes,
“advertising revenue” means the net revenue received by the video service
provider for advertising on its subscription-based video service within the
City.  If such revenue is derived under a regional or national compensation
contract or arrangement between the video service provider and one or more
advertisers or advertising representatives, the amount of revenue derived for
the City shall be determined by multiplying the total net revenue received by
the video service provider under the contract or arrangement by the
percentage resulting from dividing the number of subscribers in the City by
the total number of regional or national subscribers that potentially receive
the advertising under the contract or arrangement.





      (2)   Gross revenue shall not include any of the following:





         (a)   Any taxes, fees, or assessments that are collected
by the video service provider from video service subscribers for pass-
through to any federal, state, or local government agency, including the
video service provider fee authorized under this section, the fee authorized
under division (F) of Section 1332.30 of the Revised Code, and the federal
communication commission user fee;





         (b)   Uncollectible charges, except that uncollectible
charges, all or part of which are written off as bad debt but subsequently
collected, less the expenses of their collection shall be included in gross
revenue in the quarter collected;





         (c)   Late payment charges;





         (d)   Maintenance charges;





         (e)   Charges for services other than video service,
reasonably identifiable on books or records the video service provider keeps
in the regular course of business or by other reasonable means, that are
aggregated or bundled with amounts billed to video service subscribers,
including, but not limited to, any revenue received by a video service
provider or its affiliates for telecommunications service, information
service, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including
yellow pages, white pages, banner advertising, and electronic publishing;





         (f)   Reimbursement by programmers of marketing costs
actually incurred by the video service provider;





         (g)   Any revenue not expressly enumerated in division
(B)(1) of this section.










   (C)   (1)   If in a calendar quarter a franchise fee is payable
by a provider under a franchise in effect in the City, the percentage of
gross revenue payable in that calendar quarter by the video service provider
to the City shall be the same percentage of gross revenue payable in that
calendar quarter pursuant to that franchise, not to exceed five percent.





      (2)   Otherwise, the percentage shall be five (5) percent of a
video service provider’s gross revenues, as calculated in accordance with
this chapter.










   (D)   A video service provider that pays a video service provider
fee pursuant to this section may identify and collect the amount of that fee
as a separate line item on the regular bill of each of its video service
subscribers that has a service address within any portion of the City.










   (E)   (1)   At its sole expense and not more often than once per
calendar year, the City or its designee may conduct an audit for the purpose
of verifying the accuracy of a video service provider fees it paid to City in
the audit period.  For the purpose of the audit, the video service provider
shall make available for inspection, at the location where such records are
kept in the normal course of business, those records pertaining to its gross
revenue as defined in division (B) of Section 118.02 of the West Carrollton
Ordinances.





      (2)   A video service provider shall pay any amounts found to
have been underpaid in the audit within thirty days after notice and shall
include interest on the underpayments.  However, payment need not be made in
that thirty-day period if the video service provider brings an action under
division (3) of this section.





      (3)   An action by the City or by the video service provider
to dispute the amount of video service provider fee due based on the audit
results may be brought in a court of competent jurisdiction not later than
two years following the end of the quarter to which the disputed amount
relates.





(Ord. 3358.  Passed 11-13-07.)









118.03  VSP FEE NOTICE PROVISION.




   Upon receipt of notice from a VSP that it will begin providing Video
Service in the City pursuant to a state-issued video service authorization,
the City Manager or his/her designee is authorized and directed to provide
such VSP with notice of the VSP Fee as determined by this Council in Section
118.02 which notice shall be delivered in a manner that provides for proof of
timely delivery.





(Ord. 3358.  Passed 11-13-07.)









118.04  MVCC MANAGEMENT AUTHORIZATION.




   The City authorizes the Community Programming Board (“MVCC”) to
manage and direct the City’s cable franchise management, public,
educational, and government access programming and franchise fee collection
activities and further directs MVCC to manage and direct the City’s VSA
public, educational, and government access programming and VSP Fee collection
activities as may be necessary under R.C. Sections 1332.21 through 1332.34 et
seq., all until such time as the City may terminate or revoke such grant of
authority.





(Ord. 3358.  Passed 11-13-07.)









118.05  MVCC MANAGEMENT AUTHORIZATION.




   The MVCC shall coordinate regulatory efforts for the City and provide
expertise on other matters regarding cable franchises, cable service
providers, VSAs, VSPs, and other electronic media.  Additional
responsibilities shall include the creation and promotion of the community
media center and PEG access channels, the establishment and review of
programming policies, resolution of policy disputes, and questions of equal
treatment for access users, and fiscal controls.  If matters of contract
interpretation arise concerning community programming, the MVCC shall be
consulted.





(Ord. 3358.  Passed 11-13-07.)









118.06  VSP ACCESS PROVISION.




   Upon receipt of notice from a VSP that it will begin providing Video
Service in the City pursuant to a VSA, the City Manager or his/her designee
is authorized and directed to provide such VSP with notice that the VSP shall
be required to provide the same number of PEG channels in the City under the
same service tier conditions and subject to the same channel reclamation
conditions as may be proscribed by R. C. Section 1332.30(A)(1)(a-b) for the
Incumbent Cable Provider with the most recent obligation in the City, which
notice shall be delivered in a manner that provides for proof of timely
delivery and shall state the appropriate number of PEG channels and service
tiers required to be provided by the VSP within the City within one hundred
and twenty (120) days after delivery of such notice.





(Ord. 3358.  Passed 11-13-07.)









118.07  ACCESS PROGRAMMING REQUIREMENT.




   In accordance with the requirements of R.C. Section 1332.30(A)(1)(a)
when more than three (3) PEG access channels are provided to the City by an
Incumbent Cable Provider or VSP, such additional channel shall be programmed
by the City with at least forty (40) hours of non-character generated content
per week with at least sixty percent (60%) of the programming being
non-repeat and locally produced.  For the purposes of this section
“non-repeat and locally produced” shall mean, the first three (3)
playbacks of programming produced or provided by any local resident, the MVCC
or its affiliates, or any local public or private agency that provides
services to residents of the greater Dayton metro area, or any transmission
of a meeting or proceeding of any local, state, or federal governmental
entity.





(Ord. 3358.  Passed 11-13-07.)









118.08  FEE PAYMENT REQUIREMENTS.




   Any VSP Fee or Community Service Fee  Payments required to be paid to
the City by a VSP shall be made quarterly and be remitted directly to the
Community Programming Board via a negotiable instrument made payable to the
City of West Carrollton, Miami Valley Communications Council, 1195 Alex Bell
Road, Centerville, Ohio  45459, not later than sixty (60) days after the end
of a calendar quarter.





(Ord. 3358.  Passed 11-13-07.)









118.09  PEG ORIGINATION POINT.




   The PEG programming origination point of the City for the delivery of
VSP access services shall be located at the MVCC office location - 1195 Alex
Bell Road, Centerville, Ohio  45459.





(Ord. 3358.  Passed 11-13-07.)









118.10  NOTICE REQUIREMENT.




   Any notice to the City that is required of a VSP in accordance with
R.C. Sections 1332.21 through 1332.34 shall be provided in written form to
both the City Manager and the Executive Director of the MVCC either by
certified mail, express mail or upon personal delivery, all evidenced by a
return receipt. 
(Ord. 3358.  Passed 11-13-07.)









118.11  APPLICATION TO INCUMBENT CABLE PROVIDERS.




   Nothing in this section shall apply to incumbent cable providers until
they are granted a Video Service Authorization in accordance with R.C.
1332.21 - 1332.34 et seq.





(Ord. 3358.  Passed 11-13-07.)









118.12  CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.




   (A)   When requested to do so, a video service provider shall assist
the City in addressing video service subscriber complaints, in a manner
consistent with the provider’s complaint handling process.










   (B)   A video service provider shall meet all of the following
customer service standards:





      (1)   The provider shall restore video service within
seventy-two hours after a subscriber reports a service interruption or other
problem if the cause was not a natural disaster.





      (2)   Upon a report by a subscriber of a service interruption
and if the interruption is caused by the video service provider and lasts for
more than four hours in a given day, the provider shall give the subscriber a
credit in the amount of the cost of each such day’s video service as would
be billed to the subscriber.





      (3)   Upon a report by a subscriber of a service interruption
and if the interruption is not caused by the video service provider and lasts
for more than twenty-four consecutive hours, the provider shall give the
subscriber, for each hour of service interruption, a credit in the amount of
the cost of per hour video service as would be billed to the subscriber.





      (4)   The provider shall give a subscriber at least thirty
days’ advance, written notice before removing a channel from the
provider’s video service, but no such notice is required if the provider
must remove the channel because of circumstances beyond its control.





      (5)   The provider shall give a subscriber at least ten
days’ advance, written notice of a disconnection of all or part of the
subscriber’s video service, except if the disconnection has been requested
by the subscriber, is necessary to prevent theft of video service, or is
necessary to reduce or prevent signal leakage as described in 47 C.F.R.
76.611.





      (6)   The provider shall not disconnect all or part of a
subscriber’s video service for failure of the subscriber to pay its video
service bill, until the bill is at least forty-five days past due.





      (7)   The provider shall give a subscriber at least thirty
days’ advance, written notice before instituting an increase in video
service rates.





(Ord. 3358.  Passed 11-13-07.)









118.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than sixty days or both.  A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 3358.  Passed 11-13-07.)



















CHAPTER 119
CULTIVATING, PROCESSING OR DISPENSING MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROHIBITED









Section









119.01   Definitions.



119.02   Cultivating, processing or dispensing medical marijuana
prohibited.



119.99   Penalty.














CROSS REFERENCES





Drug paraphernalia - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 141









119.01  DEFINITIONS.









   As used in this chapter:










   (A)   “Marijuana” means marijuana as defined in Section 3719.01
of the Ohio Revised Code.










   (B)   “Medical marijuana” means marijuana that is cultivated,
processed, dispensed, tested, possessed or used for a medical purpose.





(Ord. 3617.  Passed 10-24-17.)









119.02  CULTIVATING, PROCESSING OR DISPENSING MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROHIBITED.









   No person shall cultivate, process, dispense, or sell medical
marijuana.  The cultivation, processing or retail dispensing of medical
marijuana, even under a license issued under Chapter 3796 of the Ohio Revised
Code, is prohibited within the City of West Carrollton.  (Ord. 3617. 
Passed 10-24-17.)









119.99  PENALTY.









   Whoever violates any section of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.  Each day that the person continues to violate this
chapter shall constitute a separate and complete offense.





(Ord. 3617.  Passed 10-24-17.)


































TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES









Chapter










Chap. 130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS










Chap. 131.   ADMINISTRATION AND LAW ENFORCEMENT










Chap. 132.   GAMBLING OFFENSES










Chap. 133.   HABITATION AND PROPERTY OFFENSES










Chap. 134.   HEALTH, SAFETY AND SANITATION










Chap. 135.   JUSTICE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION










Chap. 136.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS










Chap. 137.   PUBLIC MORALITY










Chap. 138.   PUBLIC ORDER










Chap. 139.   WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES










Chap. 140.   (RESERVED)










Chap. 141.   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA REGULATIONS










Chap. 142.   MINOR'S CURFEW










         Chap.143.   PANHANDLING







































CHAPTER 130
GENERAL PROVISIONS









Section










130.01   Definitions





130.02   Offenses; classifications





130.03   Offenses; defined





130.04   Offenses; rule of construction





130.05   Offenses; statute of limitations





130.06   Requirements for criminal liability





130.07   Offenses; culpable mental states





130.08   Offenses; organizations





130.09   Offenses; organizations; officers, agents, employees





130.10   Offenses; repeat offender





130.11   Offenses; penalty; considerations





130.12   Attempt





130.13   Complicity





130.14   Offenses; penalty; organizations





130.15   Names of persons damaging real property by operation of vehicle
to be provided to owner





130.99   Penalty




 



130.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.










   CONTRABAND.    Includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:





      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in Ohio  R.C. 
3719.01, or any device, or paraphernalia;





      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device, or paraphernalia;





      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.










   FORCE.  Any violence, compulsion, or constraint physically exerted by
any means upon or against a person or thing. 
(R.C. § 2901.01 (A)(1))










   IMPRISONED.  Imprisoned in a county, multicounty, municipal,
municipal-county, or multicounty-municipal jail or workhouse, if the offense
is a misdemeanor. 
(R.C. § 1.05(A))










   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  Any of the following:





      (1)   A sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of
a township or joint police district, marshal, deputy marshal, municipal
police officer, member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing
authority under Ohio R.C. 3735.31(D) or State highway patrol trooper;





      (2)   An officer, agent or employee of the State or any of its
agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute,
Charter or ordinance, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or
certain laws is imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred,
within the limits of that statutory duty and authority;





      (3)   A mayor or manager in the mayor's or manager's capacity
as chief conservator of the peace within the mayor's or manager's municipal
corporation;





      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by
county, township or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope
of the member's appointment or commission;





      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to Ohio R.C. 311.07 to
aid a sheriff in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when
the person is called;





      (6)   A person appointed by a mayor pursuant to Ohio R.C.
737.01 as a special patrolling officer during riot or emergency, for the
purposes and during the time when the person is appointed;





      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this State or the
armed forces of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil
authorities in keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence;





      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney,
secret service officer or municipal prosecutor;





      (9)   A veterans' home police officer appointed under Ohio
R.C. 5907.02;





      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional
transit authority under Ohio R.C. 306.35(Y);





      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority
under Ohio R.C. 4582.04 or 4582.28;





      (12)   The Senate Sergeant of Arms and or Assistant Sergeant
at Arms;





      (13)   A special police officer employed by a municipal
corporation at a municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation
facility, that has scheduled operations, as defined in Section 119.3 of Title
14 of the Code of Federal Regulations, 14 C.F.R. 119.3, as amended, and that
is required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation
security rules of the transportation security administration of the United
States Department of Transportation as provided in Parts 1542 and 1544 of
Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended.










   NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY.  A person is NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF
INSANITY relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the
manner specified in R.C. § 2901.05 that at the time of the commission of the
offense, the person did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or
defect, the wrongfulness of the person's acts.










   OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.  Any of the following:





      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03,
2903.04, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22,
2905.01, 2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02,
2909.03, 2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03,
2917.31, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, 2923.161, 2903.04(A)(1),
2911.12(A)(1) to (3) or 2919.22(B)(1) to (4), or felonious sexual penetration
in violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12;





      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance
or law of this or any other state or the United States, substantially
equivalent to any section or division listed in R.C. § 2901.01(A)(9)(b);





      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an
existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or
the United States, committed, purposely or knowingly, and involving physical
harm to persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;





      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing any offense under division (D), (1), (2), or (3), of this
section. 
(R.C. § 2901.01 (A)(9))










   PERSON.





      (1)   (a)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as
used in any section contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a
criminal offense, PERSON includes all of the following:





            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust,
estate, trust, partnership and association.





            2.   An  unborn human who is viable.





         (b)   As used in any section contained in Title XIII of
this code that does not set forth a criminal offense, PERSON includes an
individual, corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.





         (c)   As used in division (1)(a)2. of this definition,
UNBORN HUMAN means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from
fertilization until live birth.  VIABLE means the stage of development of a
human fetus at which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and
nourishing of a life outside the womb with or without temporary artificial
life-sustaining support.





      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)(a) of this definition, in
no case shall the portion of the definition of the term PERSON that is set
forth in division (1)(a)2. of this definition be applied or construed in any
section contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense in any of the following manners:





         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)(a) of
this definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant
woman implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one
otherwise authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the
pregnant woman.  An abortion that violates the conditions described in the
immediately preceding sentence may be punished as any violation of R.C. §§
2903.01 through 2903.08, 2903.11 through 2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, as
applicable.  An abortion that does not violate the conditions described in
the second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate R.C. §§
2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.17 or 2919.18 may be punished as a
violation of such section, as applicable.  Consent is sufficient under this
division if it is of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment
to the pregnant woman, even if it does not comply with R.C. § 2919.12.





         (b)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is
construed as applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman
that occurs while she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the
following:





            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.





            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death
in utero of a viable, unborn human that she is carrying.





            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is
born alive but who dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while
the child is a viable, unborn human.





            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to
sustain one or more injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.





            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or
attempting to cause, in any other manner, an injury, illness, or other
psychological illness or condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to
a viable, unborn human that she is carrying. 
(R.C. § 2901.01(B))










   PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any injury, illness, or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
(R.C. § 2901.01 (A)(3))










   PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY.  Any tangible or intangible damage to
property that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with
its use or enjoyment.  PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY does not include wear and
tear occasioned by normal use.
(R.C. § 2901.01 (A)(4))










   PRIVILEGE.  An immunity, license, or right conferred by law, or
bestowed by express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position,
office, or relationship, or growing out of necessity.
(R.C. § 2901.01 (A)(12))










   PROPERTY.





      (1)   "Property" means any property, real or personal,
tangible or intangible, and any interest or license in that property. 
"Property" includes, but is not limited to, cable television service, other
telecommunications service, telecommunications devices, information service,
computers, data, computer software, financial instruments associated with
computers, other documents associated with computers, or copies of the
documents, whether in machine or human readable form, trade secrets,
trademarks, copyrights, patents, and property protected by a trademark,
copyright, or patent.  “Financial instruments associated with computers”
include, but are not limited to, checks, drafts, warrants, money orders,
notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit, bills of
credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms,
marketable securities, or any computer system representations of any of them.





      (2)   As used in this section, “trade secret” has the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1333.61, and “telecommunications service” and
“information service” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.





      (3)   As used in this section, “cable television service”,
“computer”, “computer software”, “computer system”, “computer
network”, “data”, and “telecommunications device” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.









130.02  OFFENSES; CLASSIFICATIONS.




   As used in the Codified Ordinances:





   (A)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third and
fourth degree, minor misdemeanors and offenses not specifically classified.










   (B)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.










   (C)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.










   (D)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor
if the only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:





      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a
fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00);





      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a
fine not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), community service
under division (D) of Ohio R.C. 2929.27, or a financial sanction other than a
fine under Ohio R.C. 2929.28. (ORC 2901.02)









130.03  OFFENSES; DEFINED.




   (A)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the city
unless it is defined as an offense in the criminal code of the city.










   (B)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of the code
state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and provide a penalty
for violation of the prohibition or failure to meet the duty.
(R.C. § 2901.03)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)









130.04  OFFENSES; RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.




   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C) hereof,
sections of the Codified Ordinances defining offenses or penalties shall be
strictly construed against the Municipality and liberally construed in favor
of the accused.










   (B)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of the Ohio Revised
Code providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the
fair, impartial, speedy and sure administration of justice.










   (C)   Any provision of a section of the Codified Ordinances that
refers to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a
section of the Codified Ordinances or Ohio Revised Code or of a division of a
section of the Codified Ordinances or Ohio Revised Code shall be construed to
also refer to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a substantially
equivalent offense under an existing or former law of this State, another
state, or the United States or under an existing or former municipal
ordinance.










   (D)   Any provision of the Codified Ordinances that refers to a
section, or to a division of a section, of the Codified Ordinances that
defines or specifies a criminal offense shall be construed to also refer to
an existing or former law of this State, another state, or the United States,
to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or to an existing or former
division of any such existing or former law or ordinance that defines or
specifies, or that defined or specified, a substantially equivalent offense. 





(ORC 2901.04)









130.05  OFFENSES; STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.




   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a prosecution
shall be barred unless it is commenced within the following periods after an
offense is committed:





      (1)   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, 2
years;





      (2)   For a minor misdemeanor, 6 months.










   (B)   If the period of limitation provided in division (A) of this
section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which
an element is fraud or breach of a fiduciary duty, within one year after
discovery of the offense either by an aggrieved person, or by his legal
representative who is not himself a party to the offense.










   (C)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in this section
has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the following offenses during
the following specified periods of time:





         (a)   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a
public servant at any time while the accused remains a  public servant, or
within two years thereafter;





         (b)   For an offense by a person who is not a public
servant but whose offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of
a public servant, at any time while that public servant remains a public
servant, or within two years thereafter.




      (2)   As used in this subsection:




         (a)   An "offense is directly related to the misconduct
in office of a public servant" includes, but is not limited to, a violation
of Ohio R.C. 101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, division (F) or (H) of Ohio
R.C. 102.03, division (A) of Ohio R.C. 2921.02, division (A) or (B) of Ohio
R.C. 2921.43, or division (F) or (G) of Ohio R.C. 3517.13, that is directly
related to an offense involving misconduct in office of a public servant.





         (b)   "Public servant" has the same meaning as in
Section 135.01.










   (D)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense
occurs.  In the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing
course of conduct, the period of limitation does not begin to run until such
course of conduct or the accused's accountability for it terminates,
whichever occurs first.










   (E)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is
returned or an information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a
warrant is made, or on the date a warrant, summons, citation, or other
process is issued, whichever occurs first.  A prosecution is not commenced
by the return of an indictment or the filing of an information unless
reasonable diligence is exercised to issue and execute process on the same. 
A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance of a warrant, summons, citation,
or other process, unless reasonable diligence is exercised to execute the
same.










   (F)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when
the corpus delicti remains undiscovered.










   (G)   The period of limitation shall not run during  any time
when  the accused purposely  avoids prosecution.  Proof that the accused
absented himself from this state or concealed his identity or whereabouts is
prima facie evidence of his purpose to avoid prosecution.










   (H)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a
prosecution against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this
state, even though the indictment, information, or process which commenced
the prosecution is quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information
or process are set aside or reversed on appeal.










   (I)   The period of limitation for a violation of any provision of
this General Offenses Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury,
disability or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or
neglect of a child under eighteen years of age or of a child with a
developmental disability or physical impairment under twenty-one years of age
shall not begin to run until either of the following occurs:





      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.





      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or
county peace officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the
county in which the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is
occurring or has occurred has been notified that abuse or neglect is known,
suspected, or believed to have occurred. 
(ORC 2901.13)









130.06  REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY.



   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, a person is not
guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:




      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that
includes either a voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty
that the person is capable of performing;





      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for
each element as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language
defining the offense.




 



   (B)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any
degree of culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
criminal liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability
is not required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one
subsection of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability for an offense defined in that subsection does not by itself
plainly indicate a purpose to impose strict criminal liability for an offense
defined in other subsections of the section that do not specify a degree of
culpability.



 




   (C)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that
is related to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be
applied neither specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to
impose strict liability, the element of the offense is established only if a
person acts recklessly.





      (2)   Subsection (C)(1) of this section does not apply to
offenses defined in the Traffic Code.





      (3)   Subsection (C)(1) of this section does not relieve the
prosecution of the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by
any definition incorporated into the offense.




 



   (D)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense.  Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act
if failure to act constitutes a criminal offense.  Evidence that a person
was voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the
person was physically capable of performing the act with which the person is
charged.



 



   (E)   As used in this section:




      (1)   Possession is a voluntary act if the possessor knowingly
procured or received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s
control of the thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.





      (2)   Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor's volition, are involuntary acts.





      (3)   "Culpability" means purpose, knowledge, recklessness or
negligence, as defined in Section 130.07.





      (4)   “Intoxication” includes, but is not limited to,
intoxication resulting from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and
a drug. 




(ORC 2901.21)








130.07  OFFENSES; CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.



   (A)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific
intention to cause a certain result, or when the gist of the offense is a
prohibition against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the
offender intends to accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific
intention to engage in conduct of that nature.



 



   (B)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the
person is aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain
result or will probably be of a certain nature.  A person has knowledge of
circumstances when the person is aware that such circumstances probably
exist. 



   When knowledge of the existence of a particular fact is an element of
an offense, such knowledge is established if a person subjectively believes
that there is a high probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry
or acts with a conscious purpose to avoid learning the fact.



 



   (C)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to
the consequences, the person perversely disregards a substantial and
unjustifiable risk that the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain
result or is likely to be of a certain nature.  A person is reckless with
respect to circumstances when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, the person perversely disregards a substantial and
unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist.



 



   (D)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the
person’s conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain
nature.  A person is negligent with respect to circumstances when, because
of a substantial lapse from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a
risk that such circumstances may exist.



 



   (E)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence
suffices to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge or
purpose is also sufficient culpability for such element.  When recklessness
suffices to establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for such element.  When knowledge suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient
culpability for such element. 




(ORC 2901.22)









130.08  OFFENSES; ORGANIZATIONS.




   (A)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of
the following circumstances:





      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an
officer, agent or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and
within the scope of the officer's, agent's or employee's office or
employment, except that if the section defining the offense designates the
officers, agents or employees for whose conduct the organization is
accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable, those
provisions shall apply.





      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly
appears in the section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by
an officer, agent or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and
within the scope of the officer's, agent's or employee's office or
employment, except that if the section defining the offense designates the
officers, agents or employees for whose conduct the organization is
accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable, those
provisions shall apply.





      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a
specific duty imposed by law on the organization.





      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise
required for the commission of the offense, its commission was authorized,
requested, commanded, tolerated or performed by the board of directors,
trustees, partners or by a high managerial officer, agent or employee acting
in behalf of the organization and within the scope of such a board's or
person's office or employment.










   (B)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an
offense, a purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed,
unless the contrary plainly appears.










   (C)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than
one for which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high
managerial officer, agent or employee having supervisory responsibility over
the subject matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its
commission.  This defense is not available if it plainly appears
inconsistent with the purpose of the section defining the offense.










   (D)   As used in this section, "organization" means a corporation
for profit or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint
venture, unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust or other
commercial or legal entity.  "Organization" does not include an entity
organized as or by a governmental agency for the execution of a governmental
program.  (ORC 2901.23)









130.09  OFFENSES; ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS, AGENTS, EMPLOYEES.




   (A)   An officer, agent, or employee of an organization as defined
in § 130.08 may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization,
if he acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of the
offense, and any of the following apply:





      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he
engages in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in
such conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he has
direct responsibility;





      (2)   He has primary responsibility to discharge a duty
imposed on the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged.










   (B)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this
section, he is subject to the same penalty as if he had acted in his own
behalf.





(R.C. § 2901.24)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)









130.10  OFFENSES; REPEAT OFFENDER.




   (A)   REPEAT OFFENDER.  A person who has a history of persistent
criminal activity, and whose character and condition reveal a substantial
risk that he will commit another offense.  It is prima facie evidence that a
person is a repeat offender if any of the following apply:





      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of
violence, as defined in R.C. § 2901.01 and § 130.01 of this title, and
having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, he commits
a subsequent offense of violence;





      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented
offenses as defined in R.C. § 2950.01 or of § 137.01 of this title, and
having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, he commits
a subsequent sexually oriented offense;





      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01 or of § 133.01 of this title, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, he commits a subsequent
theft offense;





      (4)   Having been convicted of 2 or more felonies, and having
been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, he commits a
subsequent offense;





      (5)   Having been convicted of 3 or more offenses of any type
or degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses, or
minor misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any
such offense, he commits a subsequent offense;





      (6)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse
offenses as defined in R.C. Ch. 2925, and having been imprisoned pursuant to
sentence for any such offense, he commits a subsequent felony drug abuse
offense.










   (B)   DANGEROUS OFFENDER.  A person who has committed an offense,
whose history, character, and condition reveal a substantial risk that he
will be a danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a
pattern of repetitive, compulsive, or aggressive behavior with heedless
indifference to the consequences.
(R.C. § 2935.36(E))  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)










   (C)   ACTUAL INCARCERATION.  When an offender is required to be
imprisoned for the stated period of time to which he is sentenced that is
specified as a term of actual incarceration.





      (1)   If a person is sentenced to a term of actual
incarceration, the court shall not suspend his term of actual incarceration,
and shall not grant him probation or shock probation, pursuant to R.C. §§
2929.51, 2947.061, 2951.02, or 2951.04 and the Department of Rehabilitation
and Correction or the adult parole authority shall not, pursuant to R.C. Ch.
2967 or its rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Ch. 2967, 5120, or 5149, grant him
a furlough for employment or education, a furlough for being a trustworthy
prisoner other than a furlough pursuant to division (A)(1)(a) or (b) of R.C.
§ 2967.27, parole, emergency parole, or shock parole until after the
expiration of his term of actual incarceration, diminished as provided in
R.C. §§ 2967.19, 2967.193, and 5145.11.





      (2)   An offender who is sentenced to a term of actual
incarceration may be transferred from an institution operated by the
Department of Rehabilitation and Correction to the custody of the Department
of Mental Health or the Department of Mental Retardation and Developmental
Disabilities, as provided in R.C. § 5120.17, and shall be credited with all
time served in the custody of the Department of Mental Health or the
Department of Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities against the
term of actual incarceration.










   (D)   DEADLY WEAPON.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.





(R.C. § 2935.36(E))









130.11  OFFENSES; PENALTY; CONSIDERATIONS.




   (A)   In determining whether to impose imprisonment or a fine, or
both, for a misdemeanor, and in determining the term of imprisonment and the
amount and method of payment of a fine for a misdemeanor, the court shall
consider the risk that the offender will commit another offense and the need
for protecting the public from the risk; the nature and circumstances of the
offense; the history, character, and condition of the offender and the
offender's need for correctional or rehabilitative treatment; any statement
made by the victim under R.C. §§ 2930.12 to 2930.17, if the offense is a
misdemeanor  specified in  R.C. § 2930.01(A); and theability and resources
of the offender and the nature of the burden that payment of a fine will
impose on the offender.










   (B)   The following do not control the court's discretion, but shall
be considered in favor of imposing imprisonment for misdemeanor.





      (1)   The offender is a repeat or dangerous offender;





      (2)   Regardless of whether or not the offender knew the age
of the victim, the victim was 65 years of age or older or permanently and
totally disabled, or less than 18 years of age at the time of the commission
of the offense.










   (C)   The criteria listed in division (B) of this section shall not
be construed to limit the matters that may be considered in determining
whether to impose imprisonment for misdemeanor.










   (D)   The court shall not impose a fine in addition to imprisonment
for a misdemeanor, unless a fine is specially adapted to deterrence of the
offense or the correction of the offender, or the offense has proximately
resulted in physical harm to the person or property of another or the offense
was committed for hire or for purpose of gain.










   (E)   The court shall not impose a fine or fines that, in the
aggregate and to the extent not suspended by the court, exceed the amount
that the offender is or will be able to pay by the method and within the time
allowed without undue hardship to the offender or the offender's dependents,
or will prevent the offender from making restitution or reparation to the
victim of the offender's offense.










   (F)   At the time of the sentencing or as soon as possible after
sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the offense of the victim's
right to file an application for an award of reparations pursuant to R.C.
§§ 2743.51 to 2743.72. 










   (G)   As used in this section, REPEAT OFFENDER and DANGEROUS
OFFENDER have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2935.36.
(R.C. § 2929.22)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)









130.12  ATTEMPT.




   (A)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or
knowledge is sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall
engage in conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the
offense.










   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in
retrospect, commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was
either factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if
that offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been
as the actor believed them to be.










   (C)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense or
of complicity in the commission of an offense, shall be convicted of an
attempt to commit the same offense in violation of this section.










   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
that the actor abandoned the actor’s effort to commit the offense or
otherwise prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting a
complete and voluntary renunciation of the actor’s criminal purpose.










   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to
commit an offense.  An attempt to commit a drug abuse offense for which the
penalty is determined by the amount or number of unit doses of the controlled
substance involved in the drug abuse offense is an offense of the same degree
as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if that drug abuse offense had
been committed and had involved an amount or number of unit doses of the
controlled substance that is within the next lower range of controlled
substance amounts than was involved in the attempt.  An attempt to commit
any other misdemeanor is a misdemeanor of the next lesser degree than the
misdemeanor attempted.  In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other
than a violation of Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734 that is not specifically
classified, an attempt is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense
attempted is a felony under the Ohio Revised Code, and a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor.  An attempt to
commit a minor misdemeanor is not an offense under this section. 










   (F)   As used in this section, “drug abuse offense” has the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01. 
(ORC 2923.02)









130.13  COMPLICITY.




   (A)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for
the commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:





      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;





      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;





      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation
of R.C. § 2923.01;





      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the
offense;










   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person
with whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal
offender.










   (C)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section
unless an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of
complicity in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of § 130.12.










   (D)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against
the defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in
the commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with
R.C. § 2923.03(D).










   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
that, prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete and
voluntary renunciation of his criminal purpose.










   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he were
a principal offender.  A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of this
section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(R.C. § 2923.03)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)









130.14  OFFENSES; PENALTY; ORGANIZATIONS.




   (A)   Regardless of the penalties provided in § 130.11 of this
title, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to § 130.08 shall be
fined in accordance with this section.  The court shall fix the fine as
follows:





      (1)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than
$5,000;





      (2)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than
$4,000;





      (3)    For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than
$3,000;





      (4)    For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than
$2,000;





      (5)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $1,000;





      (6)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more
than $2,000;





      (7)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified, not
more than $1,000;










   (B)   When an organization is convicted of an offense that is not
specifically classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty
plainly indicates a purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon
organizations, then the penalty so provided shall be imposed in lieu of the
penalty provided in this section.










   (C)   When an organization is convicted of an offense that is not
specifically classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than
the fine that is provided in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be
pursuant to the penalty provided for the violation of the section defining
the offense.










   (D)   This section does not prevent the imposition of available
civil sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to
§ 130.08, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to
this section. 
(R.C. § 2929.31)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)









130.15  NAMES OF PERSONS DAMAGING REAL PROPERTY BY OPERATION OF VEHICLE TO
BE  PROVIDED TO OWNER.




   (A)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4501.01.










   (B)   If damage is caused to real property by the operation of a
motor vehicle in, or during the, violation of any section of the Revised Code
or of any municipal ordinance, the law enforcement agency that investigates
the case, upon request of the real property owner, shall provide the owner
with the names of the persons who are charged with the commission of the
offense.  If a request for the names is made, the agency shall provide the
names as soon as possible after the persons are charged with the offense.










   (C)   The personnel of law enforcement agencies who act pursuant to
division (B) of this section in good faith are not liable in damages in a
civil action allegedly arising from their actions taken pursuant to that
division.  Political subdivisions and the state are not liable in damages in
a civil action allegedly arising from the actions of personnel of their law
enforcement agencies if the personnel have immunity under this division.





(R.C. § 2935.28)









130.99  PENALTY.




   (A)   Financial Sanctions.  In addition to imposing court costs
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2947.23, the court imposing a sentence upon an offender
for a misdemeanor committed under the Code of Ordinances, including a minor
misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or
combination of financial sanctions authorized under this section.  If the
court in its discretion imposes one or more financial sanctions, the
financial sanctions that may be imposed pursuant to this section include, but
are not limited to, the following:





      (1)   Restitution. Unless the misdemeanor offense is a minor
misdemeanor or could be disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving
the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution by the offender to the victim of
the offender’s crime or any survivor of the victim, in an amount based on
the victim’s economic loss.  The court may not impose restitution as a
sanction pursuant to this section if the offense is a minor misdemeanor or
could be disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under
Traffic Rule 13.  If the court requires restitution, the court shall order
that the restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult
probation department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court
on behalf of the victim.





   If the court imposes restitution, the court shall determine the amount
of restitution to be paid by the offender.  If the court imposes
restitution, the court may base the amount of restitution it orders on an
amount recommended by the victim, the offender, a presentence investigation
report, estimates or receipts indicating the cost of repairing or replacing
property, and other information, provided that the amount the court orders as
restitution shall not exceed the amount of the economic loss suffered by the
victim as a direct and proximate result of the commission of the offense. 
If the court decides to impose restitution, the court shall hold an
evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim or survivor
disputes the amount of restitution.  If the court holds an evidentiary
hearing, at the hearing the victim or survivor has the burden to prove by a
preponderance of the evidence the amount of restitution sought from the
offender.





            All restitution payments shall be credited against
any recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or any
survivor of the victim against the offender.  No person may introduce
evidence of an award of restitution under this section in a civil action for
purposes of imposing liability against an insurer under Ohio R.C. 3937.18.





            If the court imposes restitution, the court may order
that the offender pay a surcharge, of not more than five per cent of the
amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity responsible for
collecting and processing restitution payments.





   The victim or survivor may request that the prosecutor in the case file
a motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment
terms of any restitution ordered.  If the court grants the motion, it may
modify the payment terms as it determines appropriate.





      (2)   Fines.  A fine in the following amount:





         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000);





         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00);





         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00);





         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00);





         (e)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00).





      (3)   Reimbursement of costs of sanctions.





         (a)   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the
costs of sanctions incurred by the government, including, but not limited to,
the following:





            1.   All or part of the costs of implementing any
community control sanction, including a supervision fee under Ohio R.C.
2951.021;





            2.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a
jail or other residential facility, including, but not limited to, a per diem
fee for room and board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the
costs of repairing property damaged by the offender while confined.





         (b)   The amount of reimbursement ordered under
subsection (A)(3)(a) of this section shall not exceed the total amount of
reimbursement the offender is able to pay and shall not exceed the actual
cost of the sanctions.  The court may collect any amount of reimbursement
the offender is required to pay under that subsection.  If the court does
not order reimbursement under that subsection, confinement costs may be
assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under Ohio R.C. 2929.37.  In
addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees specified in Ohio R.C.
2929.38 in accordance with that section.





(ORC 2929.28)










   (B)   Jail Terms. 





      (1)   Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.22 or 2929.23 of
the Revised Code, and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant
to law, if the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a
misdemeanor elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender
pursuant to this General Offenses Code, the court shall impose a definite
jail term that shall be one of the following:





         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more
than one hundred eighty days;





         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more
than ninety days;





         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more
than sixty days;





         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more
than thirty days.





      (2)   (a)   A court that sentences an offender to a jail
term under this section may permit the offender to serve the sentence in
intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender
as provided in Ohio R.C.  2929.26(B).  The court retains jurisdiction over
every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at any
time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.





         (b)   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in Ohio R.C.
2935.01, has filed a notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be
notified about a particular case and if the court is considering modifying
the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the court shall notify the
prosecutor that the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of the
offender in that case.  The prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the
court's consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that
case, and, if the prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the
eligible offender of the hearing.





            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing
regarding the court's consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the
offender in that case, the court shall hold the hearing before considering
whether or not to release the offender from the offender's jail sentence.





      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under
this section and the court assigns the offender to a county jail that has
established a county jail industry program pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5147.30, the
court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be
considered for participation in the program.  During the offender’s term
in the county jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its
specifications regarding the offender’s participation in the county jail
industry program.





      (4)   If a person is sentenced to a jail term pursuant to this
section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in
which the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16,
2301.56, or 2947.19 and Ohio R.C. 2929.37, both of the following apply:





         (a)   The court shall specify both of the following as
part of the sentence:





            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized
bill pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement,
the person is required to pay the bill in accordance with that section.





            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill
described in subsection (B)(4)(a)1. of this section and does not pay the bill
by the times specified in Ohio R.C. 2929.37, the clerk of the court may issue
a certificate of judgment against the person as described in that section.





         (b)   The sentence automatically includes any
certificate of judgment issued as described in subsection (B)(4)(a)2. of this
section. 
(ORC 2929.24)
























CHAPTER 131
ADMINISTRATION AND LAW ENFORCEMENT









Section










131.01   Compounding a crime





131.02   Failure to report a crime





131.03   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer





131.04   Obstructing official business





131.05   Obstructing justice





131.06   Resisting arrest





131.07   Personating an officer





131.08   Impersonation of peace officer





131.09   Assaulting police dog or horse or an assistance dog





131.10   False allegation of peace officer misconduct





131.11   Refusal to disclose personal information in public place




 



131.01  COMPOUNDING A CRIME.




   (A)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept, or agree to accept
anything of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a
pending criminal prosecution.










   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
when both of the following apply:





      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of
§§ 133.07 or 133.10,  division (B) (2) of § 133.11 or R.C. § 2913.47 of
which the actor under this section was the victim.





      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted, or agreed to be
accepted, in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the
prosecution, did not exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due
him as restitution for the loss caused him by the offense.










   (C)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a
prosecution under division (B) of this section, such abandonment or agreement
in no way binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.










   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a
crime, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(R.C. § 2921.21) (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99










131.02  FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME.




   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (A)(2) hereof, no
person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly
fail to report such information to law enforcement authorities.





      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of division (B) of
Ohio R.C. 2913.04 has been, or is being committed or that the person has
received information derived from such a violation, shall knowingly fail to
report the violation to law enforcement authorities.




 



   (B)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of subsection
(E) of this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted
from an offense of violence.



 



   (C)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first
knowledge of the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately
to a physician or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to
be treating the deceased for a condition from which death at such time would
not be unexpected, or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an
emergency squad, or the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body
is discovered, the death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge
concerning the death is obtained.  For purposes of this subsection (C),
"advanced practice registered nurse" does not include a certified registered
nurse anesthetist.



 



   (D)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to
whom a report required by subsection (C) of this section was made, or to any
law enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within the
person's knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.



 



   (E)   (1)   As used in this subsection, "burn injury" means any
of the following:



         (a)   Second or third degree burns;



         (b)   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or
laryngeal edema due to the inhalation of superheated air;



         (c)   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death;




         (d)   Any physical harm to persons caused by or as the
result of the use of fireworks, novelties and trick noisemakers, and wire
sparklers, as each is defined by Ohio R.C. 3743.01.





      (2)   No physician, nurse, physician assistant, or limited
practitioner who, outside a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility,
attends or treats a person who has sustained a burn injury that is inflicted
by an explosion or other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having
been inflicted in a violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to
report the burn injury immediately to the local arson, or fire and explosion
investigation, bureau, if there is a bureau of this type in the jurisdiction
in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law
enforcement authorities.





      (3)   No manager, superintendent or other person in charge of
a hospital, sanitarium or other medical facility in which a person is
attended or treated for any burn injury that is inflicted by an explosion or
other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson, or fire and explosion investigation, bureau,
if there is a bureau of this type in the jurisdiction in which the person is
attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement authorities.





      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury
under subsection (E)(2) or (3) of this section shall fail to file, within
three working days after attending or treating the victim, a written report
of the burn injury with the office of the State Fire Marshal.  The report
shall comply with the uniform standard developed by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3737.22(A)(15).





      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under
subsection (E) of this section or anyone participating in a judicial
proceeding resulting from the reports is immune from any civil or criminal
liability that otherwise might be incurred or imposed as a result of such
actions.  Notwithstanding Ohio R.C.  4731.22, the physician-patient
relationship or advanced practice registered nurse-patient relationship is
not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a person's burn injury or the
cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding resulting from a report
submitted under subsection (E) of this section.




 




   (F)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine,
hospital intern or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent
social worker, social work assistant, licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, independent marriage and family
therapist or marriage and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause
to believe that a patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the
basis for it in the patient's or client's records.





      (2)   Notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 4731.22, the physician-patient
privilege or advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not
be a ground for excluding any information regarding the report containing the
knowledge or belief noted under subsection (F)(1) of this section, and the
information may be admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of
Evidence.




 



   (G)   Subsections (A) and (D) of this section do not require
disclosure of information, when any of the following applies:




      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the
relationship between attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced
practice registered nurse and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed
school psychologist and client; licensed professional clinical counselor,
licensed professional counselor, independent social worker, social worker,
independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family therapist
and client; member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest and any person
communicating information confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi,
minister, or priest for a religious counseling purpose of a professional
character; husband and wife; or a communications assistant and those who are
a party to a telecommunications relay service call.





      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of
the actor's immediate family.





      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing
a news source, privileged under Ohio R.C. 2739.04 or 2739.12.





      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure
by a member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a
confidential communication made to that member of the clergy in that member's
capacity as a member of the clergy by a person seeking the aid or counsel of
that member of the clergy.





      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information
acquired by the actor in the course of the actor's duties in connection with
a bona fide program of treatment or services for drug dependent persons or
persons in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or
conducted by a hospital, clinic, person, agency, or community addiction
services provider whose alcohol and drug addiction services are certified
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5119.36.





      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information
acquired by the actor in the course of the actor's duties in connection with
a bona fide program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes
that are violations of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.05 or to victims of
felonious sexual penetration in violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12.  As
used in this subsection, "counseling services" include services provided in
an informal setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent
to provide those services.




 



   (H)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives
rise to any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or
confidence.



 



   (I)   Whoever violates subsection (A) or (B) of this section is
guilty of failure to report a crime.  Violation of subsection (A)(1) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  Violation of subsection
(A)(2) or (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.



 



   (J)   Whoever violates subsection (C)  or (D) of this section is
guilty of failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.



 



   (K)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates subsection (E) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates subsection (E) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.



 



   (L)   As used in this section, "nurse" includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse.  (ORC
2921.22)



 



131.03  FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.




   (A)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law
enforcement officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting
the commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender,
when such aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the
person giving it.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a
law enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor. 
(R.C. § 2921.23) (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









131.04  OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.




   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to
prevent, obstruct or delay the performance by a public official of any
authorized act within the public official’s official capacity, shall do any
act that hampers or impedes a public official in the performance of the
public official’s lawful duties.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing
official business.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (B),
obstructing official business is a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If a
violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
obstructing official business is a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate State law.
(ORC 2921.31)









131.05  OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.




   (A)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for a misdemeanor, or to
assist another to benefit from the commission of a misdemeanor, and no
person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution,
adjudication as a delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that
if committed by an adult would be a misdemeanor or to assist a child to
benefit from the commission of an act that if committed by an adult would be
a misdemeanor, shall do any of the following:





      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child;





      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money,
transportation, a weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or
apprehension;





      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension;





      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the misdemeanor,
or act, or induce any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude
legal process summoning the person to testify or supply evidence;





      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.





      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force,
intimidation, or deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery,
apprehension, or prosecution of the other person or child.










   (B)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or
adjudicated a delinquent child for committing, a violation of subsection (a)
hereof, regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is
apprehended for, is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is
adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or
child aided committed.  The crime or act the person or child aided committed
shall be used under subsection (C) hereof in determining the penalty for the
violation of subsection (A) hereof, regardless of whether the person or child
aided ultimately is apprehended for, is charged with, is convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or
act the person or child aided committed.










   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of
obstructing justice.





      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a
misdemeanor or if the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor
if committed by an adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same
degree as the misdemeanor committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of
the same degree that the act committed by the child aided would be if
committed by an adult.










   (D)   As used in this section:





      (1)   “Adult” and “child” have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 2151.011.





      (2)   “Delinquent child” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2152.02.





(ORC 2921.32)









131.06  RESISTING ARREST.




   (A)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere
with a lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.










   (B)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere
with a lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course
of or as a result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a
law enforcement officer.










   (C)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere
with a lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the
following applies:





      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the
resistance or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law
enforcement officer by means of a deadly weapon; or





      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or
interference, brandishes a deadly weapon.










   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. 
A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree.  A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.










   (E)   As used in this section, DEADLY WEAPON has the same meaning as
in § 137.01 and R.C. § 2923.11.





(R.C. § 2921.33)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









131.07  PERSONATING AN OFFICER.




   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property
or services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator, or agent of any governmental agency.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an
officer, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(R.C. § 2913.44) (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









131.08  IMPERSONATION OF PEACE OFFICER.




   (A)   As used in this section:





      (1)   "Peace officer" means a sheriff, deputy sheriff,
marshal, deputy marshal, member of the organized police department of a
municipal corporation or township constable who is employed by a political
subdivision of this State; a member of a police force employed by a
metropolitan housing authority under Ohio R.C. 3735.31(D); a member of a
police force employed by a regional transit authority under Ohio R.C.
306.35(Y), a State university law enforcement officer appointed under Ohio
R.C. 3345.04; a veterans' home police officer appointed under Ohio R.C.
5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port authority under Ohio
R.C. 4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent, or employee of the State or any
of its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by
statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is
imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of
that statutory duty and authority; or a State highway patrol trooper whose
primary duties are to preserve the peace, to protect life and property and to
enforce the laws, ordinances or rules of the State or any of its political
subdivisions.





      (2)   "Private police officer" means any security guard,
special police officer, private detective or other person who is privately
employed in a police capacity.





      (3)   “Federal law enforcement officer” means an employee
of the United States who serves in a position the duties of which are
primarily the investigation, apprehension or detention of individuals
suspected or convicted of offenses under the criminal laws of the United
States.





      (4)   “Investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2903.11.





      (5)   "Impersonate" means to act the part of, assume the
identity of, wear the uniform or any part of the uniform of or display the
identification of a particular person or of a member of a class of persons
with purpose to make another person believe that the actor is that particular
person or is a member of that class of persons.










   (B)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police
officer, federal law enforcement officer or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.










   (C)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police
officer,  federal law enforcement officer, or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation, shall arrest or detain any person,
search any person or search the property of any person.










   (D)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission
of an offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the State
or the Municipality or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.










   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (b)
hereof that the impersonation of the peace officer was for a lawful purpose.










   (F)   Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  Whoever violates subsections (c) or (d)
hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the purpose of a
violation of subsection (d) hereof is to commit or facilitate the commission
of a felony, such violation is a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate State law.  (ORC 2921.51)









131.09  ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE OR AN ASSISTANCE DOG.




   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical
harm to a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:





      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement
officer in the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the
physical harm is caused or attempted.





      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law
enforcement officer in the performance of the officer’s official duties at
the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has
actual knowledge that the dog or horse is a police dog or horse.










   (B)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:





      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse;





      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;





      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or
interfere with or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by
a police dog or horse, in a manner that does any of the following:





         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement
officer’s control of the police dog or horse;





         (b)   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of
the police dog or horse;





         (c)   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of
control;





         (d)   Enters the area of control of the police dog or
horse without the consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing
food or any other object or substance into that area;





         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police
dog or horse to assist a law enforcement officer.





      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious
physical injury or death to a police dog or horse.





      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a
dog, fail to reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing,
approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or
attempting to bite or otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the
time of the conduct is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance
of the officer’s duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.










   (C)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical
harm to an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:





      (1)   The dog is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing
impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused
or attempted.





      (2)   The dog is not assisting or serving a blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog is
an assistance dog.










   (D)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:





      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog;





      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;





      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or
interfere with or obstruct a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a
manner that does any of the following:





         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served
person’s control of the dog;





         (b)   Deprives the assisted or served person of control
of the dog;





         (c)   Releases the dog from its area of control;





         (d)   Enters the area of control of the dog without the
consent of the assisted or served person, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;





         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to
assist the assisted or served person.





      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious
physical injury or death to an assistance dog;





      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper or harborer of a dog,
fail to reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing,
approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or
attempting to bite or otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time
of the conduct is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or
mobility impaired person or that the person knows is an assistance dog.










   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of
assaulting a police dog or horse.  If the violation results in physical harm
to the police dog or horse, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.  If the violation does not result in death, serious
physical harm, or physical harm to the police dog or horse, assaulting a
police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the violation
results in death or serious physical harm to the police dog or horse, such
violation is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.





      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (B) hereof is guilty of
harassing a police dog or horse.  Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection, harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second
degree.  If the violation results in the death of the police dog or horse or
if the violation results in serious physical harm to the police dog or horse
but does not result in its death, harassing a police dog or horse is a felony
and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.  If the violation
results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not result in
its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog or horse
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.





      (3)   Whoever violates subsection (C) hereof is guilty of
assaulting an assistance dog.  If the violation results in physical harm to
the dog other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance
dog is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the violation does not result
in death, serious physical harm, or physical harm to the dog, assaulting an
assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the violation
results in death or serious physical harm to the dog, such violation is a
felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.





      (4)   Whoever violates subsection (D) of this section is
guilty of harassing an assistance dog.  Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection, harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second
degree.  If the violation results in the death of or serious physical harm
to the assistance dog but does not result in its death, harassing an
assistance dog is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State
law.  If the violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but
does not result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an
assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the first degree.





      (5)   In addition to any other sanction or penalty imposed for
the offense under this section, whoever violates subsection (A), (B), (C) or
(D) of this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:





         (a)   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication
incurred as a result of the violation by the Police Department regarding a
violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section or by the blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the
assistance dog regarding a violation of subsection (C) or (D) of this section;





         (b)   The cost of any damaged equipment that results
from the violation;





         (c)   If the violation did not result in the death of
the police dog or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the
violation and if, as a result of that dog or horse being the subject of the
violation, the dog or horse needs further training or retraining to be able
to continue in the capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog,
the cost of any further training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law
enforcement officer or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog;





         (d)   If the violation resulted in the death of the
assistance dog that was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious
physical harm to the police dog or horse or the assistance dog or horse that
was the subject of the violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to
be replaced on either a temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing
that dog or horse and of any further training of a new police dog or horse or
a new assistance dog by a law enforcement officer or by the blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the
assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because of the
death of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the
subject of the violation.










   (F)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose
conduct is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4741.










   (G)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should
know at the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance
dog that is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or
horse or assistance dog.










   (H)   As used in this section:





      (1)   "Physical harm" means any injury, illness, or other
physiological impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.





      (2)   "Police dog or horse" means a dog or horse that has been
trained, and may be used, to assist law enforcement officers in the
performance of their official duties.





      (3)   "Serious physical harm" means any of the following:





         (a)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk
of death;





         (b)   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or
that involves some temporary, substantial maiming;





         (c)   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a
duration that results in substantial suffering.





      (4)   "Assistance dog”, "blind", and "mobility impaired
person" have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 955.011.





(ORC 2921.321)









131.10  FALSE ALLEGATION OF PEACE OFFICER MISCONDUCT.



   (A)   As used in this section, “peace officer” has the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2935.01.



 



   (B)   No person shall knowingly file a complaint against a peace
officer that alleges that the peace officer engaged in misconduct in the
performance of the officer’s duties if the person knows that the allegation
is false.



 



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making a false
allegation of peace officer misconduct, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(ORC 2921.15)



 



131.11  REFUSAL TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION IN PUBLIC  PLACE.



   (A)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose
the person’s name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law
enforcement officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:




      (1)   The person is committing, has committed, or is about to
commit a criminal offense.





      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:





         (a)   An offense of violence that would constitute a
felony under the laws of this State;





         (b)   A felony offense that causes or results in, or
creates a substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or to
property;





         (c)   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity
in committing, any offense identified in subsection (A)(2)(a) or (b) of this
section;





         (d)   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense
identified in subsection (A)(2)(a) or (b) of this section or any attempt,
conspiracy, or complicity described in subsection (A)(2)(c) of this section
has been, is being, or is about to be committed.




 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disclose
one’s personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



 



   (C)   Nothing in this section requires a person to answer any
questions beyond that person’s name, address, or date of birth.  Nothing
in this section authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a person for
not providing any information beyond that person’s name, address, or date
of birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed.



 



   (D)   It is not a violation of this section to refuse to answer a
question that would reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is an
element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing. 
(ORC 2921.29)



 



 













CHAPTER 132
GAMBLING OFFENSES









Section










132.01   Definitions





132.02   Gambling





132.03   Operating a gambling house





132.04   Public gaming





132.05   Cheating





132.06   Methods of conducting a bingo game; prohibitions





132.07   Instant bingo conduct





132.08   Raffles





132.09   Charitable instant bingo organizations





132.10   Location of instant bingo





132.11   Bingo or game of chance records





132.12   Bingo operator prohibitions





132.13   Bingo exceptions





132.14   Instant bingo conduct by a veteran’s or fraternal organization





132.15   Skill-based amusement  machines




 



132.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Bookmaking" means the business of receiving or paying off
bets.



 



   (b)   "Bet" means the hazarding of anything of value upon the result
of an event, undertaking or contingency, but does not include a bona fide
business risk.



 




   (c)   "Scheme of chance" means a slot machine unless authorized
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3772, lottery unless authorized under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for profit, or other scheme in
which a participant gives a valuable consideration for a chance to win a
prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based amusement machine, or a pool
not conducted for profit.  "Scheme of chance" includes the use of an
electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry if valuable
consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win a prize. 
Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a prize in
the following instances:





      (1)   Less than fifty per cent of the goods or services sold
by a scheme of chance operator in exchange for game entries are used or
redeemed by participants at any one location;





      (2)   Less than fifty per cent of participants who purchase
goods or services at any one location do not accept, use or redeem the goods
or services sold or purportely sold;





      (3)   More than fifty per cent of prizes at any one location
are revealed to participants through an electronic device simulating a game
of chance or a "casino game" as defined in Ohio R.C. 3772.01;





      (4)   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator
in exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner
advertised;





      (5)   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods
or services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or
more game entries;





      (6)   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase
additional game entries;





      (7)   A participant may purchase additional game entries by
using points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;





      (8)   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more
than twenty per cent of the gross revenue received at one location; or





      (9)   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to
obtain any good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the
electronic device.




      As used in this subsection, "electronic device" means a
mechanical, video, digital or electronic machine or device that is capable of
displaying information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned,
leased or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or
by that person's partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or contractors.



 



   (d)   "Game of chance" means poker, craps, roulette, or other game
in which a player gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of
which is determined largely by chance, but does not include bingo.



 



   (e)   "Game of chance conducted for profit" means any game of chance
designed to produce income for the person who conducts or operates the game
of chance, but does not include bingo.



 



   (f)   "Gambling device" means any of the following:




      (1)   A book, totalizer or other equipment for recording bets;





      (2)   A ticket, token or other device representing a chance,
share or interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;





      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel,
slot machine, or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game
of chance;





      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus or paraphernalia
specially designed for gambling purposes;





      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in
violation of this chapter.




 



   (g)   "Gambling offense" means the following:




      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2915.02 to 2915.092, 2915.10 or
2915.11;





      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance
or law of this or any other state or the United States substantially
equivalent to any section listed in subsection (g)(1) hereof or a violation
of Ohio R.C. 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;





      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal
ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States, of which
gambling is an element;





      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing an offense under subsection (g)(1), (2) or (3) hereof.




 



   (h)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, "charitable
organization" means either of the following:




      (1)   An organization that is and has received from the
Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in effect
stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under
subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code;





      (2)   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer
firefighter's organization, veteran's organization, fraternal organization,
or sporting organization that is exempt from federal, income taxation under
subsection 501(c)(4), (c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10) or (c)(19) of the Internal
Revenue Code.




   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have
been in continuous existence as such in this State for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under Ohio R.C. 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided
in division (D) of Ohio R.C. 2915.02.



 



   (i)   "Religious organization" means any church, body of
communicants or group that is not organized or operated for profit, that
gathers in common membership for regular worship and religious observances.



 



   (j)   "Veteran's organization" means any individual post or state
headquarters of a national veteran's association or an auxiliary unit of any
individual post of a national veteran's association, which post, state
headquarters, or auxiliary unit  is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation
and either has received a letter from the state headquarters of the national
veteran's association indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit
is in good standing with the national veteran's association or has received a
letter from the national veteran's association indicating that the state
headquarters is in good standing with the national veteran's association. 
As used in this subsection, "national veteran's association" means any
veteran's association that has been in continuous existence as such for a
period of at least five years and either is incorporated by an act of the
United States congress or has a national dues-paying membership of at least
five thousand persons.



 



   (k)   "Volunteer firefighter's organization" means any organization
of volunteer firefighters, as defined in Ohio R.C. 146.01, that is organized
and operated exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire
department or a volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by
a county, municipal corporation, or township.



 



   (l)   "Fraternal organization" means any society, order, state
headquarters, or association within this State, except a college or high
school fraternity, that is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge
or chapter of a national or state organization, that exists exclusively for
the common business of sodality of its members.



 



   (m)   "Volunteer rescue service organization" means any organization
of volunteers organized to function as an emergency medical service
organization as defined in Ohio R.C. 4765.01.



 



   (n)   "Charitable bingo game" means any bingo game described in
subsection (o)(1) or (2) of this section that is conducted by a charitable
organization that has obtained a license pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.08 and
the proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.



 



   (o)   "Bingo" means either of the following:




      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:





         A.   The participants use bingo cards or sheets,
including paper formats and electronic representation or image formats, that
are divided into twenty-five spaces arranged in five horizontal and five
vertical rows of spaces, with each space, except the central space, being
designated by a combination of a letter and a number and with the central
space being designated as a free space.





         B.   The participants cover the space on the bingo cards
or sheets that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are
announced by a bingo game operator.





         C.   A bingo game operator announces combinations of
letters and numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects
by chance, either manually or mechanically from a receptacle that contains
seventy-five objects at the beginning of each game, each object marked by a
different combination of a letter and a number that corresponds to one of the
seventy-five possible combinations of a letter and a number that can appear
on the bingo cards or sheets.





         D.   The winner of the bingo game includes any
participant who properly announces during the interval between the
announcements of letters and numbers as described in subsection (o)(1)C.
hereof, that a predetermined and preannounced pattern of spaces has been
covered on a bingo card or sheet being used by a participant.





      (2)   Instant bingo, punch boards and raffles.




 



   (p)   "Conduct" means to back, promote, organize, manage, carry on,
sponsor, or prepare for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme
of chance, or a sweepstakes.



 



   (q)   "Bingo game operator" means any person, except security
personnel, who performs work or labor at the site of bingo, including, but
not limited to, collecting money from participants, handing out bingo cards
or sheets or objects to cover spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from
a receptacle the objects that contain the combination of letters and numbers
that appear on bingo cards or sheets, calling out the combinations of letters
and numbers, distributing prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets
or cards, supervising the operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets,
selecting raffle tickets from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers
in a raffle, and preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages.



 



   (r)   "Participant" means any person who plays bingo.



 



   (s)   "Bingo session" means a period that includes both of the
following:




      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of
one or more games described in subsection (o)(1) of this section, instant
bingo, and seal cards;





      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and seal cards
for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the
period described in subsection (s)(1) of this section.




 



   (t)   "Gross receipts" means all money or assets, including
admission fees, that a person receives from bingo without the deduction of
any amounts for prizes paid out or for the expenses of conducting bingo.
"Gross receipts" does not include  any money directly taken in from the sale
of food or beverages by a charitable organization conducting bingo, or by a
bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a charitable organization conducting
bingo, provided all of the following apply:




      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as
a  bona fide auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at
least two years prior to conducting bingo.





      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives
nothing of value except the food or beverage and items customarily received
with the purchase of that food or beverage.





      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and
reasonable prices.




 



   (u)   "Security personnel" includes any person who either is a
sheriff, deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or a
police officer of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a
peace officer's training course pursuant to Ohio R.C. 109.71 to 109.79 and
who is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.



 



   (v)   "Charitable purpose" means that the net profit of bingo, other
than instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or otherwise
transferred to, any of the following:




      (1)   Any organization that is described in subsection
509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either
a governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under subsection
501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code;





      (2)   A veteran's organization that is a post, chapter, or
organization of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or
foundation for, any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the
United States or any of its possessions, at least seventy-five per cent of
the members of which are veterans and substantially all of the other members
of which are individuals who are spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or
such individuals, provided that no part of the net earnings of such post,
chapter, or organization inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or
individual, and further provided that the net profit is used by the post, 
chapter, or organization for the charitable purposes set forth in division
(B)(12) of Ohio R.C. 5739.02, is used for awarding scholarships to or for
attendance at an institution mentioned in division (B)(12) of Ohio R.C.
5739.02, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit youth
activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated to
schools, youth groups, or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion
of patriotism, or disaster relief;





      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous
existence in this State for fifteen years and that uses the net profit
exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, or educational
purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals if
contributions for such use would qualify as a deductible charitable
contribution under subsection 170 of the Internal Revenue Code;





      (4)   A volunteer firefighter's organization that uses the net
profit for the purposes set forth in subsection (k) of this section.




 



   (w)   "Internal Revenue Code" means the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, 100 Stat. 2085, 26 U..S.C. 1, as now or hereafter amended.



 



   (x)   "Youth athletic organization" means any organization, not
organized for profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide
financial support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are
twenty-one years of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing,
operating or contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league or
association.



 



   (y)   "Youth athletic park organization" means any organization, not
organized for profit, that satisfies both of the following:




      (1)   It owns, operates and maintains playing fields that
satisfy both of the following:





         A.   The playing fields are used at least one hundred
days per year for athletic activities by one or more organizations not
organized for profit, each of which is organized and operated exclusively to
provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons
who are eighteen years of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing,
operating or contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league or
association;





         B.   The playing fields are not used for any
profit-making activity at any time during the year,





      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively
for the operation, maintenance and improvement of its playing fields of the
type described in paragraph (1) hereof.




 



   (z)   "Bingo supplies" means bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo
tickets or cards; electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal
cards; instant bingo ticket dispensers; and  devices for selecting or
displaying the combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets.
Items that are "bingo supplies" are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise
provided,  and used, in accordance with this chapter. For purposes of this
chapter, "bingo supplies" are not to be considered equipment used  to
conduct a bingo game.



 



   (aa)   "Instant bingo" means a form of bingo that shall use folded
or banded tickets or paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of
which is covered or otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter,
or symbol, or set of numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been
designated in advance as prize winners, and may also include games in which
some winners are determined by the random selection of one or more bingo
numbers by the use of a seal card or bingo blower.  In all "instant bingo"
the prize amount and structure shall be predetermined. "Instant bingo" does
not include any device that is activated by the insertion of a coin,
currency, token, or an equivalent, and that contains as one of its components
a video display monitor that is capable of displaying numbers, letters,
symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations.



 



   (bb)   "Seal card" means a form of instant bingo that uses instant
bingo tickets in conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or
more seals that, when removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning
numbers, letters, or symbols.



 



   (cc)   "Raffle" means a form of bingo in which the one or more
prizes are won by one or more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The
one or more winners of the raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or
other detachable section from a receptacle containing ticket stubs or
detachable sections corresponding to all tickets sold for the raffle. 
"Raffle" does not include the drawing of a ticket stub or other detachable
section of a ticket purchased to attend a professional sporting event if both
of the following apply:




      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to
select the winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting
event; and





      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a
ticket to the professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given
away.




 



   (dd)   "Punch board" means a board containing a number of holes or
receptacles of uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and randomly,
serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from the hole
or receptacle when used in conjunction with instant bingo. A player may punch
or draw the numbered slips of paper from the holes or receptacles and obtain
the prize established for the game if the number drawn corresponds to a
winning number or, if the punch board includes the use of a seal card, a
potential winning number.



 



   (ee)   "Gross profit" means gross receipts minus the amount actually
expended for the payment of prize awards.



 



   (ff)   "Net profit" means gross profit minus expenses.



 



   (gg)   "Expenses" means the reasonable amount of gross profit
actually expended for all of the following:




      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;





      (2)   The annual license fee required under Ohio R.C. 2915.08;





      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or
game account described in Ohio R.C. 2915.10;





      (4)   Audits and accounting services;





      (5)   Safes;





      (6)   Cash registers;





      (7)   Hiring security personnel;





      (8)   Advertising bingo;





      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;





      (10)   Tables and chairs;





      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable
organization's facilities, including, but not limited to, a post home, club
house, lounge, tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home,
club house, lounge, tavern, or canteen;





      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are
levied on a premises on which bingo is conducted;





      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the
conduct of bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General
under division (B)(1) of Ohio R.C. 2915.08.




 



   (hh)   "Person" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1.59 and
includes any firm or any other legal entity, however organized.



 



   (ii)   "Revoke" means to void permanently all rights and privileges
of the holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08, 2915.081, or
2915.082 or a charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.



 



   (jj)   "Suspend" means to interrupt temporarily all rights and
privileges of the holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08,
2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable gaming license issued by another
jurisdiction.



 



   (kk)   "Distributor" means any person who purchases or obtains bingo
supplies and who does either of the following:




      (1)   Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers
to provide the bingo supplies to another person for use in this State;





      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the
bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this State.




 



   (ll)   "Manufacturer" means any person who assembles completed bingo
supplies from raw materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies,
converts, adds to, or removes parts from bingo supplies to further their
promotion or sale.



 



   (mm)   "Gross annual revenues" means the annual gross receipts
derived from the conduct of bingo described in subsection (o)(1) of this
section plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo
described in subsection (o)(2) of this section.



 



   (nn)   "Instant bingo ticket dispenser" means a mechanical device
that dispenses an instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value
dispensed and that has the following characteristics:




      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States
currency.





      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.





      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate
noise.





      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters,
symbols, or  characters in winning or losing combinations.





      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning
reels.





      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo
ticket or card is a winning or nonwinning ticket or card and requires a
winning ticket or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.





      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid
in accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.





      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not
interactive.




 




   (oo)   (1)   "Electronic bingo aid" means an electronic device
used by a participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased  at the
time and place of a bingo session and that does all of the following:





         A.   It provides a means for a participant to input
numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller.





         B.   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the
participant to the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.





         C.   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.





      (2)   "Electronic bingo aid" does not include any device into
which a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.




 



   (pp)   "Deal of instant bingo tickets" means a single game of
instant bingo tickets all with the same serial number.



 




   (qq)   (1)   "Slot machine" means either of the following:





         A.   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital
device that is capable of accepting anything of value, directly or
indirectly, from or on behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the
hope of gain;





         B.   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital
device that is capable of accepting anything of value, directly or
indirectly, from or on behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or
game of chance.





      (2)   "Slot machine" does not include a skill-based amusement
machine or an instant bingo ticket dispenser.




 



   (rr)   "Net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo"
means gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and  reasonable expense
expended for the purchase of instant bingo supplies, and, in the case of
instant bingo conducted by a veteran's, fraternal or sporting organization,
minus the payment by that organization of real property taxes, and
assessments levied on a premises on which instant bingo is conducted.



 



   (ss)   "Charitable instant bingo organization" means an organization
that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and
described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is a
charitable organization as defined in this section. A "charitable instant
bingo organization" does not include a charitable organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in
subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and that is created by a
veteran's organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization
in regards to bingo conducted or assisted by a veteran's organization, a
fraternal organization, or a sporting organization pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2915.13.



 



   (tt)   "Game flare" means the board or placard that accompanies each
deal of instant bingo tickets and that has printed on or affixed to it the
following information for the game:




      (1)   The name of the game;





      (2)   The manufacturer's name or distinctive logo;





      (3)   The form number;





      (4)   The ticket count;





      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning
instant bingo tickets by denomination and the respective winning symbol or
number combinations for the winning instant bingo tickets;





      (6)   The cost per play;





      (7)   The serial number of the game.




 




   (uu)   (1)   "Skill-based amusement machine" means mechanical,
video, digital, or electronic device that rewards the player or players, if
at all, only with merchandise prizes or with redeemable vouchers redeemable
only for merchandise prizes, provided that with respect to rewards for
playing the game all of the following apply:





         A.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded
as a result of the single play of a machine does not exceed ten dollars;





         B.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of
a machine are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value
of more than ten dollars;





         C.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a
merchandise prize that has a wholesale value of more than ten dollars times
the fewest number of single plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers
required to obtain that prize; and





         D.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are
distributed at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of
play.





         A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher
for purposes of division (uu)(1) of this section even if the skill-based
amusement machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a
place where gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card
is not redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the
skill-based amusement machine.





      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement
machine and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more
of the following apply:





         A.   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is
impacted by the number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players
playing the game.





         B.   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based
solely on the player achieving the object of the game or the player's score;





         C.   The outcome of the game, or the value of the
redeemable voucher or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be
controlled by a source other than any player playing the game.





         D.   The success of any player is or may be determined
by a chance event that cannot be altered by player actions.





         E.   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is
determined by game features not visible or known to the player.





         F.   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is
impacted by the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.





      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is
operated as described in subsection (uu)(1) of this section:





         A.   As used in subsection (uu) of this section, "game"
and "play" mean one event from the initial activation of the machine until
the results of play are determined without payment of additional
consideration.  An individual utilizing a machine that involves a single
game, play, contest, competition or tournament may be awarded redeemable
vouchers or merchandise prizes based on the results of play.





         B.   Advance play for a single game, play, contest,
competition or tournament participation may be purchased.  The cost of the
contest, competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a
single noncontest, competition or tournament play.





         C.   To the extent that the machine is used in a
contest, competition or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament
has a defined starting and ending date and is open to participants in
competition for scoring and ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable
vouchers or merchandise prizes that are stated prior to the start of the
contest, competition or tournament.





      (4)   For purposes of subsection (uu)(1) of this section, the
mere presence of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing, or scoring
mechanism, that does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of
the game does not make the device a skill-based amusement machine.




 



   (vv)   "Merchandise prize" means any item of value, but shall not
include any of the following:




      (1)   Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;





      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, bingo,
or instant bingo;





      (3)   Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or





      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the
items listed in subsection (vv)(1), (2) or (3) of this section.




 



   (ww)   "Redeemable voucher" means any ticket, token, coupon,
receipt, or other noncash representation of value.



 



   (xx)   "Pool not conducted for profit" means a scheme in which a
participant gives a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and
the total amount of consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or
participants.



 



   (yy)   "Sporting organization" means a hunting, fishing or trapping
organization, other than a college or high school fraternity or sorority,
that is not organized for profit, that is affiliated with a state or national
sporting organization, including but not limited to, the league of Ohio
sportsmen, and that has been in continuous existence in this State for a
period of three years.



 



   (zz)   "Community action agency" has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 122.66.



 




   (aaa)   (1)   "Sweepstakes terminal device" means a mechanical,
video, digital or electronic machine or device that is owned, leased or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a sweepstakes, or by that
person's partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors, that is intended
to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that is capable of displaying
information on a screen or other mechanism.  A device is a sweepstakes
terminal device if any of the following apply:





         A.   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a
representation of the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes
entries.





         B.   The device utilizes software such that the
simulated game influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.





         C.   The device selects prizes from a predetermined
finite pool of entries.





         D.   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the
content of a predetermined sweepstakes entry.





         E.   The device predetermines the prize results and
stores those results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results
are revealed.





         F.   The device utilizes software to create a game
result.





         G.   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even
though the device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value
of any prize awarded.





         H.   The device determines and associates the prize with
an entry or entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.





      (2)   As used in this subsection and in Section 132.02:





         A.   "Enter" means the act by which a person becomes
eligible to receive any prize offered in a sweepstakes.





         B.   "Entry" means one event from the initial activation
of the sweepstakes terminal device until all of the sweepstakes prize results
from that activation are revealed.





         C.   "Prize" means any gift, award, gratuity, good,
service, credit, reward or any other thing of value that may be transferred
to a person, whether possession of the prize is actually transferred, or
placed on an account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer
the prize.





         D.   "Sweepstakes terminal device facility" means any
location in this Municipality where a sweepstakes terminal device is provided
to a sweepstakes participant, except as provided in Ohio R.C.  2915.02(G).










   (bbb)   "Sweepstakes" means any game, contest, advertising scheme or
plan, or other promotion where consideration is not required for a person to
enter to win or become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of
which is based upon chance.  "Sweepstakes" does not include bingo as
authorized under this chapter, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by Ohio
R.C. Chapter 3769, lotteries conducted by the State Lottery Commission as
authorized by Ohio R.C. Chapter 3770, and casino gaming as authorized by Ohio
R.C. Chapter 3772.





(ORC 2915.01)




 



132.02  GAMBLING.




   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:





      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct
that facilitates bookmaking;





      (2)   Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in
conduct that facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any
scheme of chance;





      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange, or engage in
conduct that facilitates the procurement, transmission, or exchange of
information for use in establishing odds or determining winners in connection
with bookmaking or with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme
of chance;





      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of
chance as a substantial source of income or livelihood;





      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes
with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal
device facility and either:





         A.   Give to another person any item described in
subsection (vv)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of Section 132.01 as a prize for playing
or participating in a sweepstakes; or





         B.   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a
redeemable voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is
in excess of ten dollars and which is awarded as a single entry for playing
or participating in a sweepstakes.  Redeemable vouchers shall not be
redeemable for a merchandise prize that has a wholesale value of more than
ten dollars.





      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes
with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal
device facility without first obtaining a current annual "certificate of
registration" from the Attorney General as required by division (F) of Ohio
R.C. 2915.02.





      (7)   With purpose to violate subsection (a)(1), (2), (3),
(4), (5) or (6) of this section, acquire, possess, control, or operate any
gambling device.




 



   (b)   For purposes of subsection (a)(1) of this section, a person
facilitates bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal
bookmaking operation, including, without limitation, placing a bet with a
person engaged in or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of
subsection (a)(2) of this section, a person facilitates a game of chance
conducted for profit or a scheme of chance if the person in any way knowingly
aids in the conduct or operation of any such game or scheme, including,
without limitation, playing any such game or scheme.



 



   (c)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with
gambling expressly permitted by law.



 



   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:




      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:





         A.   The games of chance are not craps for money or
roulette for money.





         B.    The games of chance are conducted by a charitable
organization that is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect, stating that the
organization is, exempt from Federal income taxation under subsection 501(a)
and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.





         C.   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of
the charitable organization that are conducted not more than a total of five
days a calendar year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable
organization for a period of no less than one year immediately preceding the
conducting of the games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental
unit, or on premises that are leased from a veteran's or fraternal
organization and that have been owned by the lessor veteran's or fraternal
organization for a period of no less than one year immediately preceding the
conducting of the games of chance.





   A charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran's or
fraternal organization to conduct a festival described in subsection (d)(1)C.
hereof if the veteran's or fraternal organization has already leased the
premises twelve times during the preceding year to charitable organizations
for that purpose.  If a charitable organization leases premises from a
veteran's or fraternal organization to conduct a festival described in
subsection (d)(1)C. hereof, the charitable organization shall not pay a
rental rate for the premises per day of the festival that exceeds the rental
rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may pay under Section
132.06(b)(1) when it leases premises from another charitable organization to
conduct bingo games.





         D.   All of the money or assets received from the games
of chance after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the
games of chance are used by, or given, donated or otherwise transferred to,
any organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), (2) or (3) of the
Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or an organization
that is tax exempt under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code;





         E.   The games of chance are not conducted during, or
within ten hours of, a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only
pursuant to Section 132.13.





   No person shall receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip,
donations, gratuity or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
for operating or assisting in the operation of any game of chance.





      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament operated under a permit
issued under Ohio R.C. 1533.92, as "tag fishing tournament" is defined in
Ohio R.C. 1531.01.





      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds
a license issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08.




 



   (e)   Subsection (d) hereof shall not be construed to authorize the
sale, lease or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct
games of chance, as granted by subsection (d) hereof, by any charitable
organization that is granted that right.



 



   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has been
convicted of a gambling offense, gambling is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate State law. 



(ORC 2915.02)



 



132.03  OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.



   (a)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody,
control or supervision of premises, shall:




      (1)   Use or occupy such premises for gambling in violation of
Section 132.02;





      (2)   Recklessly permit such premises to be used or occupied
for gambling in violation of Section 132.02.




 



   (b)    Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a
gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling
house is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.



 



   (c)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 3767.



(ORC 2915.03)



 



132.04  PUBLIC GAMING.



   (a)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena,
hall, or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort
shall make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.



 



   (b)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody,
control, or supervision, of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall
recklessly permit those premises to be used or occupied in violation of
subsection (a) of this section.



 



   (c)   Subsections (a) and (b) of this section do not prohibit
conduct in connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.



 



   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming.
Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, public gaming is a minor
misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense, public gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



 



   (e)   Premises used or occupied in violation of subsection (b) of
this section constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 3767. 
(ORC 2915.04)



 



132.05  CHEATING.



   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person
is facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the
outcome of any of the following:




      (1)   The subject of a bet;





      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not
an athletic or sporting event;





      (3)   A scheme or game of chance;





      (4)   Bingo.




 



   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of cheating.  Except
as otherwise provided in this subsection cheating is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  If the potential gain from the cheating is one thousand
dollars ($1,000) or more, or if the offender previously has been convicted of
any gambling offense or of any theft offense as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01,
cheating is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2915.05)



 



132.06  METHODS OF CONDUCTING A BINGO GAME; PROHIBITIONS.



   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to
do any of the following:




      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease
that equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct
bingo, or from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a
rental rate that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that
equipment;





      (2)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the
net profit derived from bingo, other than instant bingo, for a charitable
purpose listed in its license application and described in Section 132.01(v),
or distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant
bingo as stated in its license application and in accordance with Ohio R.C.
2915.101.




 



   (b)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game
described in Section 132.01(o)(1) shall fail to do any of the following:




      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the
charitable organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable
organization and leased from that charitable  organization for a rental rate
not in excess of the lesser of six hundred dollars ($600.00) per bingo
session or forty-five per cent of the gross receipts of the bingo session, on
premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable organization
for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and reasonable for
premises that are similar in location, size, and quality but not in excess of
four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) per bingo session, or on premises that
are owned by a person other than a charitable organization, that are leased
from that person by another charitable organization, and that are subleased
from that other  charitable organization by the charitable organization for
a rental rate not in excess of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) per bingo
session. No charitable organization is required to pay property taxes or
assessments on premises that the charitable organization leases from another
person to conduct bingo sessions.  If the charitable organization leases
from a person  other than a charitable organization the premises on which
it  conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall  provide the
premises to the organization and shall not provide the organization with
bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or concession
operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of service. A charitable
organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or leases to
more than three other charitable organizations per calendar week for
conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not a charitable
organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases, or otherwise is
empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per calendar
week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall more
than nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar week.





      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where
the bingo session is conducted;





      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with the
definition of bingo set forth in Section 132.01(s)(1).




 



   (c)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game
described in Section 132.01(o)(1) shall do any of the following:




      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for
operating a bingo session that is conducted by the charitable organization or
for preparing, selling, or serving food or  beverages at the site of the
bingo session, permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable
organization to pay compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares,
sells, or serves food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the 
charitable organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or society of the
charitable organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at a
bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, if the auxiliary unit
or society pays any  compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare,
sell, or serve the food or beverages;





      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services
performed in relation to the bingo session;





      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides
refreshments to the participants in the bingo session;





      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(4) of
this section, conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period.
A volunteer firefighter's organization or a volunteer rescue service
organization that conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar
year may conduct more than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after
notifying the Attorney General when it will conduct the sessions;





      (5)   Pay out more than six thousand dollars ($6,000) in
prizes for bingo games described in Section 132.01(o)(1) during any bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization.  "Prizes" does not
include awards from the conduct of instant bingo;





      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the
eight-hour period between two a.m. and ten a.m., at any time during, or
within ten hours of, a bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2915.12, at any premises not specified on its license, or on any
day of the week or during any time period not specified on its license. 
Subsection (c)(6) of this section does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo
tickets beginning at nine a.m. for a bingo session that begins at ten a.m. 
If circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to
conduct a bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the
time, specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to
conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day
or time specified on its license, the charitable organization may apply in
writing to the Attorney General for an amended license, pursuant to division
(F) of Ohio R.C. 2915.08. A charitable organization may apply twice in each
calendar year for an amended license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of
the week or at a time other than the day or time specified on its license. If
the amended license is granted, the organization may conduct bingo sessions
at the premises, on the day of the week, and at the time specified on its
amended license;





      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization
knows, or should have known, is under the age of eighteen to work as a bingo
game operator;





      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization
knows, or should have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling
offense in any jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;





      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo
session is conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to
provide the charitable organization with bingo game operators, security
personnel, concessions, bingo  supplies, or any other type of service;





      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except
a distributor issued a license under Ohio R.C. 2915.081;





      (11)   A.   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids
except under the following circumstances:





            1.   For any single participant, not more than
ninety bingo faces can be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.





            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a
participant using an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo
cards or sheets.





            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an
electronic bingo aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of
bingo faces played with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo
session but without an electronic bingo  aid.





            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an
electronic network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and
devices that are located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted or be interactive with any device not located on the premises at
which the bingo is being conducted.





            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to
participate in bingo that is conducted at a location other than the location
at which the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid
is used.





            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to
provide for the input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller
other than the bingo caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at
the location at which the bingo session is conducted and at which the
electronic bingo aid is used.





         B.   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance
with Ohio R.C. Chapter 119  that govern the use of electronic bingo aids.
The rules may include a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable
of being audited by the Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards
or sheets played during each bingo session.





      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or
should have known, to be under eighteen years of age to play bingo described
in Section 132.01(o)(1).




 




   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(3)
hereof, no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator,
and no bingo game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage,
salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or  other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly, regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or
providing other work or labor at the site of bingo during a bingo session.





      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(3)
hereof, no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any
commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of
compensation, directly or indirectly, regardless of the source, for
conducting instant bingo other than at a bingo session at the site of instant
bingo other than at a bingo session.





      (3)   Nothing in subsection (d) hereof prohibits an employee
of a fraternal organization, veteran’s organization, or sporting
organization from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the
organization’s members or invited guests, as long as no portion of the
employee’s compensation is paid from any receipts of bingo.




 



   (e)   Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1) of this  section, a
charitable organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into
written agreements for the lease of  premises it owns to another charitable
organization or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo
sessions so that more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week
on the premises, and a person that is not a charitable organization and that,
prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease
of premises it owns to charitable organizations for the conducting of more
than two bingo sessions per calendar week on the premises, may continue to
lease the premises to those charitable organizations, provided that no more
than four sessions are conducted per calendar week, that the lessor
organization or person has notified the Attorney General in writing of the
organizations that will conduct the sessions and the days of the week and the
times of the day on which the sessions will be conducted, that the initial
lease entered into with each organization that will conduct the sessions was
filed with the Attorney General prior to December 6, 1977, and that each
organization that will conduct the sessions was issued a license to conduct
bingo games by the Attorney General prior to December 6, 1977.



 



   (f)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo
ticket as a prize.



 



   (g)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates subsection (a)(1) or (2), (b)(1), (2), or (3), (c)(1) to (11) or (d)
of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (2),
(b)(1), (2) or (3), (c)(1) to (11), or (d) of this section, a violation of
subsection (a)(1) or (2), (b)(1), (2) or (3) or (c)(1) to (11) or (d) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Whoever violates subsection
(c)(12) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If
the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection
(c)(12) of this section, a violation of subsection (c)(12) is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.



(ORC 2915.09)



 



132.07  INSTANT BINGO CONDUCT.



   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall
do any of the following:




      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of divisions
(A)(1), (2), and (3) of Ohio R.C. 2915.09;





      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following
applies:





         A.   That organization is, and has received from the
Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect
stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under
subsection 501(a), is described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code, is a charitable organization as defined in Section 132.01, is
in good standing in the State pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.08, and is in
compliance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 1716;





         B.   That organization is, and has received from the
Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect
stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under
subsection 501(a), is described in subsection 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or
501(c)(19) or is a veteran’s organization described in subsection 501(c)(4)
of the Internal Revenue Code, and conducts instant bingo under Section 132.14.





      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any
premises not specified on the organization's license issued pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2915.08;





      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should
have known has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;





      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo
or punch board games from any person except a distributor licensed  under
Ohio R.C.  2915.081;





      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a
price different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either
the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;





      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under
eighteen years of age;





      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for
less than three years;





      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for
conducting instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for
preparing, selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant
bingo game, permit any auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator  who prepares, sells, or serves food
or beverages at an instant bingo game conducted by the organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the organization to prepare, sell, or
serve food or beverages at an instant bingo game conducted by the
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages;





      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to an instant bingo game, except as provided in Section 132.09(d);





      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;





      (12)   A.   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold
to bingo game operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant
bingo tickets or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who
are working at a premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold;





         B.   Subsection (a)(12)A. of this section does not
prohibit a licensed charitable organization or a bingo game operator from
giving any person an instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize
won by a participant in an instant bingo game.  In no case shall an instant
bingo ticket or card be sold or provided for a price different from the price
printed on it by the manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card
or on the game flare.





      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial
numbers of the deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold,
conspicuously at each premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or
cards;





      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that 
was not purchased from a distributor licensed under Ohio R.C. 2915.081 as
reflected on an invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the
information required by Section 132.11(e);





      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or
cards, to continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the
tickets or cards with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are
sold;





      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in 
accordance with Ohio R.C.  2915.01 to 2915.13.









   (b)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant
bingo ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.



 



   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section or a rule
adopted under Ohio R.C. 2915.091(C) is guilty of illegal instant bingo
conduct.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal instant
bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (a) of this
section or of such a rule, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.



(ORC 2915.091)



 



132.08  RAFFLES.




   (a)   (1)   Subject to subsection (a)(2) of this section, a
charitable organization, a public school, a chartered nonpublic school, a
community school, or a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
subsection 501(a) and is described in subsection 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4),
501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code
may conduct a raffle to raise money for the organization or school and does
not need a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle drawing that
is not for profit.





      (2)   If a charitable organization that is described in
subsection (a)(1) of this section, but that is not also described in
subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, conducts a raffle, the
charitable organization shall distribute at least fifty per cent of the net
profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in Section 132.01(v)
or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state, or any
political subdivision.










   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (a) or (b) of this section,
no person shall conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle
drawing that is not for profit.










   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of
illegal conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (c) of
this section, illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2915.092)









132.09  CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATIONS.




   (a)   As used in this section, "retail income from all commercial
activity" means the income that a person receives from the provision of
goods, services, or activities that are provided at the location where
instant bingo other than at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale
of instant bingo tickets.  A religious organization that is exempt from
federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, at not more than one location at
which it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its
members and guests as retail income.










   (b)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts
instant bingo other than at a bingo session, the charitable  instant bingo
organization shall enter into a written contract  with the owner or lessor
of the location at which the instant  bingo is conducted to allow the owner
or lessor to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session, identify each location where the instant bingo other than at a bingo
session is being conducted, and identify the owner or lessor of each location.





      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts
instant bingo other than at a bingo session is not required to enter into a
written contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the
instant bingo is conducted provided that the owner or lessor is not assisting
in the conduct of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session and
provided that the conduct of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session
at that location is not more than five days per calendar year and not more
than ten hours per day.










   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (f) of this section, no
charitable instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than
at a bingo session at a location where the primary source of retail income
from all commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo
tickets.










   (d)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract
pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to
the charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant
bingo tickets.  The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or
lessor receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however,
that after the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the
charitable instant bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant
bingo prizes remaining in the deal of instant bingo tickets.





   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay six per cent of the
total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of
reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this subsection.





   As used in this subsection, "expenses" means those items provided for
in subsections (gg)(4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (12) and (13) of Section 132.01
and that percentage of the owner's or lessor's rent for the location where
instant bingo is conducted.  "Expenses" in the aggregate, shall not exceed
six per cent of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets.





   As used in this subsection, "full gross profit" means the amount by
which the total receipts of all instant bingo tickets, if the deal had been
sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be paid out if all prizes were
redeemed.










   (e)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the
Attorney General with all of the following information:





      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has
terminated a contract entered into pursuant to subsection (b) of this section
with an owner or lessor of a location;





      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has
entered into a written contract pursuant to subsection (b) of this section
with a new owner or lessor of a location;





      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware
of conduct by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is
conducted that is in violation of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.










   (f)   Subsection (c) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter's organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code, that conducts instant bingo other than at a bingo session on
the premises where the organization conducts firefighter training, that has
conducted instant bingo continuously for at least five years prior to July 1,
2003, and that, during each of those five years, had gross receipts of at
least one million five hundred thousand dollars.  (ORC 2915.093)









132.10  LOCATION OF INSTANT BINGO.



   (a)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable
instant bingo organization in the conduct of  instant bingo other than at a
bingo session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a
written contract, as described in Section 132.09, with the charitable instant
bingo organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a
bingo session.









   (b)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a
location where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session.










   (c)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written
contract as prescribed in subsection (a) of this section shall violate any
provision of Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person
in violating any provision of Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.










   (d)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written
contract as prescribed in subsection (a) of this section shall violate the
terms of the contract.










   (e)   (1)    Whoever violates subsection (c) or (d) of this
section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise 
provided in this subsection, illegal instant bingo conduct is a  misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a
violation of subsection (c) or (d) of this section, illegal instant bingo
conduct is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.





      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly,
intentionally, or recklessly violates subsection (c) or (d) of this section,
any license that the owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods
on the owner's or lessor's premises that is issued by the State or a
political subdivision is subject to suspension, revocation, or payment of a
monetary penalty at the request of the Attorney General. 
(ORC 2915.094)









132.11  BINGO OR GAME OF CHANCE RECORDS.



   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of
chance pursuant to Section 132.02(d), shall fail to maintain the following
records for at least three years from the date on which the bingo or game of
chance is conducted:




      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo
session, each game of instant bingo by serial number, each raffle, each punch
board game, and each game of chance, and an itemized list of the gross
profits of each game of instant bingo by serial number;





      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes,
that are incurred in conducting bingo or instant  bingo, the name of each
person to whom the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;





      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization,  the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number, and the name, address, and social security number of
all persons who are winners of prizes of six hundred dollars ($600.00) or 
more in value;





      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of
the bingo or game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient
to whom the money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit
of bingo, or the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any
charitable or other purpose set forth in Section 132.01(v), Section
132.02(d), or Ohio R.C. 2915.101, a list of each purpose and an itemized list
of each expenditure for each purpose;





      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo 
session or game of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;





      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages
by the charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if
the receipts were excluded from "gross receipts" Section 132.01(t);





      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo
session, each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo
conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and beverages by
the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of the
charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses.










   (b)    A charitable organization shall keep the records that it  is
required to maintain pursuant to subsection (a) of this section at its
principal place of business in this State or at its headquarters in this
State and shall notify the Attorney General  of the location at which those
records are kept.









   (c)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in
Section 132.01(o)(1) or (2) shall be deposited into a checking account
devoted exclusively to the bingo session or game. Payments for allowable
expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session or game and payments to
recipients of some or all of the net profit of the bingo session or game
shall be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers drawn on the bingo
session or game account.









   (d)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an
inventory of all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of
each year.










   (e)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with Ohio
R.C. Chapter 119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and
reporting to ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are
properly accounted for.










   (f)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years
after the date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of
its selling or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use
in this State. The record shall include all of the following for each
instance:





      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor
purchased the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;





      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or 
other distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or  otherwise
provided;





      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;





      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of
all paper bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or
otherwise provided to each charitable organization.










   (g)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three  years
after the date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of
its selling or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this State. The
record shall include all of the following for each instance:





      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the
bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;





      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo
supplies, including serial numbers;





      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers
of  all paper bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or
otherwise provided to each distributor.










   (h)   The Attorney General, or any law enforcement agency, may do
all of the following:





      (1)   Investigate any charitable organization or any officer,
agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization;





      (2)   Examine the accounts and records of the organization;





      (3)   Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of bingo
or games of chance;





      (4)   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games
of chance are conducted;





      (5)   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to
determine if a violation of any provision of this chapter has occurred and to
determine whether Section 132.12 has been complied with.





   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe that a
charitable organization or an officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of
the organization has violated any provision of this chapter, the law
enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce this
chapter, provided that the law enforcement agency shall give written notice
to the Attorney General when commencing an action as described in this
subsection.










   (i)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny
access to any accounts or records of a charitable  organization that have
been requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any
inspection, audit, or  observation of bingo or a game of chance or premises
where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or refuse to comply with any
reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any other
reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law enforcement
agency pursuant to subsection (h) of this section.










   (j)   Whoever violates subsection (a) or (i) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2915.10)









132.12  BINGO OPERATOR PROHIBITIONS.




   (a)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless he is eighteen
years of age or older.










   (b)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling
offense in any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.










   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.










   (d)   Whoever violates subsection (b) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(ORC 2915.11)









132.13  BINGO EXCEPTIONS.




   (a)   Ohio R.C. 2915.07 to 2915.11 or Section 132.06 et seq. of this
chapter do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose of
amusement only.  A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only
if it complies with all of the requirements specified in either subsection
(a) hereof:





      (1)   A.   The participants do not pay any money or any
other thing of value including an admission fee, or any fee for bingo cards,
sheets, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in playing bingo,
for the privilege of participating in the bingo game or to defray any costs
of the game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or
after the bingo game.





         B.   All prizes awarded during the course of the game
are nonmonetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods or entitlements to
goods or services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the
game is less than one hundred dollars ($100.00).





         C.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip,
donation, gratuity or other form of compensation, either directly or
indirectly, and regardless of the source, is paid to any bingo game operator
for work or labor performed at the site of the bingo game.





         D.   The bingo game is not conducted either during or
within ten hours of any of the following:





            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable
bingo game is conducted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.07 to 2915.11 or Section
132.06 et seq. of this chapter;





            2.   A scheme or game of chance or bingo described
in Section 132.01(o)(2).





         E.   The number of players participating in the bingo
game does not exceed fifty.





      (2)   A.   The participants do not pay money or any other
thing of value as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than
twenty-five cents (25¢) to purchase a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover
the spaces or other devices used in playing bingo.





         B.   The total amount of money paid by all of the
participants for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces or other
devices used in playing bingo does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).





         C.   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover spaces or other devices used in playing bingo is used only
to pay winners monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.





         D.   The total value of all prizes awarded during the
game does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).





         E.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip,
donation, gratuity or other form of compensation, either directly or
indirectly, and regardless of the source, is paid to any bingo game operator
for work or labor performed at the site of the bingo game.





         F.   The bingo game is not conducted during or within
ten hours of either of the following:





            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable
bingo game is conducted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.07 to 2915.11 or Section
132.06 et seq. of this chapter;





            2.   A scheme of chance or game of chance or bingo
described in Section 132.01(o)(2).





         G.   All of the participants reside at the premises
where the bingo game is conducted.





         H.   The bingo games are conducted on different days of
the week and not more than twice in a calendar week.










   (b)   The Attorney General, or any local law enforcement agency, may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with subsection (a) hereof.  A local
law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce
this section if the local law enforcement agency gives written notice to the
Attorney General when commencing the action. 





(ORC 2915.12)









132.14  INSTANT BINGO CONDUCT BY A VETERAN’S OR FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION.




   (a)   A veteran's organization, a fraternal  organization, or a
sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session pursuant to Ohio
R.C.  2915.01 to 2915.12 may conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session if all of the following apply:





      (1)   The veteran's organization, fraternal organization or
sporting organization limits the sale of instant bingo to twelve hours during
any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than ten a.m. and ends
not later than two a.m.





      (2)   The veteran's organization, fraternal organization or a
sporting organization limits the sale of instant bingo to its own premises
and to its own members and invited guests.





      (3)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization is raising money for an organization that is described
in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code
and is either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its
principal place of business in this State, that is exempt from federal income
taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code, and that is in good standing in this State and
executes a written contract with that organization as required in subsection
(b) of this section.










   (b)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to
subsection (a) of this section is raising money for another organization that
is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or an organization that
maintains its  principal place of business in this State, that is exempt
from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and described in
subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that is in good
standing in this State, the veteran’s organization, fraternal organization,
or sporting organization shall execute a written contract with the
organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or
509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or
an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this State,
that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and
described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that is
in good standing in this State in order to conduct instant bingo.  That
contract shall include a statement of the percentage of the net proceeds that
the veteran’s, fraternal or sporting organization will be distributing to
the organization that is described in subsection 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2) or
509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is either a governmental unit or
an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this State,
that is exempt from federal income taxation under subsection 501(a) and
described in subsection 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that is
in good standing in this State.










   (c)   (1)   If a veteran's organization, fraternal  organization
or a sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to
subsection (a) of this section has been issued a liquor permit under Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension, revocation, or
cancellation if the veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or a
sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C.
Chapter 2915.





      (2)   No veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or a
sporting organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to
subsection (b) of this  section shall violate any provision of this chapter
or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in
violating any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.










   (d)   A veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or a
sporting organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the
conduct of instant bingo to the organization with which the veteran's
organization, fraternal organization, or a sporting organization has entered
into a written contract.










   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal  instant
bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal
instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of this section, illegal instant
bingo conduct is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.





(ORC 2915.13)









132.15  SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES.




   (a)   (1)   No person shall give to another person any item
described in Section 132.01(vv`)(1), (2), (3), or (4) in exchange for a
noncash prize, toy, or novelty received as a reward for playing or operating
a skill-based amusement machine or for a free or reduced-prize game won on a
skill- based amusement machine.





      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(1) of this section is
guilty of skill-based amusement machine prohibited conduct.  Except as
provided herein, a violation of subsection (a)(1) is a misdemeanor of the
first degree for each redemption of a prize that is involved in the
violation.  If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
subsection (a)(1), a violation of subsection (a)(1) is a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2915.06)










   (b)   Any regulation of skill-based amusement machines shall be
governed by this chapter and Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915 and not by Ohio R.C.
Chapter 1345.





(ORC 2915.061)





























CHAPTER 133
HABITATION AND PROPERTY OFFENSES









Section










133.01   Definitions





133.02   Application of provisions





133.03   Arson





133.04   Criminal damaging or endangering





133.05   Criminal mischief





133.06   Criminal trespass





133.07   Petty theft





133.08   Unauthorized use of a vehicle





133.09   Unauthorized use of property or access to computer systems





133.10   Passing bad checks





133.11   Misuse of credit cards





133.12   Making or using slugs





133.13   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud





133.14   Tampering with records





133.15   Securing writings by deception





133.16   Defrauding creditors





133.17   Receiving stolen property





133.18   Tampering with coin machines





133.19   Determining property value in theft offense





133.20   Exclusions





133.21   Destruction of vines, shrubs, trees or crops





133.22   Shoplifting





133.23   Detention of shoplifters





133.24   Identity fraud





133.25   Trespass on a place of public amusement




 



Cross-reference:



Names of persons damaging real property by operation of vehicle to be
provided to owner, see § 130.15



 



133.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.










   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE.  Any services provided by or through the
facilities of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission
service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar
closed circuit coaxial cable communications system.










   COIN MACHINE.  Any mechanical or electrical device designed to do both
of the following:





      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;





      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill,
or token, automatically dispense property, provide a service, or grant a
license.










   COMPUTER.  An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic, and
memory functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. 
COMPUTER includes, but is not limited to, all input, output, processing,
storage, computer program, or communication facilities that are connected, or
related, in a computer system or network to an electronic device of that
nature.










   COMPUTER NETWORK.  A set of related and remotely connected computers
and communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that
has the capability to transmit among the connected computers and
communication facilities through the use of computer facilities.










   COMPUTER PROGRAM.  An ordered set of data representing coded
instructions or statements that when executed by a computer cause the
computer to process data.










   COMPUTER SERVICES.  Includes, but is not limited to, the use of a
computer system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared
for computer use, or data that is contained within a computer system or
network.










   COMPUTER SYSTEM.  A set of related computers, whether connected or
unconnected, and the equipment that is necessary to operate the computers.










   CREDIT CARD.  Includes, but is not limited to, a card, code, device,
or other means of access to a customer's account for the purpose of obtaining
money,  property, labor, or services on  credit,  or for initiating an
electronic fund transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller
machine, or a cash dispensing machine.  ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER has the
same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15 U.S.C.A. 1693a, as amended.










   DATA.  A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts, or
instructions that are prepared in a formalized manner and that are intended
for use in a computer system or network. For purposes of R.C. § 2913.47,
DATA has the additional meaning set forth in division (A) of that section.










   DECEPTION.  Knowingly deceiving another or causing another to be
deceived, by any false or misleading representation, by withholding
information, by preventing another from acquiring information, or by any
other conduct, act, or omission which creates, confirms, or perpetuates a
false impression in another, including a false impression as to law, value,
state of mind, or other objective or subjective fact.










   DEFRAUD.  To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself
or another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.










   DEPRIVE.





      (1)   Withhold property of another permanently, or for a
period that appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with
purpose to restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;





      (2)   Dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the
owner will recover it;





      (3)   Accept, use, or appropriate money, property, or
services, with purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the
money, property or services, and without reasonable justification or excuse
for not giving proper consideration.










   ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER.  Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728,
15 U.S.C.A. 1693a, as amended.










   FORGE.  To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means,
any spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce, or
otherwise purport to authenticate any writing, when such writing in fact is
not authenticated by that conduct.










   OWNER.  Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person,
other than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of,
or who has any license or interest in property or services, even though the
ownership, possession, control, license, or interest is unlawful.










   RENTED PROPERTY.  Personal property in which the right of possession
and use of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in
return for consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of
possession of the property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and
the amount of consideration is generally determined by the duration of
possession of the property.










   SERVICES.  Include labor, personal services, professional services,
rental services, public utility services, including wireless service as
defined in Ohio R.C. 5507.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink,
transportation, entertainment and cable television services.










   SLUG.  An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition, or
other quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as
an improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill, or token made for that
purpose.










   THEFT.  Any of the following:





      (1)   A violation of §§ 133.06 through 133.18, inclusive, or
133.22;





      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance
or law of this or any other state of the United States substantially
equivalent to any section listed in division (I) (1) of this section;





      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal
ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States involving
robbery, burglary, breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful
conversion, forgery, counterfeiting, deceit, or fraud;





      (4)   An attempt to commit, or complicity in committing any
offense under division (I) (1), (2), or (3) of this section. 










   THEFT OFFENSE.  Any of the following:





      (1)   A violation any of the sections listed in R.C. §
2913.01 (K) (1);





      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance
or law of this or any other state or  of the United  States 
substantially  equivalent  to any section listed in division (1) of this
definition, or any of the sections listed in R.C. § 2913.01(K)(2);





      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal
ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States involving
robbery, burglary, breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful
conversion, forgery, counterfeiting, deceit, or fraud;





      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing any offense under divisions (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.










   UTTER.  To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into
circulation, deliver, or display.










   WRITING.  Any computer program, document, letter, memorandum, note,
paper, plate, data, film, or other thing having in or upon it any written,
typewritten, or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card,
badge, trademark, label, or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license,
or identification.










   ELDERLY PERSON.  A person who is sixty- five years of age or older.










   DISABLED ADULT. A person who is eighteen years of age or older and has
some impairment of body or mind that makes the person unfit to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period
of at least twelve months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is eighteen years of age or older and has been certified
as permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this State or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.










   FIREARM and DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.  The same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
2923.11.










   MOTOR VEHICLE.  The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.










   DANGEROUS DRUG.  The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.










   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01. 
(ORC 2913.01)










   POLICE DOG OR HORSE and SERVICE DOG.  Have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 2921.321.










   ANHYDROUS AMMONIA.  A compound formed by the combination of two
gaseous elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described in this
subsection.  Anhydrous ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen
(NH3).  Anhydrous ammonia by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three
parts hydrogen, which is approximately eighty-two per cent nitrogen to
eighteen per cent hydrogen. 





(ORC 2913.01)










   ACTIVE DUTY SERVICE MEMBER.  Any member of the armed forces of the
United States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States
Code.  (ORC 2913.01)









133.02  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.




   (A)   Any person having previously been convicted of a theft offense
under this code or the Revised Code shall, on a subsequent offense, be
prosecuted pursuant to the provisions of Title 29 of the Revised Code.










   (B)   This section shall not apply to §§ 133.09, 133.12, 133.14,
133.15, 133.16 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)









133.03  ARSON.



   (A)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly
cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm to any property of
another without the other person's consent.



 




   (B)   (1)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall
knowingly cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;





      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under
subsection (B)(1) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent
of the other person.




 



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of the property or the amount
of physical harm involved is one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, arson is
a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 



(ORC 2909.03)








133.04  CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING.




   (A)   No person shall cause, or create a substantial risk of
physical harm to any property of another without the other person's consent:





      (1)   Knowingly, by any means;





      (2)   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison
gas, poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If violation of this
section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or
endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the property involved
in a violation of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller,
appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement used or intended
to be used in the operation of an aircraft, and if the violation creates a
risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering is a
felony of the fifth degree and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.  If the property involved in a violation of this section is an
aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other
equipment or implement used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and if the violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to
any person or if the property involved in a violation of this section is an
occupied aircraft, criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.06)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









133.05  CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.




   (A)   No person shall:





      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface,
damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with either of the following:




         (a)   The property of another;




         (b)   One's own residential real property with the
purpose to decrease the value of or enjoyment of the residential real
property, if both of the following apply:




            1.   The residential real property is subject to a
mortgage.




            2.   The person has been served with a summons and
complaint in a pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating
to that real property.  As used in this subsection, "pending" includes the
time between judgment entry and confirmation of sale.





      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of
property of another employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator or
other device releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons
exposed, or that tends to cause public alarm;





      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface,
damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark,
triangulation station, boundary marker or other survey station, monument or
marker.





      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface,
damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the
property of another or the property of the offender when required or placed
for the safety of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or
availability for its intended purpose;





      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of
the property of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal
property that has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or
personal property is outside and apart from any building, other structure or
personal property that is on that land.





      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair
the functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program, all as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.01, knowingly
do any of the following:





         (a)   In any manner or by any means, including, but not
limited to, computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer,
computer system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or
data contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program;





         (b)   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer,
computer system, computer network, computer software or computer program.










   (B)   As used in this section, "safety device" means any fire
extinguisher, fire hose or fire axe, or any fire escape, emergency exit or
emergency escape equipment, or any life line, life-saving ring, life
preserver or life boat or raft, or any alarm, light, flare, signal, sign or
notice intended to warn of danger, or emergency, or intended for other safety
purposes, or any guard railing or safety barricade, or any traffic sign or
signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign, signal or gate, or any first aid
or survival equipment, or any other device, apparatus, or equipment intended
for protecting or preserving the safety of persons or property.










   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal
mischief, and shall be punished as provided in subsection (C)(2) or (3) of
this section.





      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
criminal mischief committed in violation of subsection (A)(1), (2), (3), (4)
or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree.  Except as
otherwise provided in this subsection, if the violation of subsection (A)(1),
(2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any
person, criminal mischief committed in violation of subsection (A)(1), (2),
(3), (4) or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If
the property involved in the violation of subsection (A)(1), (2), (3), (4) or
(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller, appliance,
spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment, implement,
or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft, or
any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft, criminal mischief
committed in violation of subsection (A)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this
section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.





      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
criminal mischief committed in violation of subsection (A)(6) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of the computer,
computer system, computer network, computer software, computer program or
data involved in the violation of subsection (A)(6) of this section or the
loss to the victim resulting from the violation is one thousand dollars or
more, or if the computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, computer program or data involved in the violation of subsection
(A)(6) of this section is used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and the violation creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
criminal mischief committed in violation of subsection (A)(6) of this section
is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2909.07)









133.06  CRIMINAL TRESPASS.




   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the
following:





      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of
another;





      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of
another, the use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons,
purposes, modes, or hours, when the offender knows he is in violation of any
such restriction or is reckless in that regard;





      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of
another, as to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given
by actual communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or
by posting in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of
potential intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to
restrict access;





      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently
fail or refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a
conspicuous place or otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or
occupant, or the agent or servant of either.










   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land
or premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.










   (C)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the
offender was authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved
when such authorization was secured by deception.










   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal
trespass, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.





      (2)   Notwithstanding Section 130.99, if the person, in
committing the violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two
times the usual amount imposed for the violation.





      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or state law, and the offender, in committing
each violation, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle, the court, in addition to or independent of all other penalties
imposed for the violation, may impound the certificate of registration of
that snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle or the certificate of registration
and license plate of that all-purpose vehicle for not less than sixty days. 
In such a case, Ohio R.C. 4519.47 applies.










   (E)   As used in this section:





      (1)   "All-purpose vehicle," "off-highway motorcycle" and
"snowmobile" have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4519.01.





      (2)   "Land or premises" includes any land, building,
structure, or place belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another,
and any separate enclosure or room, or portion thereof.





         (ORC 2911.21)









133.07  PETTY THEFT.




   (A)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or
services, shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or
services in any of the following ways:





      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to
give consent;





      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent;





      (3)   By deception;





      (4)   By threat;





      (5)   By intimidation.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of petty theft, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  Petty theft is a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate State law if:





      (1)   The value of the property or services stolen is one
thousand dollars ($1,000) or more; or





      (2)   The victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled
adult, active duty service member, or spouse of an active duty service
member, or





      (3)   The property stolen is a firearm or dangerous ordnance,
or





      (4)   The property stolen is a motor vehicle, or





      (5)   The property stolen is any dangerous drug, or





      (6)   The property stolen is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog and the offender knows or should know that the property stolen
is a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, or





      (7)   The property stolen is anhydrous ammonia, or





      (8)   The property stolen is a special purpose article as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container as defined in
Ohio R.C. 4737.012.










   (C)   In addition to the penalties described in subsection (B) of
this section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor
vehicle to leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is
offered for retail sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline
that was dispensed into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another
container, the court may do one of the following:





      (1)   Unless subsection (C)(2) of this section applies,
suspend for not more than six months the offender’s driver’s license,
probationary driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege;





      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s license, probationary
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, or nonresident operating privilege has previously been suspended
pursuant to subsection (C)(1) of this section, impose a class seven
suspension of the offender’s license, permit, or privilege from the range
specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7), provided that the suspension shall be
for at least six months.





      (3)   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender's driver's
or commercial driver's license, probationary driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to
subsections (c)(1) or (2) of this section, instead may require the offender
to perform community service for a number of hours determined by the court.









   (D)   In addition to the penalties described in subsection (B)
hereof, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property
or rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.18 or 2929.28.  Restitution may include, but is
not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or
the cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting
from deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less
than or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was
rented.  Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental
services shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of Ohio R.C. 2913.72.



 



   (E)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender’s license,
permit, or nonresident operating privilege under subsection (C) of this
section may grant the offender limited driving privileges during the period
of the suspension in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510.  (ORC 2913.02)








133.08  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE.




   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor
vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle without the
consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.










   (B)   This section does not apply to property removed from the State
or if possession is kept for more than forty-eight hours.










   (C)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this
section:





      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though
mistaken, reasonably believed that the actor was authorized to use or operate
the property.





      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably
believed that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize
the actor to use or operate the property.










   (D)   No person shall knowingly enter into or upon a motor vehicle,
motorcycle or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner
or person authorized to give consent.










   (E)   Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of
unauthorized use of a vehicle, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the
victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the
victim incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of subsection
(A) hereof is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 





(ORC 2913.03)










   (F)   Whoever violates subsection (D) hereof is guilty of vehicle
trespass, a minor misdemeanor.









133.09  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY OR ACCESS TO COMPUTER SYSTEMS.




   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of
another without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.










   (B)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain
access to, or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, or
computer network without the consent of the owner of the computer, computer
system or computer network or other person authorized to give consent by the
owner.










   (C)   The affirmative defenses contained in division (B) of §
133.08 of this code are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.










   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property.  Except as otherwise provided in this
division, unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.  If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is applicable:





      (1)   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of
property is a misdemeanor of the first degree.





      (2)   If the value of the property or services or the loss to
the victim is $1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. 










   (E)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer property, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. 
(R.C. § 2913.04) (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









133.10  PASSING BAD CHECKS.




   (A)   As used in this section:





      (1)   “Check” includes any form of debit from a demand
deposit account, including, but not limited to any of the following:





         (a)   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of
withdrawal, or similar negotiable or nonnegotiable instrument;





         (b)   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit
card transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check, or any
form of automated clearing house transaction.





      (2)   “Issue a check” means causing any form of debit from
a demand deposit account.










   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or
cause to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument,
knowing that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or
will order stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.










   (C)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers
a check or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be
dishonored, if either of the following occurs:





      (1)   The drawer had no account with the drawee at the time of
issue or the stated date, whichever is later.





      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly
refused payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within thirty days
after issue or the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the
drawer, indorser or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by
payment or satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.










   (D)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers
a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presumed to have the purpose to
defraud if the drawer fails to comply with Ohio R.C. 1349.16 by doing any of
the following when opening a checking account intended for personal, family
or household purposes at a financial institution:





      (1)   Falsely stating that the drawer has not been issued a
valid driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card issued
under Ohio R.C. 4507.50;





      (2)   Furnishing such license or card, or another
identification document that contains false information;





      (3)   Making a false statement with respect to the drawer’s
current address or any additional relevant information reasonably required by
the financial institution.










   (E)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of
subsection (F) of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other
negotiable instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to
be issued or transferred in violation of subsection (A) of this section
within a period of one hundred eighty consecutive days.










   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad
checks.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, passing bad checks
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the check or checks or other
negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to a single
vendor or single other person for the payment of one thousand dollars
($1,000) or more or if the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued or transferred to multiple vendors or persons for the
payment of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) or more, passing bad
checks is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2913.11)









133.11  MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.




   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:





      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the
issuance of a credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance
thereon;





      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person
other than the issuer.










   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the
following:





      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;





      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card,
in one or more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the card has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained or is
being used in violation of law;





      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a
credit card, knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;





      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a
credit card that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the
representation is false.










   (C)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall
receive, possess, control or dispose of a credit card.










   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit
cards, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Misuse of credit cards is a
felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law if:





      (1)   The cumulative retail value of the property and services
involved in one or more violations of subsection (B)(2), (3) or (4) hereof,
which violations involve one or more credit card accounts and occur within a
period of ninety consecutive days commencing on the date of the first
violation, is one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more; or





      (2)   The victim of the offense is an elderly person or
disabled adult and the offense involves a violation of subsection (B)(1) or
(2) hereof.





(ORC 2913.21)









133.12  MAKING OR USING SLUGS.




   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:





      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose
to defraud;





      (2)   Make, possess, or dispose of a slug, with purpose of
enabling another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using
slugs, a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(R.C. § 2913.33) (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









133.13  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE  TO DEFRAUD.




   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat,
camper, trailer, horse, or buggy, or kept or operated any of the same that
has been hired, or engaged accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground,
or other hostelry, it is prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the
person did any of the following:










   (A)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to  furnish the
person with the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,  sailboat,
camper, trailer, horse, or buggy, or used deception to induce the hostelry to
furnish the person with accommodations;










   (B)   Hired any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, or buggy, or engaged accommodations,
knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to pay the hire or rental;










   (C)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;










   (D)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;










   (E)   Knowingly failed to return hired property as required by the
contract of hire, without reasonable excuse for the failure.





(R.C. § 2913.41)  Penalty, see § 130.99









133.14  TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.




   (A)    No person, knowing the person has no privilege to do so, and
with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is facilitating a fraud,
shall do any of the following:





      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface or
mutilate any writing, computer software, data, or record;





      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been
tampered with as provided in subsection (A)(1) hereof.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with
records, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the violation involves data
or computer software the value of which or loss to the victim is one thousand
dollars ($1,000) or more, or if the writing or record is a will unrevoked at
the time of the offense, tampering with records is a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2913.42)









133.15  SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.




   (A)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any
writing that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary
obligation is incurred.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings
by deception, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Securing writings by
deception is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law if:





      (1)   The value of the property or obligation involved is one
thousand dollars ($1,000) or more; or





      (2)   The victim of the offense is an elderly person or
disabled adult, active duty service member or spouse of an active duty
service member.  (ORC 2913.43)









133.16  DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.




   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his
creditors, shall do any of the following:





      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey, or otherwise
deal with any of the person's property;





      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary
appointed to administer or manage the person's affairs or estate, the
existence, amount, or location of any of the person's property, or any other
information regarding such property that the person legally required to
furnish to the fiduciary.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding 
creditors.  Except as  otherwise provided in this division, defrauding
creditors is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of the
property involved is $1,000 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
(R.C  § 2913.45) Penalty, see § 130.99









133.17  RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.




   (A)   No person shall receive, retain or dispose of property of
another, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has
been obtained through commission of a theft offense.










   (B)   It is not a defense to a charge ofreceiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of
a theft offense.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen
property, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Receiving stolen property is a
felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law if:





      (1)   The value of the property involved is one thousand
dollars ($1,000) or more; or





      (2)   The property involved is:





         A.   Listed in Section 133.20; or





         B.   A motor vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01; or





         C.   A dangerous drug as defined in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.





         D.   A special purchase article as defined in Ohio R.C.
4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container as defined in Ohio R.C. 4737.012.
(ORC 2913.51)









133.18  TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.




   (A)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall
knowingly enter, force an entrance into, tamper with, or insert any part of
an instrument into any coin machine.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(R.C. § 2911.32) (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









133.19  VALUATION OF PROPERTY.




   (A)   If more than one item of property or service is involved in a
theft offense, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose
of determining the value is the aggregate value of all property or services
involved in the offense.










   (B)   (1)   When a series of offenses under Section 133.07, or a
series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to
violate, or complicity in violations of Section 133.07, 133.08, or 133.09,
133.11(b)(1) or (2), or Section 133.15 involving a victim who is an elderly
person or disabled adult, is committed by the offender in the offender's same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses shall
be tried as a single offense.  When a series of offenses under Section
133.07, or a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of,
conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of Sections 133.07 or
133.15 involving a victim who is an active duty service member or spouse of
an active duty service member is committed by the offender in the
offender’s same employment, capacity or relationship to another, all of
those offenses shall be tried as a single offense.  The value of the
property or services involved in the series of offenses for the purpose of
determining the value is the aggregate value of all property and services
involved in all offenses in the series.





      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under
Section 133.07 that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple
victims, all of the offenses may be tried as a single offense.  If an
offender is being tried for the commission of a series of violations of,
attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in
violations of Section 133.07, 133.08 or 133.09, Section 133.11(B)(1) or (2),
or Section 133.15, whether committed against one victim or more than one
victim, involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult,
pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried
as a single offense.  If the offender is being tried for the commission of a
series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to
violate, or complicity in violations of Section 133.07 or 133.15, whether
committed against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who
is an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member
pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried
as a single offense.  If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the
value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the
value is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in all of
the offenses in the course of conduct.





      (3)   In prosecuting a single offense under subsection (B)(1)
or (2), it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in
the series.  Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the offender,
within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses in the
offender's same employment, capacity, or relationship to another as described
in subsection (B)(1) of this section or that involve a common course of
conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or course of conduct as
described in subsection (B)(2) of this section.  While it is not necessary
to separately allege and prove each offense in the series in order to
prosecute a single offense under subsection (B)(1) or (2) hereof, it remains
necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense to prove the aggregate
value of the property or services in order to meet the requisite statutory
offense level sought by the prosecution.










   (C)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value
of property or services involved in a theft offense:










      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector's item,
antique, museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that has
intrinsic worth to its owner and that is either irreplaceable or is
replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time, effort or money, is
the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss.










      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and
of materials, supplies, equipment and fixtures used in the profession,
business, trade, occupation or avocation of its owner, which property is not
covered under subsection (C)(1) hereof, and which retains substantial utility
for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing
the property with new property of like kind and quality.










      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not
covered under subsections (C)(1) or (2) hereof, and the value of services, is
the fair market value of the property or services.  As used in this section,
"fair market value" is the money consideration that a buyer would give and a
seller would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is
willing to buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully
informed as to all facts material to the transaction, and that neither is
under any compulsion to act.










   (D)   Without limitation on the evidence that may be used to
establish the value of property or services involved in a theft offense:










      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for
sale at wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for
sale is prima-facie evidence of its value.










      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity
traded on an exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price,
the asked price, given in the latest market quotation prior to the offense,
is prima-facie evidence of the value of the security or commodity.










      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima-facie evidence of the value
of the livestock, poultry or products.










      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument,
the face value is prima-facie evidence of the value of the instrument.










      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill
of lading, pawn ticket, claim check or other instrument entitling the holder
or bearer to receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value,
the value of the property covered by the instrument less any payment
necessary to receive the property, is prima-facie evidence of the value of
the instrument.










      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission,
ticket for transportation, coupon, token or other instrument entitling the
holder or bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there
is no face value, the value of the property or services that may be received
by the instrument, is prima-facie evidence of the value of the instrument.










      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water,
telephone, transportation, shipping or other services for which the rate is
established by law, the duly established rate is prima-facie evidence of the
value of the services.










      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the
rate is not established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to
the offense of the rate for the services, either in writing or orally, or by
posting in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of
potential offenders, the rate contained in the notice is prima-facie evidence
of the value of the services.  (ORC 2913.61)









133.20  EXCLUSIONS.




   (A)   Sections 133.07 and 133.17 of this chapter are not violated
when the property involved is any of the following:





      (1)   A credit card;





      (2)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable
instrument, that on its face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it
is designed or identifies the account on which it is to be drawn, and that
has not been executed by the drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;





      (3)   A dangerous ordnance as defined in R.C. § 2923.11;





      (4)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as
prescribed by R.C. § 4503.22, or as prescribed by the applicable law of
another state or the United States;





      (5)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a
manufacturer's or importer's certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by
R.C. § 4505.07;





      (6)   A blank form for any license listed in division (A) of
R.C. § 4507.01.










   (B)   Offenses concerning the above property shall be prosecuted
pursuant to § 2913.71 of the Revised Code. 
(R.C. § 2913.71) (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)









133.21  DESTRUCTION OF VINES, SHRUBS, TREES, OR CROPS.




   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut
down, destroy, girdle, or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling,
tree, or crop standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for
the injury caused.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. 
(R.C. § 901.51)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









133.22  SHOPLIFTING.




   (A)   No person shall willfully alter any label, price tag, or
marking upon any merchandise offered for sale by any store or other retail
mercantile establishment with the intention of depriving the owner of all or
some part of the value thereof.










   (B)   No person shall willfully transfer any merchandise offered for
sale by any store or other retail mercantile establishment from the container
in or on which the same shall be displayed to any other container with intent
to deprive the owner of all or some part of the value thereof.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of shoplifting, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.





(Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74) Penalty, see § 130.99









133.23  DETENTION OF SHOPLIFTERS.




   (A)   A merchant, or his employee or agent, who has probable cause
to believe that items offered for sale by a mercantile establishment have
been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in
subsection (C) hereof, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a
reasonable length of time within the mercantile establishment or its
immediate vicinity.










   (B)   Any officer, employee or agent of a library, museum or
archival institution may, for the purposes set forth in subsection (C) hereof
or for the purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that
the person has acted in a manner described in subsections (B)(1) and (2)
hereof, detain a person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within, or in the immediate vicinity of the library, museum or archival
institution, if the officer, employee or agent has probable cause to believe
that the person has either:





      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced,
damaged, destroyed or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or
in the custody of the library, museum or archival institution; or





      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum or archival
institution of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or
exerted control over the property without the consent of the owner or person
authorized to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied
consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or
by threat.










   (C)   An officer, agent or employee of a library, museum or archival
institution pursuant to subsection (B) hereof or a merchant or his employee
or agent pursuant to subsection (A) hereof may detain another person for any
of the following purposes:





      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the
unlawful taking, criminal mischief or theft;





      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;





      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest.





      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the
unlawful taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other
provision of this General Offenses or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity
to complete a pretrial diversion program and to inform the person of the
other legal remedies available to the library, museum, archival institution
or merchant.










   (D)   The officer, agent or employee of the library, museum or
archival institution, or the merchant or his employee or agent acting under
subsection (A) or (B) hereof shall not search the person, search or seize any
property belonging to the person detained without the person's consent, or
use undue restraint upon the person detained.










   (E)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that
he has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
subsection (B)(1) or (2) hereof or that he has probable cause to believe has
committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment.  An arrest under
this





subsection shall be made within a reasonable time after the commission of the
act or unlawful taking.










   (F)   As used in this section:





      (1)   "Archival institution" means any public or private
building, structure or shelter in which are stored historical documents,
devices, records, manuscripts or items of public interest, which historical
materials are stored to preserve the materials or the information in the
materials, to disseminate the information contained in the materials, or to
make the materials available for public inspection or for inspection by
certain persons who have a particular interest in, use for or knowledge
concerning the materials.





      (2)   "Museum" means any public or private nonprofit
institution that is permanently organized for primarily educational or
aesthetic purposes, owns or borrows objects or items of public interest, and
cares for and exhibits to the public the objects or items.





      (3)   "Pretrial diversion program" means a rehabilitative,
educational program designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal
responsibility that is at least four hours in length and that has been
approved by any court in this State.  (ORC 2935.041)









133.24  IDENTITY FRAUD.



   (EDITOR’S NOTE: Former Section 133.24 has been deleted from the
Codified Ordinances.  Ohio R.C. 2913.49, from which Section 133.24 was
derived, has been reclassified from a misdemeanor to a felony offense.)








133.25  TRESPASS ON A PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT.




   (A)   As used in this section, “place of public amusement” means
a stadium, theater or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a
live performance, sporting event, or other activity takes place for
entertainment of the public and to which access is made available to the
public, regardless of whether admission is charged.










   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter
or remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance,
sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public
amusement after a printed written notice has been given as provided in
subsection (D)(1) of this section that the general public is restricted from
access to that restricted portion of the place of public amusement.  A
restricted portion of a place of public amusement may include, but is not
limited to, a playing field, an athletic surface, or a stage located at the
place of public amusement.










   (C)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of
the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public
amusement may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a
restricted portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or
remains on the restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live
performance, sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of
public amusement.  This subsection does not provide immunity from criminal
liability for any use of force beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee
of a place of public amusement, an agent of either the owner or lessee, or a
performer or participant at a place of public amusement.










   (D)   (1)   Notice has been given that the general public is
restricted from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a
printed written notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted
or exhibited at the entrance to that portion of the place of public
amusement.  If a printed written notice is posted or exhibited as described
in this subsection, regarding a portion of a place of public amusement, in
addition to that posting or exhibition, notice that the general public is
restricted from access to that portion of the place of public amusement also
may be given, but is not required to be given, by either of the following
means:





         (a)   By notifying the person personally, either orally
or in writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement
is restricted;





         (b)   By broadcasting over the public address system of
the place of public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of
the public place of amusement is restricted.





      (2)   If notice that the general public is restricted from
access to a portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting
or exhibition of a printed written notice as described in subsection (D)(1)
of this section, the Municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation
of subsection (B) of this section, is not required to prove that the
defendant received actual notice that the general public is restricted from
access to a portion of a place of public amusement.










   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (B) of this section is
guilty of criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.





      (2)   In addition to any jail term, fine or other sentence,
penalty, or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to subsection
(E)(1) of this section, a court may require an offender who violates this
section to perform not less than thirty and not more than one hundred twenty
hours of supervised community service work.  (ORC 2911.23)

























CHAPTER 134
HEALTH, SAFETY AND SANITATION









Section










134.01   Unvented heaters





134.02   Abandoned refrigerators and airtight containers





134.03   Barricades and warning lights; abandoned excavations





134.04   Sidewalk cleaning and obstructions; damage or injury





134.05   Notice to fill lots, remove putrid substances





134.06   Duty to keep sidewalks in repair and clean





134.07   Spitting





134.08   Littering and deposit of garbage, rubbish, junk, etc.





134.09   Noxious or offensive odors




 



134.01  UNVENTED HEATERS.




   (A)   A brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace,
water heater, or other burner or heater using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas, or similar fuel, and
tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases;





      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed
building or space in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a
flue or vent so designed, installed, and maintained as to vent the products
of combustion outdoors; except in storage, factory, or industrial buildings
which are provided with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon
monoxide poisoning;





      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at
a construction site, or in a warehouse, shed, or structure in which persons
are temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (A) (1) of
this section, or used with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of
carbon monoxide poisoning.










   (B)   This section  does  not  apply  to  domestic ranges,
laundry stoves, gas logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or
hot plates, unless the same are used as space or room heaters.










   (C)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person
in charge, or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or
heater in violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in
this section.










   (D)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any
kerosene-fired space or room heater that is equipped with an automatic
extinguishing tip-over device, or to any natural gas-fired or liquid
petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that is equipped with an oxygen
depletion safety shutoff system, and that has its fuel piped from a source
outside of the building in which it is located, that are approved by an
authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire
Code adopted by him under R.C. § 3737.82.










   (E)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use
of unvented kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted
from division (A) hereof when used in assembly buildings, business buildings,
high-hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings, and
type R-1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are
defined in rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under R.C. §
3781.10.  No person shall negligently use, or being the owner, person in
charge, or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in
violation of any rules adopted under this division.










   (F)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards
for written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of
any potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas,
or liquid petroleum gas heater.  No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division.










   (G)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and
having a flash point below 100° F. or 37.8° C. shall be sold, offered for
sale, or used in any kerosene space heater.










   (H)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene,
natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be
sold, offered for sale, or used in any kerosene, natural gas, or liquid
petroleum gas space heater.










   (I)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired,
natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from
division (A) hereof unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on
the container with the phrase “Not approved for home use.”










   (J)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired
heater having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him
under R.C. § 3737.82.










   (K)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree. 
(R.C. §§ 3701.82, 3701.99)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74; Amend. Ord. 2558,
passed 8-26-86)  Penalty, see § 130.99









134.02  ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND  AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.




   (A)   No person shall abandon, discard, or knowingly permit to
remain on premises under his control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or
semi-airtight container which has a capacity of l-1/2 cubic feet or more and
an opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped
with hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing such door or
lid, without rendering the equipment harmless to human life by removing such
hinges, latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined
therein.  This section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other
airtight or semi-airtight container located in that part of a building
occupied by a dealer, warehouseman or repairman.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. 
(R.C. § 3767.29)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74) Penalty, see § 130.99









134.03  BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS; ABANDONED EXCAVATIONS.




   (A)   No person shall abandon or knowingly permit to remain on
public or private property, any excavation, well, cesspool or structure which
is in the process of construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration
unless the same is adequately protected by suitable barricades and guarded by
warning devices or lights at night so that the condition will not reasonably
prove dangerous to life or limb.










   (B)   No person shall destroy, remove, damage, or extinguish any
barricade or warning light that is placed for the protection of the public so
as to prevent injury to life or limb.










   (C)   Any owner or agent in control of a premises upon which a
basement, cellar, well or cistern has been abandoned due to demolition,
failure to build or any other reason shall cause the same to be filled to the
ground surfaces with rock, gravel, earth or other suitable material.










   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









134.04  SIDEWALK CLEANING AND OBSTRUCTIONS; DAMAGE OR INJURY.




   (A)   Sidewalks to be cleaned of ice and snow.  It shall be the
duty of the owner and of the tenant or person having the control of each and
every parcel of real estate in the city abutting upon any sidewalk to keep
the sidewalk abutting his premises free and clear of snow and ice, and to
remove therefrom all snow and ice accumulated thereon within a reasonable
time, which will ordinarily not exceed 12 hours after the abatement of any
storm during which any snow and ice may have accumulated.










   (B)   Unloading on street or sidewalk.  No person shall unload any
heavy material in the streets of the city by throwing or letting the same
fall upon the pavement of any street, sidewalk or other public way, without
first placing some sufficient protection over the pavement.










   (C)   Protecting sidewalks.  In the transportation of any goods,
materials or equipment across any sidewalk  in  the  city, sufficient 
temporary planking shall be used to protect such sidewalks from breakage, and
such temporary planking shall be removed at the close of each working day and
the surface of the sidewalk immediately cleaned and left in a passable
condition.










   (D)   Materials on street or sidewalk.  No person shall encumber
any street or sidewalk, or, being the owner, occupant or person having care
of any building, or lot of land bordering on any street or sidewalk, shall
permit the same to be encumbered with barrels, boxes, cans, articles or
substances of any kind, so as to interfere with the free and unobstructed use
thereof.










   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74) Penalty, see § 130.99









134.05  NOTICE TO FILL LOTS, REMOVE PUTRID SUBSTANCES.




   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with the following requirements
within the lawful time after service or publication of the notice or
resolution is made as required by law:










   To fill or drain any lot or land or remove all putrid substances
therefrom, or remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains or
natural watercourses as provided in R.C. § 715.47.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74) Penalty, see § 130.99









134.06  DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR AND CLEAN.




   (A)   No owner or occupant of abutting lands shall fail to keep the
sidewalks, curbs or gutters in repair and free from snow, ice or any nuisance.










   (B)   (1)   No owner of any lot or land abutting on any street
shall refuse, fail, or neglect to repair or keep in repair and free from
nuisance and obstruction, the sidewalks, curbs, or gutters in front of such
lot or land after due notice of a resolution of Council ordering the repair
of such sidewalks, curbs, or gutters, the removal of such obstruction or the
abatement of such nuisance.





      (2)   If the owner or person having charge of such land fails
to comply with such notice, Council may cause the sidewalks, curbs, or
gutters to be repaired.  When construction or repair is done by the city,
the cost shall be assessed against the abutting property owner.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74; amend. Ord. 2332, passed 6-22-82)  Penalty, see
§ 130.99









134.07  SPITTING.




   (A)   No person shall spit, excrete or expectorate any saliva or
sputum upon any sidewalk, or on the floor of any public conveyance, building,
theater or assembly hall, except in receptacles provided for such purpose.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74) Penalty, see § 130.99









134.08  LITTERING AND DEPOSIT OF GARBAGE, RUBBISH, JUNK, ETC.




   (A)   No person shall, without lawful authority, place or dispose of
in any manner, upon any public property or upon the premises of another, any
paper, trash, garbage, waste, rubbish, refuse, junk or any substance or
material which is or may become noxious, offensive, injurious or dangerous to
the public health, comfort or safety.










   (B)   No person shall cause or allow trash, garbage, waste, rubbish,
refuse or any other noxious or offensive materials or substances to be
collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of
the public, or unlawfully obstruct, impede, divert, corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure, any natural watercourse.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a fourth degree
misdemeanor for a first offense and for each subsequent offense the person
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor in the first degree.  In addition to all
other penalties imposed for a violation of this section, the court shall
require the offender to remove or pay the cost of removing such paper, trash,
garbage, waste, rubbage, refuse, junk, or other such  material which was
deposited on the public or private property. 
(Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74; Am. Ord. 2476, passed 11-27-84)  Penalty, see §
130.99









134.09  NOXIOUS OR OFFENSIVE ODORS.




   (A)   No person shall erect, continue, use or maintain a dwelling,
building, structure or place for a residence or for the exercise of a trade,
employment or business, or for the keeping or feeding of an animal which, by
occasioning noxious exhalations or noisome or offensive smells, becomes
injurious to the health, comfort or property of individuals or of the public.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74) Penalty, see § 130.99
























CHAPTER 135
JUSTICE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION









Section










135.01   Definitions





135.02   Falsification





135.03   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract





135.04   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation





135.05   Dereliction of duty





135.06   Interfering with civil rights





135.07   Presenting false name or information to officer




 



135.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.










   DETENTION.  Arrest, confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an
arrest, confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons
charged with or convicted of a crime in this State or another state or under
the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or
unruly child in this State or another state or under the laws of the United
States; hospitalization, institutionalization or confinement in any public or
private facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of Ohio
R.C. 2945.37, 2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39 or 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402;
confinement in any vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any
of those natures; detention for extradition or deportation, except as
provided in this subsection, supervision by any employee of any facility of
any of those natures; that is incidental to hospitalization,
institutionalization or confinement in the facility but that occurs outside
the facility; supervision by an employee of the Department of Rehabilitation
and Correction of a person on any type of release from a State correctional
institution; or confinement in any vehicle, airplane, or place while being
returned from outside of this State into this State by a private person or
entity pursuant to a contract entered into under Ohio R.C. 311.29(E) or Ohio
R.C. 5149.03(B).  For a person confined in a county jail who participates in
a county jail industry program pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5147.30, "detention"
includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to and from the work
site.










   DETENTION FACILITY.  Any public or private place used for the
confinement of a person charged with or convicted of crime in this state or
another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to
be delinquent child or unruly child in this state or another state or under
the laws of the United States.










   OFFICIAL PROCEEDING.  Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary, or other person taking testimony or a
deposition in connection with an official proceeding.










   PROVIDER AGREEMENT  has the same meanings as in R.C. § 5164.01.










   PUBLIC OFFICIAL.  Any elected or appointed officer, or employee, or
agent of the state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a
temporary or permanent capacity, and includes, but is not limited to,
legislators, judges, and law enforcement officers.










   PUBLIC SERVANT.  Any of the following:





      (1)   Any public official;





      (2)   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function,
including, but not limited to, a juror, member of a temporary commission,
master, arbitrator, advisor, or consultant;





      (3)   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether
or not the person is elected or appointed to the office for which the person
is a candidate.  A person is a candidate for purposes of this division if
the person has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to
public office, or if the person has filed a petition or petitions as required
by law to have the person's name placed on the ballot in a primary, general,
or special election, or if the person campaigns as a write-in candidate in
any primary, general, or special election. 
(R.C. § 2921.01) (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)









135.02  FALSIFICATION.




   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly
swear or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of
the following applies:





      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.





      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate
another.





      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public
official in performing the public official’s official function.





      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment
of unemployment compensation; Ohio works first; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance;
retirement benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system;
economic development assistance as defined in Ohio R.C. 9.66; or other
benefits administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public
treasury.





      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the
issuance by a governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization,
certificate, registration, release or provider agreement.





      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary
public or another person empowered to administer oaths.





      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a
report or return that is required or authorized by law.





      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to
induce another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any
degree, diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence or honor on
the offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to that person’s detriment.





      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or
facilitate the commission of a theft offense.





      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in
connection with any action, proceeding or other matter within its
jurisdiction, either orally or in a written document, including, but not
limited to, an application, petition, complaint or other pleading, or an
inventory, account or report.





      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record,
stamp, label or other writing that is required by law.





      (12)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of
writing that purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is
filed or recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder, or the
clerk of a court of record.





      (13)   The statement is required under Ohio R.C. 5743.71 in
connection with the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in
a delivery sale.










   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under subsection (A)(6) hereof
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.










   (C)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made
by the offender within the period of the statute of limitations for
falsification, it is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which
statement was false, but only that one or the other was false.










   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of subsection (A)(1)
to (8) or (10) to (13) hereof is guilty of falsification, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.





      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (A)(9) hereof is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the
value of the property or services stolen is one thousand dollars ($1,000) or
more, falsification in a theft offense is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate State law. 










   (E)   A person who violates this section is liable in a civil action
to any person harmed by the violation for injury, death, or loss to person or
property incurred as a result of the commission of the offense and for
reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs, and other expenses incurred as a
result of prosecuting the civil action commenced under this section.  A
civil action under this section is not the exclusive remedy of a person who
incurs injury, death, or loss to person or property as a result of a
violation of this section.





(ORC 2921.13)









135.03  HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.




   (A)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:





      (1)   During the public official’s term of office or within
one year thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a
public contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body,
commission or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization unless the contract was let by competitive bidding, to the
lowest and best bidder;





      (2)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public
contract entered into by or for the use of the Municipality or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected;





      (3)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public
contract that is not let by competitive bidding if required by law, and that
involves more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).










   (B)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public
official, member of a public official’s family or any of a public
official’s business associates shall not be considered as having an
interest in a public contract if all of the following apply:





      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or
controlling shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation
or other organization that is the contractor on the public contract involved,
or that is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested;





      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not
exceed five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of the corporation, and
the amount due that person as creditor does not exceed five percent (5%) of
the total indebtedness of the corporation or other organization;





      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is
entered into, files with the Municipality or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, an affidavit giving that person’s exact status in
connection with the corporation or other organization.










   (C)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a
public official, member of a public official’s family, or one of a public
official’s business associates, has an interest, when all of the following
apply:





      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies
or services for the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved;





      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for
the same or lower cost, or are being furnished to the Municipality or
governmental agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of
dealing established prior to the public official's becoming associated with
the Municipality or governmental agency or instrumentality involved;





      (3)   The treatment accorded the Municipality or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions;





      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm's length,
with full knowledge by the Municipality or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of
the public official’s family or business associate, and the public official
takes no part in the deliberations or decisions of the Municipality or
governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.










   (D)   Subsection (A)(4) does not prohibit participation by a public
employee in any housing program funded by public moneys if the public
employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority
or influence of the public employee’s office or employment to secure
benefits from the program and if the moneys are to be used on the primary
residence of the public employee.  Such participation does not constitute an
unlawful interest in a public contract in violation of this section.










   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful
interest in a public contract.  Violation of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.










   (F)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting
attorney to appoint assistants and employees in accordance with Ohio R.C.
309.06 and 2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipal corporation
or an official designated as prosecutor in a municipal corporation to appoint
assistants and employees in accordance with Ohio R.C. 733.621 and 2921.421.










   (G)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of
the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest in violation of this section is void and
unenforceable.  Any contract securing the investment of public funds in
which a public official, a member of the public official’s family, or any
of the public official’s business associates has an interest, is an
underwriter, or receives any brokerage, origination, or servicing fees and
that was entered into in violation of this section is void and unenforceable.










   (H)   As used in this section:





      (1)   "Public contract" means any of the following:





         A.   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the
purchase or acquisition of property or services by or for the use of the
State, any of its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of
either, including the employment of an individual by the State, any of its
political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.





         B.   A contract for the design, construction,
alteration, repair or maintenance of any public property.





      (2)   "Chief legal officer" has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 733.621. 
(ORC 2921.42)









135.04  SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.




   (A)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept, and no
person shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant, either of the
following:





      (1)   Any compensation other than as allowed by R.C. §§
102.03(G), (H), (I), or other provisions of law, to perform his official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant's public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant's
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public
servant's public compensation.





      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by
law to perform his official duties.










   (B)   No public servant for his own personal or business use and no
person for his own personal or business use or for the personal or business
use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit or accept anything
of value in consideration of either of the following:





      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the
appointment of any person to any public office, employment, or agency;





      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public
employee with respect to his compensation, duties, placement, location,
promotion, or other material aspects of his employment.










   (C)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign
committee, or a legislative campaign fund as defined in R.C. § 3517.01,
shall coerce any contribution, as defined in R.C. § 3517.01, in
consideration of either of the following:





      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the
appointment of any person to any public office, employment, or agency;





      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public
employee with respect to his compensation, duties, placement, location,
promotion, or other material aspects of his employment.










   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.










   (E)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this
section is disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or
position of trust in this state for a period of 7 years from the date of
conviction.










   (F)   Divisions (A), (B), and (C) of this section do not prohibit a
person from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign
committee, legislative campaign fund or political action committee, or
prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign fund or
political action committee from accepting voluntary contributions. 
(R.C. § 2921.43)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









135.05  DERELICTION OF DUTY.




   (A)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the
following:





      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay;





      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or
to apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer’s power
to do so alone or with available assistance.










   (B)   No law enforcement, ministerial or judicial officer shall
negligently fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.










   (C)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall
negligently do any of the following:





      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or
unsanitary;





      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention
facility with adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter and medical attention;





      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent
intimidation of or physical harm to a prisoner by another;





      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape;





      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for
the management of the detention facility.










   (D)   No public official of the Municipality shall recklessly create
a deficiency, incur a liability or expend a greater sum than is appropriated
by the legislative authority of the Municipality for the use in any one year
of the department, agency or institution with which the public official is
connected.










   (E)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty
expressly imposed by law with respect to the public servant’s office, or
recklessly do any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public
servant’s office.










   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of
duty, a misdemeanor of the second degree.










   (G)   As used in this section, “public servant” includes an
officer or employee of a contractor as defined in Ohio R.C. 9.08. 





(ORC 2921.44)









135.06  INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.




   (A)   No public servant, under color of his office, employment, or
authority, shall knowingly deprive, or conspire, or attempt to deprive any
person of a constitutional or statutory right.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with
civil rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(R.C. § 2921.45) (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









135.07  PRESENTING FALSE NAME OR INFORMATION TO OFFICER.




   (A)   No person shall knowingly present, display, or orally
communicate a false name, social security number, or date of birth to a law
enforcement officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic
ticket or complaint.  (R.C. § 4513.361)










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree. 
(R.C. § 4513.99(H))
























CHAPTER 136
OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



 




Section










136.01   Negligent homicide





136.02   Vehicular homicide and manslaughter





136.021   Vehicular assault in a construction zone.





136.03   Assault





136.04   Negligent assault





136.05   Aggravated menacing




136.051    Menacing by stalking




136.06   Menacing





136.07   Unlawful restraint





136.08   Endangering children





136.09   Coercion





136.10   Telecommunication harassment





136.11   Misuse of 9-1-1 system





136.12   Drug abuse





136.13   Abusing harmful intoxicants





136.14   Counterfeit controlled substances





136.15   Hazing prohibited





136.16   False report of child abuse or neglect





136.17   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products or
alternate nicotine products





136.18   Criminal child enticement





136.19   Contributing to unruliness or delinquency of a child




 



136.01  NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.




   (A)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the
unlawful termination of another's pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance as defined in § 139.01.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(R.C. § 2903.05) (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









136.02  VEHICULAR HOMICIDE AND MANSLAUGHTER.




   (A)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation
of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft, or
aircraft, shall cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of
another’s pregnancy in any of the following ways:





      (1)   (a)   Negligently;





         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while
operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle
in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this subsection
applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the
offender’s commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and
does not apply as described in subsection (D) of this section.





      (2)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any
provision of any section contained in Title XLV of the Ohio Revised Code that
is a minor misdemeanor or of a municipal ordinance that, regardless of the
penalty set by ordinance for the violation, is substantially equivalent to
any provision of any section contained in Title XLV of the Ohio Revised Code
that is a minor misdemeanor.










   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (A)(1) of this section is
guilty of vehicular homicide.  Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection, vehicular homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
Vehicular homicide is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate
State law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a
suspension or cancellation imposed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender's
driver's license or commercial driver's license without examination under
Ohio R.C. 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related
homicide, manslaughter or assault offense.  The court shall impose a
mandatory jail term on the offender when required by Ohio R.C. 2903.06(E).





      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of vehicular manslaughter.  Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection, vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
Vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time
of the offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation
imposed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a
valid driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not
eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license or commercial
driver's license without examination under Ohio R.C. 4507.10 or if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault
offense.   










   (C)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least
fifteen days on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of subsection (A)(1)(b) of this section and may impose upon the
offender a longer jail term as authorized pursuant to Section 130.99.  The
court shall impose a mandatory prison term on an offender who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (A)(1)(a) hereof if either of
the following applies:





      (1)   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this section or Ohio R.C. 2903.06 or 2903.08.





      (2)   At the time of the offense, the offender was driving
under suspension or cancellation under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender's
driver's license or commercial driver's license without examination under
Ohio R.C. 4507.10.










   (D)   Subsection (A)(1)(b) does not apply in a particular
construction zone unless signs of the type described in Ohio R.C. 2903.081
are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and
design specifications established by the Director of Transportation under
Ohio R.C. 5501.27.  The failure to erect signs of the type described in Ohio
R.C. 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance with those
guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the application
of subsections (A)(1)(a) or (A)(2) of this section in that construction zone
or the prosecution of any person who violates any of those subsections in
that construction zone.










   (E)   As used in this section:





      (1)   “Mandatory prison term” and “mandatory jail
term” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.





      (2)   “Traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault
offense” means a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.04 in circumstances in which
division (D) of that section applies, a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.06 or
2903.08, or a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.06, 2903.07 or 2903.08 as they
existed prior to March 23, 2000.





      (3)   “Construction zone” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 5501.27.





      (4)   “Speeding offense” means a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.21 or a municipal ordinance pertaining to speed.










   (F)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension
is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a
prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the
specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this State, or
current or former law of another state or the United States. 
(ORC 2903.06)










   (G)   The court imposing a sentence upon an offender for any
violation of this section also shall impose a suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the
range specified in division (B) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02 that is equivalent in
length to the suspension required for a violation of Ohio R.C.  2903.06
under similar circumstances.





(ORC 4510.07)









136.021 VEHICULAR ASSAULT IN A CONSTRUCTION ZONE.




   (A)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation
of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft, or
aircraft, shall cause serious physical harm to another person or another’s
unborn as the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a
construction zone, a speeding offense.  This subsection applies only if the
person to whom the serious physical harm is caused or to whose unborn the
serious physical harm is caused is in the construction zone at the time of
the offender’s commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone
and does not apply as described in subsection (D) hereof.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of vehicular
assault.  Except as provided in this subsection, vehicular assault is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  Vehicular assault is a felony if, at the
time of the offense, the offender was driving under a suspension imposed
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510, or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code
or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this section or any traffic- related homicide, manslaughter, or
assault offense, and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 





   In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall impose upon
the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in
division (A)(4) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02.









   (C)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least seven
days on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
this section and may impose upon the offender a longer jail term as
authorized pursuant to Section 130.99.









   (D)   This section does not apply in a particular construction zone
unless signs of the type described in Ohio R.C. 2903.081 are erected in that
construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design specifications
established by the Director of Transportation under Ohio R.C. 5501.27.










   (E)   As used in this section:





      (1)   “Mandatory jail term” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2929.01.





      (2)   “Traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault
offense” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2903.06.





      (3)   “Construction zone” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 5501.27.





      (4)   “Speeding offense” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2903.06.










   (F)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension
is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a
prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the
specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this State, or
current or former law of another state or the United States. 
(ORC 2903.08)









136.03  ASSAULT.




   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical
harm to another or to another's unborn.










   (B)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to
another or to another's unborn.










   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of assault, a
misdemeanor of the first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender as
provided in subsection (C) hereof.  If the assault was committed under the
circumstances provided in subsection (C)(2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) or
(9) hereof, assault is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate
State law. 





      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if the
offense is committed by a caretaker against a functionally impaired person
under the caretaker's care.





      (3)   If the offense occurs in or on the grounds of a State
correctional institution or an institution of the Department of Youth
Services, the victim of the offense is an employee of the Department of
Rehabilitation and Correction or the Department of Youth Services, and the
offense is committed by a person incarcerated in the State correctional
institution or by a person institutionalized in the Department of Youth
Services Institution pursuant to a commitment to the Department of Youth
Services.





      (4)   If the offense is committed in any of the following
circumstances:





         (a)   The offense occurs in or on the grounds of a local
correctional facility, the victim of the offense is an employee of the local
correctional facility or a probation department or is on the premises of the
facility for business purposes or as a visitor, and the offense is committed
by a person who is under custody in the facility subsequent to the person's
arrest for any crime or delinquent act, subsequent to the person's being
charged with or convicted of any crime, or subsequent to the person's being
alleged to be or adjudicated a delinquent child.





         (b)   The offense occurs off the grounds of a State
correctional institution and off the grounds of an institution of the
Department of Youth Services, the victim of the offense is an employee of the
Department of Rehabilitation and Correction, the Department of Youth
Services, or a probation department, the offense occurs during the employee's
official work hours and while the employee is engaged in official work
responsibilities, and the offense is committed by a person incarcerated in a
State correctional institution or institutionalized in the Department of
Youth Services who temporarily is outside of the institution for any purpose,
by a parolee, by an offender under transitional control, under a community
control sanction, or on an escorted visit, by a person under post-release
control, or by an offender under any other type of supervision by a
government agency.





         (c)   The offense occurs off the grounds of a local
correctional facility, the victim of the offense is an employee of the local
correctional facility or a probation department, the offense occurs during
the employee's official work hours and while the employee is engaged in
official work responsibilities, and the offense is committed by a person who
is under custody in the facility subsequent to the person's arrest for any
crime or delinquent act, subsequent to the person being charged with or
convicted of any crime, or subsequent to the person being alleged to be or
adjudicated a delinquent child and who temporarily is outside of the facility
for any purpose or by a parolee, by an offender under transitional control,
under a community control sanction, or on an escorted visit, by a person
under post-release control, or by an offender under any other type of
supervision by a government agency.





         (d)   The victim of the offense is a school teacher or
administrator or a school bus operator, and the offense occurs in a school,
on school premises, in a school building, on a school bus or while the victim
is outside of school premises or a school bus and is engaged in duties or
official responsibilities associated with the victim's employment or position
as a school teacher or administrator or a school bus operator, including, but
not limited to, driving, accompanying, or chaperoning students at or on class
or field trips, athletic events, or other school extracurricular activities
or functions outside of school premises.





      (5)   If the victim of the offense is a peace officer or an
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, a
firefighter, or a person performing emergency medical service, while in the
performance of their official duties.





      (6)   If the victim of the offense is a peace officer or an
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation and
if the victim suffered serious physical harm as a result of the commission of
the offense.





      (7)   If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee
of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency and
the offense relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties.





      (8)   If the victim of the offense is a health care
professional of a hospital, a health care worker of a hospital, or a security
officer of a hospital whom the offender knows or has reasonable cause to know
is a health care professional of a hospital; a health care worker of a
hospital, or a security officer of a hospital, if the victim is engaged in
the performance of the victim's duties, and if the hospital offers
de-escalation or crisis intervention training for such professionals, workers
or officers, assault is one of the following:





         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection
(C)(8)(b) of this section, assault committed in the specified circumstances
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Notwithstanding the fine specified in
division (A)(2)(b) of Ohio R.C. 2929.28 for a misdemeanor of the first
degree, in sentencing the offender under this subsection and if the court
decides to impose a fine, the court may impose upon the offender a fine of
not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000).





         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one or more assault or homicide offenses committed
against hospital personnel, assault committed in the specified circumstances
is a felony.





      (9)   If the victim of the offense is a judge, magistrate,
prosecutor or court official or employee whom the offender knows or has
reasonable cause to know is a judge, magistrate, prosecutor or court official
or employee, and if the victim is engaged in the performance of the victim's
duties, assault is one of the following:





         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection
(C)(9)(b) of this section, assault committed in the specified circumstances
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  In sentencing the offender under this
subsection, if the court decides to impose a fine, notwithstanding the fine
specified in division (A)(2)(b) of Ohio R.C. 2929.28 for a misdemeanor of the
first degree, the court may impose upon the offender a fine of not more than
five thousand dollars ($5,000).





         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one or more assault or homicide offenses committed
against justice system personnel, assault committed in the specified
circumstances is a felony.





      (10)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to
assault when it is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification as described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1423 that was included in the
indictment, count in the indictment or information charging the offense, the
court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
division (G) of Ohio R.C. 2929.24.










   (D)   As used in this section:





      (1)   "Peace officer" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2935.01.





      (2)   "Firefighter" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
3937.41.





      (3)   "Emergency medical service" has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 4765.01.





      (4)   "Local correctional facility" means a county,
multicounty, municipal, municipal-county  or multicounty-municipal jail or
workhouse.  A minimum security jail established under Ohio R.C. 341.23 or
753.21, or another county, multicounty, municipal, municipal-county, or
multicounty-municipal facility used for the custody of persons arrested for
any crime or delinquent act, persons charged with or convicted of any crime,
or persons alleged to be or adjudicated a delinquent child.





      (5)   "Employee of a local correctional facility" means a
person who is an employee of the political subdivision or of one or more of
the affiliated political subdivisions that operates the local correctional
facility and who operates or assists in the operation of the facility.





      (6)   "School teacher or administrator" means either of the
following:





         (a)   A person who is employed in the public schools of
the State under a contract described in Ohio R.C. 3311.77 or 3319.08 in a
position in which the person is required to have a certificate issued
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3319.22 to 3319.311.





         (b)   A person who is employed by a nonpublic school for
which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under Ohio
R.C. 3301.07 and who is certified in accordance with Ohio R.C. 3301.071.





      (7)   "Community control sanction" has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2929.01.





      (8)   "Escorted visit" means an escorted visit granted under
Ohio R.C. 2967.27.





      (9)   "Post-release control" and "transitional control" have
the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2967.01.





      (10)   "Investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2903.11.





      (11)   "Health care professional" and "health care worker"
have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2305.234.





      (12)   "Assault or homicide offense committed against hospital
personnel" means a violation of this section or Ohio R.C. 2903.01, 2903.02,
2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.041, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13 or 2903.14 committed in
circumstances in which all of the following apply:





         (a)   The victim of the offense was a health care
professional of a hospital, a health care worker of a hospital or a security
officer of a hospital.





         (b)   The offender knew or had reasonable cause to know
that the victim was a health care professional of a hospital, a health care
worker of a hospital, or a security officer of a hospital;





         (c)   The victim was engaged in the performance of the
victim's duties.





         (d)   The hospital offered de-escalation or crisis
intervention training for such professionals, workers or officers.





      (13)   "De-escalation or crisis intervention training" means
de-escalation or crisis intervention training for health care professionals
of a hospital, health care workers of a hospital, and security officers of a
hospital to facilitate interaction with patients, members of a patient's
family, and visitors, including those with mental impairments.





      (14)   "Assault or homicide offense committed against justice
system personnel" means a violation of this section or of Ohio R.C. 2903.01,
2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.041, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13 or 2903.14
committed in circumstances in which the victim of the offense was a judge,
magistrate, prosecutor, or court official or employee whom the offender knew
or had reasonable cause to know was a judge, magistrate, prosecutor, or court
official or employee, and the victim was engaged in the performance of the
victim's duties.





      (15)   "Court official or employee" means any official or
employee of a court created under the constitution or statutes of this State
or of a United States court located in this State.





      (16)   "Judge" means a judge of a court created under the
constitution or statutes of this State or of a United States court located in
this State.





      (17)   "Magistrate" means an individual who is appointed by a
court of record of this State and who has the powers and may perform the
functions specified in Civil Rule 53, Criminal Rule 19, or Juvenile Rule 40,
or an individual who is appointed by a United States court located in this
State who has similar powers and functions.





      (18)   "Prosecutor" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2935.01.





      (19)   (a)   "Hospital" means, subject to subsection
(D)(19)(b) of this section, an institution classified as a hospital under
Ohio R.C. 3701.01 in which are provided to patients diagnostic, medical,
surgical, obstetrical, psychiatric, or rehabilitation care or a hospital
operated by a health maintenance organization.





         (b)   "Hospital" does not include any of the following:





            1.   A facility licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter
3721, a health care facility operated by the Department of Mental Health or
the Department of Developmental Disabilities, a health maintenance
organization that does not operate a hospital, or the office of any private,
licensed health care professional, whether organized for individual or group
practice;





            2.   An institution for the sick that is operated
exclusively for patients who use spiritual means for healing and for whom the
acceptance of medical care is inconsistent with their religious beliefs,
accredited by a national accrediting organization, exempt from federal income
taxation under Section 501 of the "Internal Revenue Code of 1986", 100 Stat.
2085, 26 U.S.C. 1, as amended, and providing twenty-four-hour nursing care
pursuant to the exemption in division (E) of Ohio R.C. 4723.32 from the
licensing requirements of Ohio R.C. Chapter 4723.





      (20)   "Health maintenance organization" has the same meaning
as in Ohio R.C. 3727.01.  (ORC 2903.13)









136.04  NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.



   (A)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance as defined in Section 139.01 cause physical harm to
another or to another’s unborn.









   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault,
a misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(ORC 2903.14)









136.05  AGGRAVATED MENACING.



   (A)    No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the
other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other
person’s immediate family.  In addition to any other basis for the other
person’s belief that the offender will cause serious physical harm to the
person or property of the other person, the other person’s unborn, or a
member of the other person’s immediate family, the other person’s belief
may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at or
identify a corporation, association or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.



 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated
menacing.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (b), aggravated
menacing is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the victim of the offense
is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a private
child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer’s or
employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official
responsibilities or duties, or, if the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior
offense was an officer or employee of a public children services agency or
private child placing agency, and that prior offense related to the
officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance of
official responsibilities or duties, aggravated menacing is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 



 




   (C)   As used in this section, “organization” includes an entity
that is a governmental employer.  (ORC 2903.21)









136.051  MENACING BY STALKING.




   (A)   (1)   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall
knowingly cause another person to believe that the offender will cause
physical harm to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person or cause mental distress to the other person or a family or
household member of the other person.  In addition to any other basis for
the other person's belief that the offender will cause physical harm to the
other person or the other person's family or household member or mental
distress to the other person or the other person's family or household
member, the other person's belief or mental distress may be based on words or
conduct of the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation,
association or other organization that employs the other person or to which
the other person belongs.





      (2)   No person, through the use of any form of written
communication or any electronic method of remotely transferring information,
including, but not limited to, any computer, computer network, computer
program, computer system or telecommunication device shall post a message or
use any intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do
either of the following:




         (a)   Violate subsection (A)(1) of this section;



         (b)   Urge or incite another to commit a violation of
subsection (A)(1) of this section.



      (3)   No person, with sexual motivation, shall violate
subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section.



 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing by
stalking.




      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsections (B)(2) and
(3) of this section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.




      (2)   Menacing by stalking is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate State law if any of the following applies:




         (a)   The offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a violation of Section
541.051.





         (b)   In committing the offense under subsection (A)(1),
(2), or (3) of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to
or against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under
subsection (A)(2) or (3) of this section, a third person induced by the
offender's posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the
victim.





         (c)   In committing the offense under subsection (A)(1),
(2), or (3) of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises
where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school, or as a result of an
offense committed under subsection (A)(2) or (3) of this section, a third
person induced by the offender's posted message trespassed on the land or
premises where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school.




         (d)   The victim of the offense is a minor.




         (e)   The offender has a history of violence toward the
victim or any other person or a history of other violent acts toward the
victim or any other person.





         (f)   While committing the offense under subsection
(A)(1) of this section or a violation of subsection (A)(3) of this section is
based on conduct in violation of subsection (A)(1) of this section, the
offender had a deadly weapon on or about the offender's person or under the
offender's control.  Subsection (B)(2)(f) of this section does not apply in
determining the penalty for a violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section
or a violation of subsection (A)(3) of this section based on conduct in
violation of subsection (A)(1) of this section.





         (g)   At the time of the commission of the offense, the
offender was the subject of a protection order issued under Ohio R.C.
2903.213 or 2903.214, regardless of whether the person to be protected under
the order is the victim of the offense or another person.





         (h)   In committing the offense under subsection (A)(1),
(2), or (3) of this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the
premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that
premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or
as a result of an offense committed under subsection (A)(2) of this section,
or an offense committed under subsection (A)(3) of this section based on a
violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section, a third person induced by the
offender's posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that
real property, or any personal property on that premises.





         (i)   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had
been determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious physical harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.





      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee
of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency and
the offense relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties, or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of violence,
the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a public
children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior
offense related to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities, or duties, menacing by stalking is
a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.




 



   (C)   Ohio R.C. 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged
with a violation of this section.



 



   (D)   As used in this section:




      (1)   "Pattern of conduct" means two or more actions or
incidents closely related in time, whether or not there has been a prior
conviction based on any of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions
or incidents closely related in time, whether or not there has been a prior
conviction based on any of those actions or incidents, directed at one or
more persons employed by or belonging to the same corporation, association,
or other organization.  Actions or incidents that prevent, obstruct, or
delay the performance by a public official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency
medical services person, or emergency facility person of any authorized act
within the public official's, firefighter's, rescuer's, emergency medical
services person's, or emergency facility person's official capacity, or the
posting of messages, use of intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures,
or receipt of information or data through the use of any form of written
communication or an electronic method of remotely transferring information,
including, but not limited to, a computer, computer network, computer
program, computer system, or telecommunications device, may constitute a
"pattern of conduct".




      (2)   "Mental distress" means any of the following:



         (a)   Any mental illness or condition that involves some
temporary substantial incapacity;




         (b)   Any mental illness or condition that would
normally require psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other
mental health services, whether or not any person requested or received
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health
services.





      (3)   "Emergency medical services person" is the singular of
"emergency medical services personnel" as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.




      (4)   "Emergency facility person" is the singular of
"emergency facility personnel" as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.




      (5)   "Public official" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2921.01.





      (6)   "Computer", "computer network", "computer program",
"computer system" and "telecommunications device" have the same meanings as
in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.





      (7)   "Post a message" means transferring, sending, posting,
publishing, disseminating or otherwise communicating, or attempting to
transfer, send, post, publish, disseminate or otherwise communication, any
message or information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual,
and whether done under one's own name, under the name of another, or while
impersonating another.





      (8)   "Third person" means, in relation to conduct as
described in subsection (A)(2) of this section, an individual who is neither
the offender nor the victim of the conduct.





      (9)   "Sexual motivation" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2971.01.





      (10)   "Organization" includes an entity that is a
governmental employer.




      (11)   "Family or household member" means any of the following:




         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has
resided with the person against whom the act prohibited in subsection (A)(1)
of this section is committed:




            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a
former spouse of the person;




            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the
person, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person;





            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person
living as a spouse, or former spouse of the person, or another person related
by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the person.





         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the person
against whom the act prohibited in subsection (A((1) of this section is
committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.





      (12)   "Person living as a spouse" means a person who is
living or has lived with the person against whom the act prohibited in
subsection (A)(1) of this section is committed in a common law marital
relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise
has cohabited with the person within five years prior to the date of the
alleged commission of the act in question.




 



   (E)   The Municipality does not need to prove in a prosecution under
this section that a person requested or received psychiatric treatment,
psychological treatment, or other mental health services in order to show
that the person was caused mental distress as described in subsection
(D)(2)(b) of this section.



 




   (F)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely
because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control,
including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing
access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely
transferring the information, and that do not include the creation of the
content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection.  In
addition, any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control
shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it
believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.





      (2)   Subsection (F)(1) of this section does not create an
affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an
electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that
person's control to block the receipt or transmission through its service of
any information that it believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this
section except as otherwise provided by law.





      (3)   Subsection (F)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or
knowing distribution of material in violation of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.  (ORC
2903.211)









136.06  MENACING.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s
immediate family.  In addition to any other basis for the other person’s
belief that the offender will cause physical harm to the person or property
of the other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other
person’s immediately family, the other person’s belief may be based on
words or conduct of the offender that are directed at or identify a
corporation, association or other organization that employs the other person
or to which the other person belongs.



 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing.  Except
as otherwise provided in this subsection (b), menacing is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.  If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee
of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency and
the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or
anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of
violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that
prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or
anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, menacing is a
felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.



 



   (C)   As used in this section, “organization” includes an entity
that is a governmental employer.  (ORC 2903.22)








136.07  UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.




   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly
restrain another of the other person’s liberty.










   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual
motivation, shall knowingly restrain another of the other person’s liberty.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint,
a misdemeanor of the third degree. 










   (D)   As used in this section, “sexual motivation” has the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2971.01. 
(ORC 2905.03)









136.08  ENDANGERING CHILDREN.




   (A)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person
having custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under
eighteen years of age or a mentally or physically handicapped child under
twenty-one years of age, shall create a substantial risk to the health or
safety of the child, by violating a duty of care, protection or support.  It
is not a violation of a duty of care, protection or support under this
subsection when the parent, guardian, custodian or person having custody or
control of a





child treats the physical or mental illness or defect of the child by
spiritual means through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a
recognized religious body.










   (B)   No person shall abuse a child under eighteen years of age or a
mentally or physically handicapped child under twenty-one years of age.










   (C)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle in violation of
Section 72.45(A) of the Traffic Code when one or more children under eighteen
years of age are in the vehicle.  Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation
of subsection (C) hereof and a violation of Section 72.45(A) of the Traffic
Code that constitutes the basis of the charge of the violation of subsection
(C) hereof.  For purposes of Ohio R.C. 4511.191 to 4511.197 and all related
provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of subsection (C) hereof
shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or for
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.





      (2)   As used in subsection (C) hereof:





         (a)   “Controlled substance” has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.





         (b)   "Vehicle" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4511.01.










   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering
children.





      (1)   Whoever violates subsection (A) or (B) hereof is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the violation results in serious
physical harm to the child involved, or if the offender previously has been
convicted of an offense under this section, Ohio R.C. 2919.22 or of any
offense involving neglect, abandonment, contributing to the delinquency of or
physical abuse of a child, endangering children is a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.





      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (C) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  Endangering children is a felony and shall
be prosecuted under appropriate State law if either of the following applies:





         (a)   The violation results in serious physical harm to
the child involved or the offender previously has been convicted of an
offense under Ohio R.C. 2919.22 or any offense involving neglect,
abandonment, contributing to the delinquency of, or physical abuse of a child.





         (b)   The violation results in serious physical harm to
the child involved and the offender previously has been convicted of a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2919.22(C) or subsection (C) hereof, Ohio R.C.
2903.06, or 2903.08, Section 2903.07 as it existed prior to March 23, 2000,
or Ohio R.C. 2903.04 in a case in which the offender was subject to the
sanctions described in division (D) of that section.





      (3)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other
sentence, penalty, or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to
subsection (D)(2) hereof, or pursuant to any other provision of law, the
court also may impose upon the offender any of the sanctions provided under
Ohio R.C. 2919.22(E)(5)(d).










   (E)   (1)   If a person violates subsection (C) hereof and if, at
the time of the violation, there were two or more children under eighteen
years of age in the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may
be convicted of a violation of subsection (C) hereof for each of the
children, but the court may sentence the offender for only one of the
violations.





      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to
a violation of subsection (C) hereof but the person is not also convicted of
and does not also plead guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of
Section 72.45(A) of the Traffic Code that was the basis of the charge of the
violation of subsection (C) hereof, both of the following apply:





            1.   For purposes of the provisions of the Traffic
Code penalty that set forth the penalties and sanctions for a violation of
Section 72.45(A) of the Traffic Code, the conviction of or plea of guilty to
the violation of subsection (C) hereof shall not constitute a violation of
Section 72.45(A) of the Traffic Code.





            2.   For purposes of any provision of law that
refers to a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of Section
72.45(A) of the Traffic Code and that is not described in subsection
(E)(2)(a)1. hereof, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of
subsection (C) hereof shall constitute a conviction of or plea of guilty to a
violation of Section 72.45(A) of the Traffic Code.





         (b)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of subsection (C) hereof and the person also is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of Section 72.45(A)
of the Traffic Code that was the basis of the charge of the violation of
subsection (C) hereof, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation
of subsection (C) hereof shall not constitute, for purposes of any provision
of law that refers to a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of
Section 72.45(A) of the Traffic Code, a conviction of or plea of guilty to a
violation of Section 72.45(A) of the Traffic Code. 
(ORC 2919.22)









136.09  COERCION.




   (A)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or
refraining from action concerning which the other person has a legal freedom
of choice, shall do any of the following:





      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense;





      (2)   Utter or threaten any calumny against any person;





      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to
subject any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule, to damage any person’s
personal or business repute, or to impair any person’s credit;





      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any
person;





      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold
official action, or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or
withheld.










   (B)   Subsections (A)(4) and (5) hereof shall not be construed to
prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith
and in the interest of justice:





      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2945.44;





      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses
charged or to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the
testimony of the accused in a case to which the accused is not a party,
offering or agreeing to dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending
against an accused, or offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain
sentence or modification of sentence;





      (3)   Imposing community control sanction on certain
conditions, including without limitation requiring the offender to make
restitution or redress to the victim of the offense.










   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection
(A)(3), (4) or (5) hereof that the actor's conduct was a reasonable response
to the circumstances that occasioned it, and that the actor’s purpose was
limited to any of the following:





      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to
desist from further misconduct;





      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice;





      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the
actor reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified;





      (4)   Compelling another to take action that the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be under a duty to take.










   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.










   (E)   As used in this section:





      (1)   "Threat" includes a direct threat and a threat by
innuendo.





      (2)   “Community control sanction” has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 2929.01. 
(ORC 2905.12)









136.10 TELECOMMUNICATION HARASSMENT.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person's control, to another, if the
caller does any of the following:




      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass,
intimidate, or abuse, any person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, whether or not actual communication takes place
between the caller and a recipient;





      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the
caller, the recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in
sexual activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which
the telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication
or in the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a
telecommunication to the recipient or to the premises to which the
telecommunication is made;





      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates Ohio R.C. 2903.21;





      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the
telecommunication that the caller intends to cause damage to or destroy
public or private property, and the recipient, any member of the recipient's
family, or any other person who resides at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made owns, leases, resides, or works in, will at the
time of the destruction or damaging be near or in, has the responsibility of
protecting, or insures the property that will be destroyed or damaged;





      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient
of the telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any person at those premises.





      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or
proposal to the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening,
intimidating, menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse,
threaten or harass the recipient;





      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts
the telecommunication service of any person;





      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits
to any person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its
entirety, any file, document or other communication that prevents that person
from using the person's telephone service or electronic communication device;





      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the
death, injury, illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or
criminal conduct of the recipient of the telecommunication or family or
household member of the recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten,
intimidate, or harass the recipient;





      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a
telecommunication or other means to harass or participate in the harassment
of a person;





      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a
telecommunication without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be
inconvenient to the recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.




 




   (B)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person's control, with purpose to abuse,
threaten, or harass another person.





      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement
or an image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.










   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of
telecommunication harassment.





      (2)   A violation of subsections (A)(1), (2), (3), (5), (6),
(7), (8), (9), (10), or (11) or (B) hereof is a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense.  Each subsequent offense is a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.





      (3)   Whoever violates subsection (A)(4) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree for a first offense.  For each subsequent
offense or if a violation of subsection (A)(4) hereof results in economic
harm of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, a violation of subsection
(A)(4) hereof is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.




 



   (D)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this State
against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer
service as defined in Section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, or
information service, or against any officer, employee, or agent of a
telecommunication service, interactive computer service as defined in Section
230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, or information service, for any
injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the
provider's, officer's, employee's, or agent's provision of information,
facilities, or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that
is issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged
violation of this section.  A provider of a telecommunications service,
interactive computer service as defined in Section 230 of Title 47 of the
United States Code, or information service, or an officer, employee, or agent
of a telecommunications service, interactive computer service as defined in
Section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, of information service, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death, or loss to
person or property that allegedly arises out of the provider's, officer's,
employee's, or agent's provision of information, facilities, or assistance in
accordance with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.



 




   (E)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely
because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control,
including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing
access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely
transferring the information, and that do not include the creation of the
content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection.  In
addition, any person providing access or connection to or from an electric
method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control
shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that the
person believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.





      (2)   Subsection (E)(1) of this section does not create an
affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an
electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that
person's control to block the receipt or transmission through its service of
any information that it believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this
section except as otherwise provided by law.





      (3)   Subsection (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or
knowing distribution of material in violation of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.





      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service,
as defined in Section 230 of Title 47 of the United States Code, shall
neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any information provided by
another information content provider, as defined in Section 230 of Title 47
of the United States Code, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the
creation or development of information provided by another information
content provider, as defined in Section 230 of Title 47 of the United States
Code.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to protect a person
from liability to the extent that the person developed or created any content
in violation of this section.




 



   (F)   Subsections (A)(5) to (11) and (B)(2) of this section do not
apply to a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine,
press association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable
operator, or radio or television station, is gathering, processing,
transmitting, compiling, editing or disseminating information for the general
public, within the scope of the person's employment in that capacity or the
person's contractual authority in that capacity.



 



   (G)   As used in this section:




      (1)   "Economic harm" means all direct, incidental, and
consequential pecuniary harm suffered by a victim as a result of criminal
conduct. 





         "Economic harm" includes, but is not limited to, all of the
following:




         (a)   All wages, salaries, or other compensation lost as
a result of the criminal conduct;




         (b)   The cost of all wages, salaries or other
compensation paid to employees for time those employees are prevented from
working as a result of the criminal conduct;




         (c)   The overhead costs incurred for the time that a
business is shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;



         (d)   The loss of value to tangible or intangible
property that was damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.




      (2)   "Caller" means the person described in subsection (a)
hereof who makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person's control.





      (3)   "Telecommunication" and "telecommunications device" have
the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.





      (4)   "Sexual activity" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2907.01.




      (5)   "Family or household member" means any of the following:




         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has
resided with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act
prohibited in subsection (A)(9) of this section is committed:




            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a
former spouse of the recipient;




            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the
recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the
recipient;





            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person
living as a spouse, or former spouse of the recipient, or anther person
related by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the recipient.





         B.   The natural parent of any child of whom the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in
subsection (A)(9) of this section is committed is the other natural parent or
is the putative other natural parent.





      (6)   "Person living as a spouse" means a person who is living
or has lived with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act
prohibited in subsection (A)(9) of this section is committed in a common law
marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who
otherwise has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the
date of the alleged commission of the act in question.





      (7)   "Cable operator" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
1332.21.




 




   (H)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication call to a debtor that is in compliance with the "Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act", 91 Stat. 874 (1977), 15 U.S.C. 1692, as amended,
or the "Telephone Consumer Protection Act", 105 Stat. 2395 (1991), 47 U.S.C.
227, as amended.  (ORC 2917.21)









136.11  MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.




   (A)   "9-1-1 system" means a system through which individuals can
request emergency service using the telephone number 9-1-1. 





(ORC 128.01)










   (B)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of the
9-1-1 system established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 128 to report an emergency
if he knows that no emergency exists. 










   (C)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose
other than obtaining emergency service.










   (D)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning
telephone numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the data base that
serves the public safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 128, except for any of the following purposes or under any
of the following circumstances:





      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;





      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an
emergency service provider;





      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of
such information due solely to technology of the wireline telephone network
portion of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the data base to be
restricted to 9-1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering
point;





      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a data base being given
by a telephone company that is a wireline service provider to a public
utility or municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public
emergency or service outages.  The charge, terms, and conditions for the
disclosure or use of such information for the purpose of such access to a
data base shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Department of Public
Safety.





      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a data base given by a
telephone company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local
government in warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Department
of Public Safety.  The charge, terms, and conditions for the disclosure or
use of that information for the purpose of access to a data base is subject
to the jurisdiction of the Department of Public Safety.





         (ORC 128.32)










   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (B) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.





      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (C) or (D) hereof is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense.  For each
subsequent offense such person is guilty of a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate State law. 





         (ORC 128.99)









136.12  DRUG ABUSE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.



 



   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to the following:




         (a)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other
persons whose conduct was in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715,
4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741.





         (b)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any
person who is conducting or participating in a research project involving the
use of an anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration;





         (c)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes,
dispenses or administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic
steroid that is expressly intended for administration through implants to
livestock or other nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the
"Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act", 52 Stat. 1040 (1938), 21 U.S.C.A. 301,
as amended, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act;





         (d)   Any person who obtained the controlled substance
pursuant to a lawful prescription issued by a licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs.




      (2)   (a)   As used in subsection (B)(2) of this section:



            1.   "Community addiction services provider" has
the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 5119.01.




            2.   "Community control sanction" and "drug
treatment program" have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.





            3.   "Health care facility" has the same meaning
as in Ohio R.C. 2919.16.





            4.   "Minor drug possession offense" means a
violation of this section that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth
degree.





            5.   "Post-release control sanction" has the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2967.28.





            6.   "Peace officer" has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2935.01.





            7.   "Public agency" has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2930.01.





            8.   "Qualified individual" means a person who is
not on community control or post-release control and is a person acting in
good faith who seeks or obtains medical assistance for another person who is
experiencing a drug overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and
who seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the
subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that
overdose as described in subsection (B)(2)B. of this section.





            9.   "Seek or obtain medical assistance" includes,
but is not limited to making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by
telephone call an on-duty peace officer, or transporting or presenting a
person to a health care facility.





         (b)   Subject to subsection (B)(2)(f) of this section, a
qualified individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted or
penalized pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense if all
of the following apply:





            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession or
use of the controlled substance or controlled substance analog that would be
the basis of the offense was obtained as a result of the qualified individual
seeking the medical assistance or experiencing an overdose and needing
medical assistance.





            2.   Subject to subsection (B)(2)(g) of this
section, within thirty days after seeking or obtaining the medical
assistance, the qualified individual seeks and obtains a screening and
receives a referral for treatment from a community addiction services
provider or a properly credentialed addiction treatment professional.





            3.   Subject to subsection (B)(2)(g) of this
section, the qualified individual who obtains a screening and receives a
referral for treatment under subsection (B)(2)(b)1. of this section, upon the
request of any prosecuting attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting
attorney that verifies that the qualified individual satisfied the
requirements of that subsection.  The documentation shall be limited to the
date and time of the screening obtained and referral received.





         (c)   If a person is found to be in violation of any
community control sanction and if the violation is a result of either of the
following, the court shall first consider ordering the person's participation
or continued participation in a drug treatment program or mitigating the
penalty specified in Ohio R.C. 2929.13, 2929.15, or 2929.25, whichever is
applicable, after which the court has the discretion either to order the
person's participation or continued participation in a drug treatment program
or to impose the penalty with the mitigating factor specified in any of those
applicable sections:





            1.   Seeking or obtaining medical assistance in
good faith for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose;





            2.   Experiencing a drug overdose and seeking
medical assistance for that overdose or being the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section.





         (d)   If a person is found to be in violation of any
post-release control sanction and if the violation is a result of either of
the following, the court or the parole board shall first consider ordering
the person's participation or continued participation in a drug treatment
program or mitigating the penalty specified in Ohio R.C. 2929.141 or 2967.28,
whichever is applicable, after which the court or the parole board has the
discretion either to order the person's participation or continued
participation in a drug treatment program or to impose the penalty with the
mitigating factor specified in either of those applicable sections:





            1.   Seeking or obtaining medical assistance in
good faith for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose;





            2.   Experiencing a drug overdose and seeking
medical assistance for that emergency or being the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
subsection (b)(2)B. of this section.




         (e)   Nothing in subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section
shall be construed to do any of the following:




            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in
connection with the investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a
defendant who does not qualify for the protections of subsection (B)(2)(b) of
this section or with regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession
offense committed by a person who qualifies for protection pursuant to
subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section for a minor drug possession offense;





            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband
otherwise permitted by law;





            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace
officer to detain or take into custody a person in the course of an
investigation or to effectuate an arrest for any offense except as provided
in that division;





            4.   Limit, modify or remove any immunity from
liability available pursuant to law in effect prior to the effective date of
this amendment to any public agency or to an employee of any public agency.





         (f)   Subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section does not
apply to any person who twice previously has been granted an immunity under
subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section.  No person shall be granted an
immunity under subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section more than two times.





         (g)   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified
individual to disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts
with the requirements of the "Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act of 1996", 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C. 1320d et seq.,
as amended, and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of
Health and Human Services to implement the act or the requirements of 42
C.F.R. Part 2.




 



   (C)   Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of one of the
following:




      (1)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, IV, or V,
whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of possession of drugs. 
Possession of drugs is a misdemeanor if the amount of the drug involved does
not exceed the bulk amount.  The penalty for the offense shall be determined
as follows:  possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if
the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a felony
and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.





      (2)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than
hashish, whoever violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of possession of
marihuana.  Possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor if the amount of the
drug involved does not exceed 200 grams.  The penalty for the offense shall
be determined as follows:





         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection
(C)(2)(b) hereof, possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.





         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds 100 grams but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.





      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever
violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of possession of hashish. 
Possession of hashish is a misdemeanor if the amount of the drug involved
does not exceed the maximum amount specified in subsection (C)(3)(b)
hereof.  The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:




         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection
(C)(3)(b) hereof, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.




         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds five grams but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or
equals or exceeds one gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid
concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish
is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.




 



   (D)   In addition to any other sanction that is imposed for an
offense under this section,  the court that sentences an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section may suspend for
not more than five years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's
license or permit.  However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was
convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a substantially similar
municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising
out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall
suspend the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit for
not more than five years.



 



   (E)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the
person's criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any
application for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in
connection with the person's appearance as a witness.  (ORC 2925.11)








136.13  ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.



   (A)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental or
veterinary purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or
similar physiological effects, shall obtain, possess or use a harmful
intoxicant.



 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously
has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a
felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 



 




   (C)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
a violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five
years the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit. 
However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of
Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law
of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's
driver's or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five
years.  (ORC 2925.31)









136.14  COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED  SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.



 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of
counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  (ORC
2925.37)



 




   (C)   The court may suspend for not more than five years the
offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit.  However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit for not more than five years.  (ORC 2925.37)









136.15 HAZING PROHIBITED.




   (A)   As used in this section, HAZING means doing any act or
coercing another, including the victim, to do any act of initiation into any
student or other organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of
causing mental or physical harm to any person.










   (B)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing
of another.





      (2)   No administrator, employee, or faculty member of any
primary, secondary, or post-secondary school or of any other educational
institution, public or private, shall recklessly permit the hazing of any
person.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of hazing, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. 
(R.C. § 2903.31)  Penalty, see § 130.99









136.16  FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR  NEGLECT.




   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make
a false report under R.C. § 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has
committed an act or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child
as defined in R.C. § 2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in R.C. §
2151.03.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a
false report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.





(R.C. § 2921.14)  Penalty, see § 130.99









136.17  ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR
ALTERNATE NICOTINE PRODUCTS.



   (A)   As used in this section:




      (1)   “Age verification” means a service provided by an
independent third party (other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor,
wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes) that compares
information available from a commercially available database, or aggregate of
databases, that regularly are used by government and businesses for the
purpose of age and identity verification to personal information provided
during an internet sale or other remote method of sale to establish that the
purchaser is eighteen years of age or older.





      (2)   (a)   “Alternative nicotine product” means,
subject to subsection (A)(2)(b) of this section, an electronic cigarette or
any other product or device that consists of or contains nicotine that can be
ingested into the body by any means, including, but not limited to, chewing,
smoking, absorbing, dissolving or inhaling.




         (b)   “Alternative nicotine product” does not
include any of the following:



            1.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;



            2.   Any product that is a “drug” as that term
is defined in 21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1);



            3.   Any product that is a “device” as that
term is defined in 21 U.S.C. 321(h);



            4.   Any product that is a “combination
product” as described in 21 U.S.C. 353(g).



      (3)   “Child” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2151.011.



      (4)   “Cigarette” includes clove cigarettes and
hand-rolled cigarettes.




      (5)   “Distribute” means to furnish, give, or provide
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes.





      (6)   (a)   “Electronic cigarette” means, subject to
subsection (A)(6)(b) of this section, any electronic product or device that
produces a vapor that delivers nicotine or any other substance to the person
inhaling from the device to simulate smoking and that is likely to be offered
to  or purchased by consumers as an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo or electronic pipe.





         (b)   “Electronic cigarette” does not include any
item, product or device described in subsections (A)(2)(b)1. to 4. of this
section.





      (7)   “Proof of age” means a driver’s license, a
commercial driver’s license, a military identification card, a passport, or
an identification card issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows
that a person is eighteen years of age or older.





      (8)   “Tobacco product” means any product that is made
from tobacco, including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe
tobacco, chewing tobacco or snuff.




      (9)   “Vending machine” has the same meaning as “coin
machine” in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.



 



   (B)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or
retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or
representative of a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or
retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes, and no other person shall  do
any of the following:




      (1)   Give, sell or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to any child;





      (2)   Give away, sell or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in
any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a sign stating
that giving, selling or otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to
a person under eighteen years of age is prohibited by law;





      (3)   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the
name, age or other identification of any child with purpose to obtain
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes for that child;





      (4)   Manufacture, sell or distribute in this state any pack
or other container of cigarettes containing fewer than twenty cigarettes or
any package of roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one
ounce of tobacco;





      (5)   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a
smaller quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the
manufacturer;





      (6)   Give, sell or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine
products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than
cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age
verification.




 



   (C)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other
tobacco products or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending
machine, except in the following locations:



      (1)   An area within a factory, business, office, or other
place not open to the general public;



      (2)   An area to which children are not generally permitted
access;



      (3)   Any other place not identified in subsection (C)(1) or
(2) of this section, upon all of the following conditions:




         (a)   The vending machine is located within the
immediate vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or
operates the place, or an employee of that person, so that all cigarettes,
other tobacco product and alternative nicotine product purchases from the
vending machine will be readily observed by the person who owns or operates
the place or an employee of that person.  For the purpose of this section, a
vending machine located in any unmonitored area, including an unmonitored
coatroom, restroom, hallway or outer-waiting area, shall not be considered
located within the immediate vicinity, plain view, and control of the person
who owns or operates the place, or an employee of that person.





         (b)   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public
when the place is closed.




 



   (D)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under
subsection (b)(1) of this section:



      (1)   The child was accompanied by a parent, spouse who is
eighteen years of age or older, or legal guardian of the child.




      (2)   The person who gave, sold or distributed cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to a child under subsection (B)(1) of this section is a parent,
spouse who is eighteen  years of age or older, or legal guardian of the
child.




 



   (E)   It is not a violation of subsection (B)(1) or (2) of this
section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a child cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or papers used to roll
cigarettes while the child is participating in a research protocol if all of
the following apply:



      (1)   The parent, guardian or legal custodian of the child has
consented in writing to the child participating in the research protocol;



      (2)   An institutional human subjects protection review board,
or an equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol;



      (3)   The child is participating in the research protocol at
the facility or location specified in the research protocol.



 




   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (B)(1), (2), (4), (5) or
(6) or (c) of this section is guilty of illegal distribution of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.  Except as
otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal distribution of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of a
violation of subsection (B)(1), (2), (4), (5) or (6) or (c) of this section,
illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the third degree.





      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (B)(3) of this section is
guilty of permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products.  Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection, permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If the
offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (B)(3) of
this section, permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the third degree.




 




   (G)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold or otherwise
distributed to a child in violation of this section and that are used,
possessed, purchased or received by a child in violation of Ohio R.C. 2151.87
are subject to seizure and forfeiture as contraband under Ohio R.C. Chapter
2981.  (ORC 2927.02)









136.18  CRIMINAL CHILD ENTICEMENT.




   (A)   No person, by any means and without privilege to do so, shall
knowingly solicit, coax, entice or lure any child under fourteen years of age
to accompany the person in any manner, including entering into any vehicle,
or onto any vessel, whether or not the offender knows the age of the child,
if both of the following apply:





      (1)   The actor does not have the express or implied
permission of the parent, guardian or other legal custodian of the child in
undertaking the activity;





      (2)   The actor is not a law enforcement officer, medic,
firefighter, or other person who regularly provides emergency services, and
is not an employee or agent of, or a volunteer acting under the direction of
any Board of Education, or the actor is any of such persons, but, at the time
the actor undertakes the activity, the actor is not acting within the scope
of the actor’s lawful duties in that capacity.










   (B)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate subsection
(A) of this section.










   (C)   No person, for any unlawful purpose other than, or in addition
to, that proscribed by subsection (A) of this section, shall engage in any
activity described in subsection (A) of this section.










   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (A)
hereof that the actor undertook the activity in response to a bona fide
emergency situation or that the actor undertook the activity in a reasonable
belief that it was necessary to preserve the health, safety or welfare of the
child.










   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal child
enticement, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender has
previously been convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2905.05, 2907.02, or
2907.03, or former Section 2907.12, or Ohio R.C. 2905.01 or 2907.05 when the
victim of that prior offense was under seventeen years of age at the time of
the offense, criminal child enticement is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate State law. 










   (F)   As used in this section:





      (1)   “Sexual motivation” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2971.01.





      (2)   “Vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4501.01.





      (3)   “Vessel” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
1546.01.  (ORC 2905.05)









136.19  CONTRIBUTING TO UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      (1)   "Delinquent child" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2152.02.



      (2)   "Unruly child" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2151.022.



 



   (B)   No person, including a parent, guardian or other custodian of
a child, shall do any of the following:




      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a
child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a
delinquent child;





      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the
juvenile court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;





      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the
child as a delinquent child based on the child's violation of a court order
adjudicating the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;





      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a
child who has the duties under Ohio R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register,
register a new residence address, and periodically verify a residence address
and, if applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is
not emancipated, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2919.121, fail to ensure that the
child complies with those duties under Ohio R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.




 




   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
Each day of violation of this section is a separate offense.  (ORC 2919.24)

























CHAPTER 137
PUBLIC MORALITY









Section










137.01   Definitions





137.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor





137.03   Sexual imposition





137.04   Importuning





137.05   Voyeurism





137.06   Public indecency





137.07   Procuring





137.08   Soliciting





137.09   Prostitution





137.10   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles





137.11   Pandering obscenity





137.12   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles





137.13   Presumption of knowledge





137.14   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles




137.15   Unlawful advertising of massage



 



137.01  DEFINITIONS.




   As used in this chapter:





   (A)   "Sexual conduct" means vaginal intercourse between a male and
female; anal intercourse, fellatio and cunnilingus between persons regardless
of sex; and, without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of
any part of the body or any instrument, apparatus or other object into the
vaginal or anal opening of another.  Penetration, however slight, is
sufficient to complete vaginal or anal intercourse.










   (B)   "Sexual contact" means any touching of an erogenous zone of
another, including without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic
region, or, if such person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually
arousing or gratifying either person.










   (C)   "Sexual activity" means sexual conduct or sexual contact, or
both.










   (D)   "Prostitute" means a male or female who promiscuously engages
in sexual activity for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the
prostitute or to another.










   (E)   “Harmful to juveniles” means that quality of any material
or performance describing or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement, or sado-masochistic abuse in any form to which all of the
following apply:





      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole,
appeals to the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.





      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to
prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what
is suitable for juveniles.





      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole,
lacks serious literary, artistic, political and scientific value for
juveniles.










   (F)   When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to
ordinary adults, or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially
susceptible group, judged with reference to such group, any material or
performance is "obscene" if any of the following apply:





      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest;





      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or
depicting sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement or nudity in a way
which tends to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite;





      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or
depicting bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality;





      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological
interest by displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in
a way which inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary
sensibilities, without serving any genuine scientific, educational,
sociological, moral or artistic purpose;





      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme
or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal
to prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or
artistic purpose.










   (G)   "Sexual excitement" means the condition of human male or
female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.










   (H)   "Nudity" means the showing, representation or depiction of
human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full,
opaque covering, or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering
of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.










   (I)   "Juvenile" means an unmarried person under the age of eighteen.










   (J)   "Material" means any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet,
poster, print, picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film,
phonographic record, or tape, or other tangible thing capable of arousing
interest through sight, sound, or touch and includes an image or text
appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid crystal display,
or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a computer hard
disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape or similar data
storage device.










   (K)   "Performance" means any motion picture, preview, trailer,
play, show, skit, dance or other exhibition performed before an audience.










   (L)   "Spouse" means a person married to an offender at the time of
an alleged offense, except that such person shall not be considered the
spouse when any of the following apply:





      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation
agreement authorized by Ohio R.C. 3103.06;





      (2)   During the pendency of an action between the parties for
annulment, divorce, dissolution of marriage or legal separation;





      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the
effective date of the judgment for legal separation.










   (M)   "Minor" means a person under the age of eighteen years.










   (N)   “Mental health client or patient” has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 2305.51.










   (O)    “Mental health professional” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2305.115.










   (P)   “Sado-masochistic abuse” means flagellation or torture by
or upon a person or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise
physically restrained.





(ORC 2907.01)









137.02  UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.




   (A)   No person, who is eighteen years of age or older, shall engage
in sexual conduct with another, who is not the spouse of the offender, when
the offender knows the other person is thirteen years of age or older but
less than sixteen years of age, or the offender is reckless in that regard.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender is
four years older or more than the other person, or if the offender has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C.
2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or former Ohio R.C. 2907.12, unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate
State law.





(ORC 2907.04)









137.03  SEXUAL IMPOSITION.




   (A)   No person shall have sexual contact with another, not the
spouse of the offender; cause another, not the spouse of the offender, to
have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to
have sexual contact when any of the following applies:





      (1)   The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive
to the other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in that
regard.





      (2)   The offender knows that the other person's, or one of
the other person's, ability to appraise the nature of or control the
offender's or touching person's conduct is substantially impaired.





      (3)   The offender knows that the other person or one of the
other persons, submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact.





      (4)   The other person, or one of the other persons, is 13
years of age or older but less than 16 years of age, whether or not the
offender knows the age of such person, and the offender is at least 18 years
of age and 4 or more years older than the other person.





      (5)   The offender is a mental health professional, the other
person or one of the other persons is a mental health client or patient of
the offender, and the offender induces the other person who is the client or
patient to submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the
client or patient that the sexual contact is necessary for mental health
treatment purposes.










   (B)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section
solely upon the victim's testimony unsupported by other evidence.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition,
a misdemeanor of the third degree.  If the offender has been convicted
previously of a violation of this section, R.C. §§ 2907.02, 2907.03,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.12 or a substantially similar state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2907.06) (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









137.04  IMPORTUNING.



   (EDITOR’S NOTE: Former Section 137.04 has been deleted from the
Codified Ordinances.  Section 137.04 was identical to Ohio R.C. 2907.07(B)
which the Ohio Supreme Court held to be unconstitutional in State v. 
Thompson, 95 Ohio St.  3rd 264 (2002).)








137.05  VOYEURISM.




   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying
the person’s self, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously
invade the privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.










   (B)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying
the person’s self, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously
invade the privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph, or otherwise
record the other person in a state of nudity.









   (C)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person under or through the clothing
being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body of, or
the undergarments worn by, that other person.



 




   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.





      (2)   A violation of subsection (A) hereof is a misdemeanor of
the third degree.





      (3)   A violation of subsection (B) hereof is a misdemeanor of
the second degree.





      (4)   A violation of subsection (C)  hereof is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. 





         (ORC 2907.08)









137.06  PUBLIC INDECENCY.




   (A)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others, who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:





      (1)   Expose the person’s private parts;





      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation;





      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would
appear to be sexual conduct or masturbation.










   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront another person who is a minor, who is not the spouse of the offender,
and who resides in the person’s household:





      (1)   Engage in masturbation;





      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct;





      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would
appear to be sexual conduct or masturbation;





      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of
personal sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual
activity.










   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public
indecency and shall be punished as provided in subsections (C)(2), (3), (4)
and (5) of this section.





      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(2) of
this section, a violation of subsection (A)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, a violation
of subsection (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree or,
if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s
conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this
section, a violation of subsection (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted
by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three
or more violations of this section, a violation of subsection (A)(1) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was likely
to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony
which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.





      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(3) of
this section, a violation of subsection (A)(2) or (3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.  If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, a violation
of subsection (A)(2) or (3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more
violations of this section, a violation of subsection (A)(2) or (3) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was likely
to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony
which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.





      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(4) of
this section, a violation of subsection (B)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, a violation
of subsection (B)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, a violation of subsection
(B)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.





      (5)   A violation of subsection (B)(4) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree unless the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this section in which case
the violation is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. 





(ORC 2907.09)









137.07  PROCURING.




   (A)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the
following:





      (1)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or
brothel;





      (2)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take
or direct another at his or her request to any place for the purpose of
patronizing a prostitute.










   (B)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit such premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of procuring.  Except
as otherwise provided in this subsection (C), procuring is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the prostitute who is procured, patronized or
otherwise involved in a violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section is
under sixteen years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of
whether the offender who violates subsection (A)(2) of this section knows the
prostitute's age, or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire
in premises used in violation of subsection (B) of this section is under
sixteen years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the
offender who violates subsection (B) of this section knows the prostitute's
age, procuring is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.  If the prostitute who is procured, patronized or otherwise involved in
a violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section is sixteen or seventeen
years of age at the time of the violation or if a prostitute who engages in
sexual activity for hire in premises used in violation of subsection (B) of
this section is sixteen or seventeen years of age at the time of the
violation, procuring is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.  (ORC 2907.23)









137.08  SOLICITING.



   (A)   No person shall solicit another who is eighteen years of age
or older to engage with such other person in sexual activity for hire.



 



   (B)    Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.



 



   (C)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
any provision of this section or an attempt to commit a violation of any
provision of this section, and if the person, in committing or attempting to
commit the violation, was in, was on, or used a motor vehicle, the court, in
addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation,
shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of the person’s
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the
range specified in division (A)(6) of Ohio R.C. 4510.02.  In lieu of
imposing upon the offender the class six suspension, the court instead may
require the offender to perform community service for a number of hours
determined by the court.



 




   (D)   As used in this section, “sexual activity for hire” means
an implicit or explicit agreement to provide sexual activity in exchange for
anything of value paid to the person engaging in such sexual activity, to any
person trafficking that person, or to any person associated with either such
person.  (ORC 2907.24)










137.09  PROSTITUTION.




   (A)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of prostitution, a
misdemeanor of the third degree. 
(R.C. § 2907.25)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









137.10  DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.




   (A)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of the following:





      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide,
exhibit, rent or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;





      (2)   Directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish,
disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present to a juvenile, a group of
juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law
enforcement officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is
obscene or harmful to juveniles;





      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or
view any live performance that is harmful to juveniles.










   (B)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this
section, that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles
but not obscene:





      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian or spouse of the
juvenile involved.





      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in
question, was accompanied by the juvenile’s parent or guardian who, with
knowledge of its character, consented to the material or performance being
furnished or presented to the juvenile.





      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or the
defendant’s agent or employee a draft card, driver's license, birth
certificate, marriage license, or other official or apparently official
document purporting to show that the juvenile was eighteen years of age or
over or married, and the person to whom that document was exhibited did not
otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that the juvenile was under the
age of eighteen and unmarried.










   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this
section, involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to
juveniles, that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a
bona fide medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial or other
proper purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, librarian, clergyman, prosecutor, judge or other proper person.





      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (B)(3) hereof, mistake
of age is not a defense to a charge under this section.




 




   (D)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes,
disseminates, provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or
agrees to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or
present material or a performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles in violation of this section by means of an
electronic method of remotely transmitting information if the person knows or
has reason to believe that the person receiving the information is a juvenile
or the group of persons receiving the information are juveniles.





      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a
method of mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish,
disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to
sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the
material or performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a
law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles in violation of this section if either of the
following applies:





         (a)   The person has inadequate information to know or
have reason to believe that a particular recipient of the information or
offer is a juvenile.





         (b)   The method of mass distribution does not provide
the person the ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the
information.




 



   (E)   If any provision of this section, or the application of any
provision of this section to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this section
or related sections that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.  To this end, the provisions are severable.



 



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating
matter harmful to juveniles.  If the material or performance involved is
harmful to juveniles, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a
violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the
material or performance involved is obscene, a violation of this section is a
felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
(ORC 2907.31)



 



137.11  PANDERING OBSCENITY.



   (A)   No person, with knowledge of the character of the material or
performance involved, shall do any of the following:




      (1)   Create, reproduce, or publish any obscene material when
the offender knows that the material is to be used for commercial
exploitation or will be publicly disseminated or displayed, or when the
offender is reckless in that regard;





      (2)   Promote or advertise for sale, delivery, dissemination,
sell; deliver, publicly  disseminate, publicly display, exhibit, present,
rent, or provide; or offer or agree to sell, deliver, publicly disseminate,
publicly display, exhibit, present, rent, or provide any obscene material;





      (3)   Create, direct, or produce an obscene performance, when
the offender knows that it is to be used for commercial exploitation or will
be publicly presented, or when the offender is reckless in that regard;





      (4)   Advertise or promote an obscene performance for
presentation, or present or participate in presenting an obscene performance,
when the performance is presented publicly, or when admission is charged;





      (5)   Buy, procure, possess, or control any obscene material
with purpose to violate division (A) (2) or (4) of this section.




 



   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
that the material or performance involved was disseminated or presented for a
bona fide medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental,
judicial, or other proper purpose, by or to  a  physician, psychologist, 
sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona fide studies or
research, librarian, clergyman, prosecutor, judge, or other person having a
proper interest in the material or performance.



 



   (C)   This section shall not apply if the offender has previously
been convicted of a violation of this section or of § 137.10, or a violation
of R.C. §§ 2907.31 or 2907.32.



 



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of pandering
obscenity, a felony of the fifth degree. 
(R.C. § 2907.32) (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99



 



137.12  DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER  HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.



   (A)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain
any material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to
juveniles, shall do either of the following:




      (1)   Falsely represent that he is the parent, guardian, or
spouse of such juvenile;





      (2)   Furnish such juvenile with any identification or
document purporting to show that such juvenile is 18 years of age or over or
married.




 



   (B)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or
gaining admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do
either of the following:




      (1)   Falsely represent that he is 18 years of age or over or
married;





      (2)   Exhibit  any  identification  or  document
purporting to show that he is 18 years of age or over or married.




 



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain
matter harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  A juvenile
who violates division (B) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child,
with such disposition of the case as may be appropriate under R.C. Chapter
2151.



(R.C. § 2907.33)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74) Penalty, see § 130.99








137.13  PRESUMPTION OF KNOWLEDGE.



   (A)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or
manager, of a bookstore, newsstand, theater, or other commercial
establishment engaged in selling materials or exhibiting performances, who,
in the course of business does any of the acts prohibited by Section 137.10,
is presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or performance
involved, if the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager
has actual notice of the nature of such material or performance, whether or
not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager has
precise knowledge of its contents.









   (B)   Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be
given, actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be
given in writing by the chief legal officer of the jurisdiction in which the
person to whom the notice is directed does business.  Such notice,
regardless of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender,
identify the material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or
harmful to juveniles and bear the date of such notice.










   (C)   Section 137.10 does not apply to a motion picture operator or
projectionist acting within the scope of employment as an employee of the
owner or manager of a theater or other place for the showing of motion
pictures to the general public, and having no managerial responsibility or
financial interest in the operator’s or projectionist’s place of
employment, other than wages.










   (D)   (1)   Sections 137.10, 137.12(A) and 137.14, do not apply
to a person solely because the person provided access or connection to or
from an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that
person’s control, including having provided capabilities that are
incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic method
of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection.





      (2)   Subsection (D)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or
knowing distribution of material in violation of Section 137.10, 137.12 or
137.14, or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that
nature.





      (3)   Subsection (D)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely
transferring information that is engaged in the violation of Section 137.10,
137.12 or 137.14, and that contains content that person has selected and
introduced into the electronic method of remotely transferring information or
content over which that person exercises editorial control.









   (E)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of Section 137.10,
137.12 or 137.14  based on the actions of an employee or agent of the
employer unless the employee’s or agent’s conduct is within the scope of
employee’s or agent’s employment or agency, and the employer does either
of the following:




      (1)   With knowledge of the employee’s or agent’s conduct,
the employer authorizes or ratifies the conduct.





      (2)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee’s or
agent’s conduct.









   (F)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under Section 137.10
or 137.14 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet
or another electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the
person charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith,
reasonable, effective, and appropriate actions under the circumstances to
restrict or prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to
juveniles, including any method that is feasible under available technology.









   (G)   If any provision of this section, or the application of any
provision of this section to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this section
or related sections that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.  To this end, the provisions are severable.





(ORC 2907.35)









137.14  DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO  JUVENILES.




   (A)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a
commercial establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the
material involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is
harmful to juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the
invited general public.










   (B)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section if the
material in question is displayed by placing it behind “blinder racks” or
similar devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if
the material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the
material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that
is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Each day during
which the offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate
offense. 





(R.C. § 2907.311)  Penalty, see § 130.99









137.15  UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.



   (A)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in
a print or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or
other medium, shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage
technique or method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise
of sexual activity.



 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful
advertising of massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



 



   (C)   Nothing in this section prevents the legislative authority of
a municipal corporation or township from enacting any regulation of the
advertising of massage further than and in addition to the provisions of
subsections (A) and (B) of this section.  (ORC 2927.17)




























CHAPTER 138
PUBLIC ORDER









Section










138.01   Riot





138.02   Failure to disperse





138.03   Disorderly conduct





138.04   Disturbing a lawful meeting





138.05   Misconduct at emergency





138.06   Inducing panic





138.07   False alarms





138.08   Disturbing the peace




 



138.01  RIOT.




   (A)   No person shall participate with 4 or more others in a course
of disorderly conduct in violation of § 138.03.





      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;





      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee
into taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder,
impede, or obstruct a function of government;





      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede, or obstruct the orderly
process of administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to
interfere with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at such institution.










   (B)   No person shall participate with 4 or more others with purpose
to do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though such act might
otherwise be lawful.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor
of the first degree.





(R.C. § 2917.03)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74) Penalty, see § 130.99









138.02  FAILURE TO DISPERSE.



   (A)    Where five or more persons are participating in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of Section 138.03, and there are other
persons in the vicinity whose presence creates the likelihood of physical
harm to persons or property or of serious public inconvenience, annoyance or
alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public official may order the
participants and such other persons to  disperse.  No person shall
knowingly fail to obey such order.









   (B)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are
peaceably assembled for a lawful purpose.










   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to
disperse.





      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C)(3)
hereof, failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.





      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree if the failure to obey the order described in subsection (A) hereof,
creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind. 
(ORC 2917.04)









138.03  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.




   (A)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance, or
alarm to another, by doing any of the following:





      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or
property, or in violent or turbulent behavior;





      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse
utterance, gesture, or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly
abusive language to any person;





      (3)   Insulting, taunting, or challenging another, under
circumstances in which such conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;





      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a
public street, road, highway, or right-of-way, or to, from, within, or upon
public or private property so as to interfere with the rights of others,
and  by any  act that serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the
offender;





      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to
persons or that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by
any act that serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.










   (B)   No person, while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of
the following:





      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more
persons, engage in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience,
annoyance, or alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the
offender, if the offender were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have
that effect on others;





      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a
risk of physical harm to that or another, or to the property of another.










   (C)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is
operating a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle
while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse, is not a violation
of division (B) of this section.










   (D)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated,
it is probable cause to believe that person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of subsection (B) hereof.










   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly
conduct.





      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (E)(3),
disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.





      (3)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
if any of the following applies:





         (a)   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after
reasonable warning or request to desist.





         (b)   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a
school or in a school safety zone.





         (c)   The offense is committed in the presence of any
law enforcement officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency
medical services person, or other authorized person who is engaged in the
person’s duties at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot or
emergency of any kind.





         (d)   The offense is committed in the presence of any
emergency facility person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an
emergency facility.










   (F)   As used in this section:





      (1)   “Emergency medical services person” is the singular
of “emergency medical services personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.





      (2)   “Emergency facility person” is the singular of
“emergency facility personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.





      (3)   “Emergency facility” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2909.04.





      (4)   “Committed in the vicinity of a school” has the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01. 
(ORC 2917.11)









138.04  DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.




   (A)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful
meeting, procession, or gathering, shall do either of the following:





      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due
conduct of such meeting, procession, or gathering;





      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture, or display which outrages
the sensibilities of the group.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2917.12) (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









138.05  MISCONDUCT AT EMERGENCY.




   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:





      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person, or other authorized person, engaged in the person’s duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind;





      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility
person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility;





      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement
officer engaged in the law enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or
in connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.










   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or
deny information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of
the news media representative’s duties.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an
emergency.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, misconduct at
an emergency is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If a violation of this
section creates a risk of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at
an emergency is a misdemeanor of the first degree.










   (D)   As used in this section:





      (1)   “Emergency medical services person” is the singular
of “emergency medical services personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.





      (2)   “Emergency facility person” is the singular of
“emergency facility personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.





      (3)   “Emergency facility” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2909.04.





(ORC 2917.13)









138.06  INDUCING PANIC.




   (A)    No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or
otherwise cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the
following:





      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an
alleged or impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing
that such report or warning is false;





      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence;





      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the
likelihood that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or
alarm.










   (B)    Division (A) hereof does not apply to any person conducting
an authorized fire or emergency drill.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If inducing panic results in physical harm
to any person, economic harm of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, if the
public place involved in a violation of this section is a school or an
institution of higher education, or if the violation pertains to a purported,
threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, inducing panic is a
felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.










   (D)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other
section of the Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.










   (E)   As used in this section:





      (1)   “Economic harm” means any of the following:





         (a)   All direct, incidental, and consequential
pecuniary harm suffered by a victim as a result of criminal conduct. 
“Economic harm” as described in this division includes, but is not
limited to, all of the following:





            1.   All wages, salaries, or other compensation
lost as a result of the criminal conduct;





            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries, or other
compensation paid to employees for time those employees are prevented from
working as a result of the criminal conduct;





            3.   The overhead costs incurred for the time that
a business is shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;





            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible
property that was damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.





         (b)   All costs incurred by the Municipality as a result
of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that constituted the
violation of this section or Section 138.07, including, but not limited to,
all costs so incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue
personnel, or emergency medical services personnel of the state or the
political subdivision.





      (2)   “School” means any school operated by a board of
education or any school for which the state board of education prescribes
minimum standards under Ohio R.C. 3301.07, whether or not any instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is being
conducted at the time a violation of this section is committed.





      (3)   “Weapon of mass destruction” means any of the
following:





         (a)   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause
death or serious physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact
of toxic or poisonous chemicals, or their precursors;





         (b)   Any weapon involving a disease organism or
biological agent;





         (c)   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation
or radioactivity at a level dangerous to human life;





         (d)   Any of the following, except to the extent that
the item or device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of
“destructive device” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(4) and regulations
issued under that section:





            1.   Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas
bomb, grenade, rocket having a propellant charge of more than four ounces,
missile having an explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter
ounce, mine, or similar device;





            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or
intended for use in converting any item or device into any item or device
described in division (E)(3)(d)1. of this section and from which an item or
device described in that division may be readily assembled.





      (4)   “Biological agent” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2917.33.





      (5)   “Emergency medical services personnel” has the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2133.21. 





      (6)   “Institution of higher education” means any of the
following:





         (a)   A state university or college as defined in Ohio
R.C. 3345.12(A)(1), community college, state community college, university
branch, or technical college;





         (b)   A private, nonprofit college, university or other
post-secondary institution located in this State that possesses a certificate
of authorization issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to Ohio R.C.
Chapter 1713.





         (c)   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of
registration issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 3332. 
(ORC 2917.31)









138.07  FALSE ALARMS.




   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:





      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged
or impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the
report or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm;





      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency
to be transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for
dealing with emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or
property;





      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense
or other incident within its concern, knowing that such offense did not occur.










   (B)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an
authorized fire or emergency drill.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false
alarms, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If a violation of this section
results in economic harm of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, or if a
violation of this section pertains to a purported, threatened, or actual use
of a weapon of mass destruction, making false alarms is a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.










   (D)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other
section of the Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.









   (E)   As used in this section, “economic harm” and “weapon of
mass destruction” have the same meanings as in Section 138.06. 
(ORC 2917.32)








138.08  DISTURBING THE PEACE.




   (A)   No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued any unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise, which
either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort and repose,
health, peace, or safety of others within the municipality.










   (B)   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud,
disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of the provisions of this
section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive.





      (1)   Horns; signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, trolley coach, or other
vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger
warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device
except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle, or
other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling
device when traffic is for any reason held up.





      (2)   Radios; phonographs. The using, operating, or permitting
to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the
neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary
for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room,
vehicle, or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are
voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument,
phonograph, machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 25 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is
located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.





      (3)   Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using,
operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier,
or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is
cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or
attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure.





      (4)   Yelling; shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any
dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the
vicinity.





      (5)   Animals; birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which
by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or
repose of persons in the vicinity.





      (6)   Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam
whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give
notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger,
or upon request of proper city authorities.





      (7)   Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust
of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, or
motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.





      (8)   Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile,
motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to
create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.





      (9)   Loading; unloading; opening boxes. The creation of a
loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle
or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers.





      (10)   Construction or repairing of buildings and streets. The
erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration, or repair of any
building or street other than between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health
and safety, and then only with a permit from the Building Inspector or
Service Director, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed
three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be
renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If
the Building Inspector or Service Director should determine that the public
health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition,
alteration, or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and
highways within the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., and if he shall further
determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest,
he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for
the work is awarded or during the progress of the work.





      (11)   Schools; courts; churches; hospitals. The creation of
any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of
learning, church, or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any
hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such
institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital,
provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the
same is a school, hospital, or court street.





      (12)   Hawkers; peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers,
hawkers, and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.





      (13)   Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any
performance, show, or sale.





      (14)   Metal rails, pillars, and columns, transportation
thereof. The transportation of rails, pillars, or columns of iron, steel, or
other material, over and along streets and other public places upon carts,
drays, cars, trucks, or in any other manner or loaded as to cause loud noises
or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places.





      (15)   Pile drivers; hammers. The operation between the hours
of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic
hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or other appliance, the use of
which is attended by loud and unusual noise.





      (16)   Blowers. The operating of any noise-creating blower or
power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes
noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise
from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler
device sufficient to deaden such noise.










   (C)   Sound amplification systems in motor vehicles:





      (1)   No person shall operate or occupy a motor vehicle within
the City of West Carrollton if the sound from any sound amplifying equipment
located inside of, outside of but attached to, or held by a person inside the
motor vehicle is discernible at a distance of 25 feet or more from the
vehicle. 
(Ord.  3215.  Passed 7-23-02.)





      (2)   This section does not apply to any of the following
circumstances:





         (a)   The sound amplifying equipment if the motor
vehicle is being operated to request medical or vehicular assistance or to
warn others of a hazardous road, vehicle operating, or traffic safety
condition.





         (b)   The motor vehicle is an emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle and is on an emergency run.





         (c)   The motor vehicle is owned and operated by the
state, a political subdivision, or a public utility.





         (d)   The motor vehicle is participating in a parade for
which the sponsors of the parade have obtained the proper permits.





         (e)   The sound amplifying equipment of the motor
vehicle is being operated as a requirement of federal or state law.





         (f)   Vendors of ice cream and related products in
accordance with § 111.06 between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.










   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of
disturbing the peace, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.





(Ord. 2560, passed 10-14-86; amend. Ord. 3060, passed 8-26-97)  Penalty, see
§ 130.99
























CHAPTER 139
WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES









Section










139.01   Definitions





139.02   Carrying concealed weapons





139.03   Using weapons while intoxicated





139.04   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle





139.05   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance





139.06   Unlawful transactions in weapons





139.07   Underage purchase of firearm or handgun





139.08   Possession, sale, and use of fireworks





139.09   Permit to use fireworks





139.10   Gunpowder storage limited





139.11   Discharging firearms





139.12   Use of crossbows, bow and arrows prohibited





139.13   Defacing identification marks of a firearm; possessing a defaced
firearm




 



139.01  DEFINITIONS.




   As used in this chapter:





   (A)   "Deadly weapon" means any instrument, device or thing capable
of inflicting death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon,
or possessed, carried or used as a weapon.










   (B)   (1)   "Firearm" means any deadly weapon capable of
expelling or propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive
or combustible propellant.  "Firearm" includes an unloaded firearm, and any
firearm that is inoperable but that can readily be rendered operable.





      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of
expelling or propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive
or combustible propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial
evidence, including, but not limited to, the representations and actions of
the individual exercising control over the firearm.










   (C)   "Handgun" means any of the following:





      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be
held and fired by the use of a single hand;





      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type
described in subsection (C)(1) of this section can be assembled.










   (D)   "Semi-automatic firearm" means any firearm designed or
specially adapted to fire a single cartridge and automatically chamber a
succeeding cartridge ready to fire, with a single function of the trigger.










   (E)   "Automatic firearm" means any firearm designed or specially
adapted to fire a succession of cartridges with a single function of the
trigger.










   (F)   "Sawed-off firearm" means a shotgun with a barrel less than
eighteen inches long, or a rifle with a barrel less than sixteen inches long,
or a shotgun or rifle less than twenty-six inches long overall.










   (G)   "Zip-gun" means any of the following:





      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture;





      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter's
pistol, that is not designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for
use as a firearm;





      (3)   Any industrial tool, signalling device or safety device,
that is not designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as
such, when possessed, carried or used as a firearm.










   (H)   "Explosive device" means any device designed or specially
adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of an
explosion, and consisting of an explosive substance or agency and a means to
detonate it.  "Explosive device" includes without limitation any bomb, any
explosive demolition device, any blasting cap or detonator containing an
explosive charge, and any pressure vessel that has been knowingly tampered
with or arranged so as to explode.










   (I)   "Incendiary device" means any firebomb, and any device
designed or specially adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property
by means of fire, and consisting of an incendiary substance or agency and a
means to ignite it.










   (J)   "Ballistic knife" means a knife with a detachable blade that
is propelled by a spring-operated mechanism.










   (K)   "Dangerous ordnance" means any of the following, except as
provided in subsection (l) hereof:





      (1)   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun or ballistic
knife;





      (2)   Any explosive device or incendiary device;





      (3)   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN,
cyclonite, TNT, picric acid and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal,
tetrytol, pentolite, pecretol, cyclotol and other high explosive
compositions; plastic explosives; dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin
dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate, liquid-oxygen blasting explosives,
blasting powder and other blasting agents; and any other explosive substance
having sufficient brisance or power to be particularly suitable for use as a
military explosive, or for use in mining, quarrying, excavating or
demolitions;





      (4)   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece,
grenade, mine, bomb, torpedo or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for
military purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon;





      (5)   Any firearm muffler or suppressor;





      (6)   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner
for use in converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.










   (L)   "Dangerous ordnance" does not include any of the following:





      (1)   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the
ammunition for that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a
percussion cap or other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and
safe for use only with black powder;





      (2)   Any pistol, rifle or shotgun, designed or suitable for
sporting purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and
the ammunition for that weapon unless the firearm is an automatic or
sawed-off firearm;





      (3)   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of
its actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no
mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other system for absorbing recoil and
returning the tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is
designed and safe for use only with black powder;





      (4)   Black powder, priming quills and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in subsection
(l)(3) hereof during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and
target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms
or small-arms ammunition;





      (5)   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and
cannot readily be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a
trophy, souvenir, curio or museum piece.





      (6)   Any device that is expressly excepted from the
definition of a destructive device pursuant to the "Gun Control Act of 1968,"
82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C.921(a)(4), as amended, and regulations issued under
that Act.










   (M)   "Explosive" means any chemical compound, mixture, or device,
the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. 
"Explosive" includes all materials that have been classified as division 1.1,
division 1.2, division 1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States
Department of Transportation in its regulations and includes, but is not
limited to, dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives,
blasting caps, electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs,
cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and
igniters.  "Explosive" does not include "fireworks", as defined in Ohio R.C.
3743.01, or any substance or material otherwise meeting the definition of
explosive set forth in this section that is manufactured, sold, possessed,
transported, stored or used in any activity described in Ohio R.C. 3743.80,
provided the activity is conducted in accordance with all applicable laws,
rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, the provisions of Ohio
R.C. 3743.80, and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C.
3737.82. 










   (N)   (1)   "Concealed handgun license" or "license to carry a
concealed handgun" means, subject to subsection (N)(2) of this section, a
license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued
under Ohio R.C. 2923.125 or 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered
into a reciprocity agreement under Ohio R.C. 109.69.





      (2)   A reference in any provision of the Ohio Revised Code to
a concealed handgun license issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.125 or a license to
carry a concealed handgun issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.125 means only a
license of the type that is specified in that section.  A reference in any
provision of the Ohio Revised Code to a concealed handgun license issued
under Ohio R.C. 2923.1213, a licence to carry a concealed handgun issued
under Ohio R.C. 2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed handgun on a
temporary emergency basis means only a license of the type that is specified
in Ohio R.C. 2923.1213.  A reference in any provision of the Ohio Revised
Code to a concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license to
carry a concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license issued
by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a
reciprocity agreement under Ohio R.C. 109.69.










   (O)   "Valid concealed handgun license" or "valid license to carry a
concealed handgun" means a concealed handgun license that is currently valid,
that is not under a suspension under division (A)(1) of Ohio R.C. 2923.128,
under Ohio R.C. 2923.1213, or under a suspension provision of the state other
than this State in which the license was issued, and that has not been
revoked under division (B)(1) of Ohio R.C. 2923.128, under Ohio R.C.
2923.1213 or under a revocation provision of the state other than this State
in which the license was issued.









   (P)   “Misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding
one year” does not include any of the following:




      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust
violations, unfair trade practices, restraints of trade or other similar
offenses relating to the regulation of business practices;





      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of
imprisonment of two years or less.




 



   (Q)   “Alien registration number” means the number issued by the
United States Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on
the alien’s permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as
the “USCIS number” or the “alien number”.  (ORC 2923.11)



 




   (R)   “Shooting range” means a facility operated for the purpose
of shooting with firearms or archery equipment, whether publicly or privately
owned and whether or not operated for profit.  “Shooting range” does not
include a facility owned or operated by a municipal corporation, county,
township police district, or joint police district.




(ORC 1533.83; Ord. 3575.  Passed 1-26-16.)



 



139.02  CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the
person's person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:



      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;



      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;



      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.



 



   (B)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license,
shall do any of the following:




      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose,
and is carrying a concealed handgun, fail to promptly inform any law
enforcement officer who approaches the person after the person has been
stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun license and that
the person then is carrying a concealed handgun;





      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose
and is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person's
hands in plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins
approaching the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions
given by a law enforcement officer;





      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose
and is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply
with any lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person
is stopped, including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to
keep the person's hands in plain sight.




 



   (C)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:




         (a)   An officer, agent or employee or this or any other
state or the United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is
authorized to carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance, or is authorized
to carry handguns and is acting within the scope of the officer's, agent's or
employee's duties;





         (b)   Any person who is employed in this State, who is
authorized to carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized
to carry handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the
requirements of Ohio R.C. 109.801 unless the appointing authority of the
person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in subsection
(C)(1)(b) hereof does not apply to the person.





         (c)   A person's transportation or storage of a firearm,
other than a firearm described in divisions (G) to (M) of Ohio R.C. 2923.11
in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the
actor's person;





         (d)   A person's storage or possession of a firearm,
other than a firearm described in divisions (G) to (M) of Ohio R.C. 2923.11
in the actor's own home for any lawful purpose.





      (2)   Subsection (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any
person who, at the time of the alleged carrying or possession of a handgun,
either is carrying a valid concealed handgun license or is an active duty
member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a valid
military identification card and documentation of successful completion of
firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in division (G)(1) of Ohio R.C. 2923.125, unless the person knowingly is in a
place described in division (B) of Ohio R.C. 2923.126.




 



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection
(A)(1) of this section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a
handgun and other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise
prohibited by law from having the weapon, and that any of the following
applies:




      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the
actor for defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to
or from the actor's lawful business or occupation, which business or
occupation was of a character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at
a time or place as to render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal
attack, such as would justify a prudent person in going armed.





      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the
actor for defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful
activity and had reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a
member of the actor's family, or the actor's home, such as would justify a
prudent person in going armed.





      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the
actor for any lawful purpose and while in the actor's own home.




 



   (E)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section
shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for
the dismissal of the charge.



 




   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying
concealed weapons.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection or
subsections (F)(2), (5) and (6)  of this section, carrying concealed weapons
in violation of subsection (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection or subsections
(F)(2), (5) and (6) of this section, if the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of this section or of any offense of violence, if
the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for which the
offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is dangerous
ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation of subsection (A) of this
section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law. 
Except as otherwise provided in subsections (F)(2), (5) and (6) of this
section, if the weapon involved is a firearm and the violation of this
section is committed at premises for which a D permit has been issued under
Chapter 4303, of the Revised Code or if the offense is committed aboard an
aircraft, or with purpose to carry a concealed weapon aboard an aircraft,
regardless of the weapon involved, carrying concealed weapons in  violation
of subsection (a) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate State law.





      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (F)(5) of this section,
if a person being arrested for a violation of subsection (A)(2) of this
section promptly produces a valid concealed handgun license, and if at the
time of the violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in
division (B) of Ohio R.C. 2923.126, the officer shall not arrest the person
for a violation of that subsection.  If the person is not able to promptly
produce any concealed handgun license and if the person is not in a place
described in  that section, the officer may arrest the person for a
violation of that subsection, and the offender shall be punished as follows:




         (a)   The offender shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor if both of the following apply:




            1.   Within ten days after the arrest, the
offender presents a concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the
time of the arrest to the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting
officer.





            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in division (B) of Ohio R.C. 2923.126.





         (b)   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00) if all of the following apply:





            1.   The offender previously had been issued a
concealed handgun license and that license expired within the two years
immediately preceding the arrest.





            2.   Within forty-five days after the arrest, the
offender presents any type of concealed handgun license to the law
enforcement agency that employed the arresting officer, and the offender
waives in writing the offender's right to a speedy trial on the charge of the
violation that is provided in Ohio R.C. 2945.71.





            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense,
the offender was not knowingly in a place described in division (B) of Ohio
R.C. 2923.126.





         (c)   If  subsections(F)(2)(a) and (b) and (F)(5) of
this section do not apply, the offender shall be punished under subsection
(F)(1) or (6) of this section.





      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
carrying concealed weapons in violation of subsection (B)(1) hereof is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty or
sanction imposed for a violation of subsection (B)(1) hereof, the offender's
concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2923.128(A)(2).





         If, at the time of the stop of the offender for a law
enforcement purpose that was the basis of the violation, any law enforcement
officer involved with the stop had actual knowledge that the offender has
been issued a concealed handgun license, carrying concealed weapons in
violation of division (B)(1) of this section is a minor misdemeanor, and the
offender's concealed handgun license shall not be suspended pursuant to
division (A)(2) of Ohio R.C. 2923.128.





      (4)   Except as otherwise provided herein, carrying concealed
weapons in violation of subsection (B)(2) or (B)(3) hereof is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.  If the offender has previously been convicted or
pleaded guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.12(B)(2) or (B)(4) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, carrying concealed weapons is a
felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  In addition to
any other penalty or sanction imposed for a violation of subsection (B)(2) or
(B)(3) hereof, the offender's concealed handgun license shall be suspended
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.128(A)(2).





      (5)   If a person being arrested for a violation of subsection
(A)(2) of this section is an active duty member of the armed forces of the
United States and is carrying a valid military identification card and
documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or
exceeds the training requirements described in division (G)(1) of Ohio R.C.
2923.125, and if at the time of the violation the person was not knowingly in
a place described in division (B) of Ohio R.C. 2923.126, the officer shall
not arrest the person for a violation of that division.  If the person is
not able to promptly produce a valid military identification card and
documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or
exceeds the training requirements described in division (G)(1) of Ohio R.C.
2923.125 and if the person is not in a place described in division (B) of
Ohio R.C. 2923.126, the officer shall issue a citation and the offender shall
be assessed a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).  The citation shall be automatically dismissed and the civil
penalty shall not be assessed if both of the following apply:





         (a)   Within ten days after the issuance of the
citation, the offender presents a valid military identification card and
documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or
exceeds the training requirements described in division (G)(1) of Ohio R.C.
2923.125, which were both valid at the time of the issuance of the citation
to the law enforcement agency that employs the citing officer.





         (b)   At the time of the citation, the offender was not
knowingly in a place described in division (B) of Ohio R.C. 2923.126.





      (6)   If a person being arrested for a violation of subsection
(A)(2) of this section is knowingly in a place described in division (B)(5)
of Ohio R.C. 2923.126, and is not authorized to carry a handgun or have a
handgun concealed on the person's person or concealed ready at hand under
that division, the penalty shall be as follows:





         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
if the person produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days
after the arrest and has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a
violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section, the person is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor;





         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
if the person has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree;





         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
if the person has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two
violations of subsection (A)(2) of this section, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree;





         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
if the person has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or
more violations of subsection (A)(2) of this section, or convicted of or
pleaded guilty to any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a
firearm that is either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready
at hand, or if the weapon involved is a dangerous ordnance, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.




 



   (G)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the
person regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or
for any other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to
the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of
this section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not
otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is
not contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop.  If a court orders a law enforcement officer to
return a firearm to a person pursuant to the  requirement set forth in this
subsection, division (B) of Ohio R.C. 2923.163 applies.  (ORC 2923.12)








139.03  USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.




   (A)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of
abuse, shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.15)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









139.04  IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a
motor vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under
applicable law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded,
and the firearm is carried in one of the following ways:



      (1)   In a closed package, box or case;



      (2)   In a compartment which can be reached only by leaving
the vehicle;



      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for
the purpose;




      (4)   If the firearm is at least twenty-four inches in overall
length as measured from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the
muzzle and if the barrel is at least eighteen inches in length, either in
plain sight with the action open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm
is of a type on which the action will not stay open or which cannot easily be
stripped, in plain sight.




 



   (B)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license, or
who is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in division (G)(1) of Ohio R.C. 2923.125, who is the
driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle that is stopped as a result of a
traffic stop or a stop for another law enforcement purpose or is the driver
or an occupant of a commercial motor vehicle that is stopped by an employee
of the motor carrier enforcement unit for the purposes defined in Ohio R.C.
5503.34, and who is transporting or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle
or commercial motor vehicle in any manner, shall do any of the following:




      (1)   Fail to promptly inform any law enforcement officer who
approaches the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a
concealed handgun license or is authorized to carry a concealed handgun as an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and that the
person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle;





      (2)   Fail to promptly inform the employee of the unit who
approaches the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a
concealed handgun license or is authorized to carry a concealed handgun as an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and that the
person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor vehicle.





      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while
stopped, or knowingly fail to keep the person's hands in plain sight at any
time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while
stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is
pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law enforcement
officer.





      (4)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful
order of any law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is
stopped, including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to
keep the person's hands in plain sight.




 



   (C)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:




         (a)   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other
state or the United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting
within the scope of the officer's, agent's or employee's duties;





         (b)   Any person who is employed in this State, who is
authorized to carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles,
and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of Ohio R.C.
109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in subsection (C)(1)(b) does not apply
to the person.





      (2)   Subsection (A) of this section does not apply to a
person who transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the
time of that transportation or possession, both of the following apply:





         (a)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun
is either carrying a valid concealed handgun license or is an active duty
member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a valid
military identification card and documentation of successful completion of
firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in division (G)(1) of Ohio R.C. 2923.125.





         (b)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun
is not knowingly in a place described in division (B) of Ohio R.C. 2923.126.




      (3)   Subsection (A) of this section does not apply to a
person if all of the following apply:




         (a)   The person possesses a valid electric-powered
all-purpose vehicle permit issued under Ohio R.C. 1533.103 by the Chief of
the Division of Wildlife.





         (b)   The person is on or in an electric-powered
all-purpose vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during
the open hunting season for a wild quadruped or game bird.





         (c)   The person is on or in an electric-powered
all-purpose vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 1531.01 or a motor vehicle that
is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of
Wildlife, provided that the road is identified by an electric-powered
all-purpose vehicle sign.




 




   (D)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in Section
139.02(D)(1) and (2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under subsection
(a) that involves a firearm other than a handgun.





      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under
subsection (A) of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful
purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor's own property, provided
that the affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately
prior to arriving at the actor's own property, did not transport or possess
the firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by subsection (A) while
the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway, or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.




 




   (E)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of
subsection (A) shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a
condition for the dismissal of the charge.





      (2)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (b) of this
section as it existed prior to  September 30, 2011, and if the conduct that
was the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of subsection
(B) of this section on or after September 30, 2011, the person may file an
application under Ohio R.C. 2953.37 requesting the expungement of the record
of conviction.





         If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (A) of this
section as the subsection existed prior to September 30, 2011, and if the
conduct that was the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of
subsection (a) of this section on or after September 30, 2011, due to the
application of subsection (B)(4) of this section as it exists on and after
September 30, 2011, the person may file an application under Ohio R.C.
2953.37 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.




 



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle.  Violation of subsection (a) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection, a violation of subsection (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty or
sanction imposed for the violation, the offender's concealed handgun license
shall be suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.128(A)(2).  If at the time of
the stop of the offender for a traffic stop, for another law enforcement
purpose, or for a purpose defined in Ohio R.C. 5503.34 that was the basis of
the violation any law enforcement officer involved with the stop or the
employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit who made the stop had actual
knowledge of the offender's status as a licensee, a violation of subsection
(B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section is a minor misdemeanor, and the offender's
concealed handgun license shall not be suspended pursuant to division (A)(2)
of Ohio R.C. 2923.128.  A violation of subsection (B)(3) or (4) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (B)(3)
or (4) of this section, a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate
State law.  In addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a
misdemeanor violation of subsection (B)(3) or (4) of this section, the
offender's concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2923.128(A)(2).



 



   (G)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a
traffic stop or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle
surrenders a firearm to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a
request or demand of the officer, and if the officer does not charge the
person with a violation of this section or arrest the person for any offense,
the person is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the firearm,
and the firearm is not contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to
the person at the termination of the stop.  If a court orders a law
enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant to the
requirement set forth in this subsection, division (B) of Ohio R.C. 2923.163
applies.



 



   (H)   As used in this section:



      (1)   "Motor vehicle", "street" and "highway" have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.



      (2)   A.    "Unloaded" means:




            1.   With respect to a firearm other than a
firearm described in subsection (H)(2)(b) of this section, that no ammunition
is in the firearm in question, no magazine or speed loader containing
ammunition is inserted into the firearm in question and one of the following
applies:





               a.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or
speed loader that is in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the
firearm in question.





               b.   Any magazine or speed loader that
contains ammunition and that may be used with the firearm in question is
stored in a compartment within the vehicle in question that cannot be
accessed without leaving the vehicle or is stored in a container that
provides complete and separate enclosure.





            2.   For the purposes of subsection (H)(2)(a)1.b.
of this section, a "container that provides complete and separate enclosure"
includes, but is not limited to, any of the following:





               a.   A package, box or case with multiple
compartments, as long as the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm
in question either are in separate compartments within the package, box, or
case, or, if they are in the same compartment, the magazine or speed loader
is contained within a separate enclosure in that compartment that does not
contain the firearm and that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper,
hook and loop closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to
access the contents or the firearm is contained within a separate enclosure
of that nature in that compartment that does not contain the magazine or
speed loader;





               b.   A pocket or other enclosure on the
person of the person in question that closes using a snap, button, buckle,
zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be
opened to access the contents.





            3.   For the purposes of subsection (H)(2)(a) of
this section, ammunition held in stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not
considered ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.





         B.   "Unloaded" means, with respect to a firearm
employing a percussion cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system,
when the weapon is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the
pan.




      (3)   "Commercial motor vehicle" has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 4506.25(A).




      (4)   "Motor carrier enforcement unit" means the motor carrier
enforcement unit in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State
Highway Patrol, that is created by Ohio R.C. 5503.34. 




 



   (I)   Subsection (H)(2) of this section does not affect the
authority of a person who is carrying a valid concealed handgun license to
have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in
a vehicle, without being transported as described in that subsection, as long
as no ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other
than as permitted under any other provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C.
Chapter 2923.  A person who is carrying a valid concealed handgun license
may have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition
anywhere in a vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition
is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted
under any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2923.  (ORC 2923.16)








139.05  FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS  ORDNANCE.




   (A)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying, or using any
dangerous ordnance shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:





      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or
against its acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person;





      (2)   To insure the safety of persons and property.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.19)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









139.06  UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.




   (A)   No person shall:





      (1)   Manufacture, possess for sale, sell or furnish to any
person other than a law enforcement agency for authorized use in police work,
any brass knuckles, cestus, billy, blackjack, sandbag, switchblade knife,
gravity knife, or similar weapon;





      (2)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another,
negligently fail to require the transferee to exhibit such identification,
license, or permit showing him to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance
pursuant to § 139.05 of this title or § 2923.17 of the Revised Code, or
negligently fail to take a complete record of the transaction and forthwith
forward a copy of that record to the sheriff of the county, safety director,
or police chief of the municipality where the transaction takes place;





      (3)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities
forthwith the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordinance in the
person's possession and under the person's control.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful 
transactions  in  weapons. A  violation  of division (A) (1) or (2) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.  A violation of division
(A) (3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2923.20)  (Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









139.07  UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF FIREARM OR HANDGUN.




   (A)   No person under eighteen years of age shall purchase or
attempt to purchase a firearm.









   (B)   No person under twenty-one years of age shall purchase or
attempt to purchase a handgun, provided that this subsection does not apply
to the purchase or attempted purchase of a handgun by a person eighteen years
of age or older and under twenty-one years of age if either of the following
apply:




      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer who is properly
appointed or employed as a law enforcement officer and has received firearms
training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent
firearms training.





      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed
services of the United States or the Ohio national guard, or was honorably
discharged from military service in the active or reserve armed services of
the United States or the Ohio national guard, and the person has received
firearms training from the armed services or the national guard or equivalent
firearms training.










   (C)   Whoever violates subsection (A) hereof is guilty of underage
purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony of the fourth
degree if it could be committed by an adult.  Whoever violates subsection
(B) hereof is guilty of underage purchase of a handgun, a misdemeanor of the
second degree. 
(ORC 2923.211)









139.08  POSSESSION, SALE, AND USE OF  FIREWORKS.




   (A)   No person shall possess fireworks in this municipality or
shall possess for sale or sell fireworks in this municipality, except a 
licensed  manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.02
through 3743.08, a licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by R.C.
§§ 3743.15 through 3743.21, a shipping permit holder as authorized by R.C.
§ 3743.40, an out-of-state resident as authorized by R.C. § 3743.44, a
resident of this state as authorized by R.C. § 3743.45, or a licensed
exhibitor of fireworks as authorized by § 139.09 and R.C. §§ 3743.50
through 3743.55, and except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80.










   (B)   Except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80, and except  for
licensed exhibitors of  fireworks authorized to conduct a fireworks
exhibition pursuant to § 139.09 and R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55, no
person shall discharge, ignite, or explode any fireworks in this state.










   (C)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall, what is
technically known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium
chlorate and sulphur.










   (D)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under
18 years of age.










   (E)   No person shall advertise 1.4G fireworks for sale.  A sign
located on a seller's premises identifying the seller as a seller of
fireworks is not the advertising of fireworks for sale.










   (F)   No person, other than a licensed manufacturer, licensed
wholesaler, licensed exhibitor, or shipping permit holder, shall possess 1.3G
fireworks in this city.










   (G)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.





(R.C. § 3743.65)  (Ord. 2950, passed 7-12-94)  Penalty, see § 130.99









139.09  PERMIT TO USE FIREWORKS.




   (A)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under R.C. §§ 3743.50
through 3743.55 who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition shall
apply for approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief and Police
Chief.










   (B)   The approval required by division (A) of this section shall be
evidenced by the Fire Chief and the Police Chief signing a permit for the
exhibition.  Any exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public
fireworks exhibition may obtain a copy of the form from the state Fire
Marshal or, if it is available, from the Fire Chief, or Police Chief.










   (C)   Before signing a permit and issuing it to a licensed exhibitor
of fireworks, the Fire Chief and the Police Chief shall inspect the premises
on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that, in fact,
the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks.  Each
applicant shall show the applicant's license as an exhibitor of fireworks to
the Fire Chief and the Police Chief.










   (D)   The Fire Chief and the Police Chief shall give approval to
conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the
inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow
the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the state Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and that the applicant is in fact, a licensed
exhibitor of fireworks.  The Fire Chief and the Police Chief may inspect the
premises immediately prior to the exhibition to determine if the exhibitor
has complied with the rules, and may revoke a permit for noncompliance with
the rules.










   (E)   If the council has prescribed a fee for the issuance of a
permit for a public fireworks exhibition, the Fire Chief and Police Chief
shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor pays the requisite fee.










   (F)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount
of at least $1,000,000 with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief and the
Police Chief, conditioned for the payment of all final judgments that may be
rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury, death, or loss to
persons or property emanating from the fireworks exhibition, or proof of
insurance coverage of at least $1,000,000 for liability arising from injury,
death, or loss to persons or property emanating from the fireworks
exhibition. The council may require the exhibitor to provide an indemnity
bond or proof of insurance coverage in amounts greater than those required by
this division.  The Fire Chief and Police Chief shall not issue a permit
until the exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the insurance coverage
required by this division or by the council.










   (G)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire
Chief and the Police Chief shall contain a distinct number, designate the
municipal corporation, and identify the certified fire safety inspector, Fire
Chief, or fire prevention officer who will be present before, during, and
after the exhibition, where appropriate.  A copy of each permit issued shall
be forwarded by the Fire Chief and the Police Chief issuing it to the state
Fire Marshal.  A permit is not transferable or assignable.










   (H)   The Fire Chief and Police Chief shall keep a record of issued
permits for fireworks exhibitions.  In this list, the Fire Chief or Police
Chief shall list the name of the exhibitor, the exhibitor's license number,
the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and time of
the exhibition, and the number and political subdivision designation of the
permit issued to the exhibitor for the exhibition.










   (I)   The City Council shall require that a certified fire safety
inspector, Fire Chief or fire prevention officer be present before, during
and after the exhibition, and shall require the certified fire safety
inspector, Fire Chief or fire prevention officer to inspect the premises
where the exhibition is to take place and determine whether the exhibition is
in compliance with this chapter.





(R.C. § 3743.54)  Penalty, see § 130.99









139.10  GUNPOWDER STORAGE LIMITED.




   (A)   No person shall store or keep a quantity of gunpowder in
excess of 50 pounds anywhere within the city.










   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree. 
(Ord. 1839, passed 4-23-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99









139.11  DISCHARGING FIREARMS.




   (A)   No person shall discharge any B-B gun, air gun, rifle,
shotgun, revolver, pistol, zip gun, hand gun, or other firearm within the
corporate limits of the municipality.










   (B)   This section shall not apply to law enforcement officers
authorized to carry firearms who may discharge such firearms while in the
line of duty.










   (C)   This section shall not apply to those persons granted
permission by the chief of police to abate a nuisance under § 90.11.





(Ord. 2110.  Passed 6-10-80; Ord. 2276.  Passed 7-28-81.)










   (D)   This section shall not apply to a “shooting range” as
defined by Section 139.01(F).










   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.





(Ord. 3575.  Passed 1-26-16.)





   Penalty, see §130.99









139.12  USE OF CROSS BOWS, BOW AND ARROWS PROHIBITED.




   (A)   No person shall discharge any bow and arrow, not designed or
intended as a child's toy, or a crossbow within the corporate limits of the
municipality.  A child's toy shall be any bow that takes less than eight
pounds of pull force for normal operation of the bow, and the arrows shall
have rubber or other soft tips for safety.










   (B)   This section shall not apply to the use of such items in any
agricultural district, bona fide ranges or sportsman clubs in the city.










   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.





(Ord. 2957, passed 10-25-94)  Penalty, see § 130.99









139.13  DEFACING IDENTIFICATION MARKS OF A FIREARM; POSSESSING A DEFACED
FIREARM.




   (A)   No person shall do either of the following:





      (1)   Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the
manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial number, or other mark or
identification on a firearm.





      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to
believe that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial
number, or other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed,
altered, removed, or obliterated.










   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (A)(1) of this section is
guilty of defacing identification marks of a firearm.  Except as otherwise
provided in this subsection, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (A)(1) of this
section, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.





      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of possessing a defaced firearm.  Except as otherwise provided in
this subsection, possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of subsection (A)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced
firearm is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate State law.





(ORC 2923.201)
























CHAPTER 140
(RESERVED)























CHAPTER 141
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA REGULATIONS









Section










141.01   Definitions





141.02   License required





141.03   Required records





141.04   Sale or display to minors regulated





141.05   Exceptions





141.99   Penalty




 



Cross-reference:



Drug abuse, see § 136.12



Abusing harmful intoxicants, see § 136.13



 



141.01  DEFINITIONS.




   (A)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.  Has the same meaning as provided in
R.C. § 3719.01 and any amendments thereto.










   (B)   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.  Any device, instrument, kit, equipment,
material, or product which is either designed by the manufacturer or marketed
by a retailer so that by virtue of its objective design features or by virtue
of the manner in which it is displayed for sale, that its principal use
appears to be for planting, propagating, cultivating, producing, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, cutting, smoking,
consuming, inhaling, injecting, ingesting, testing, preparing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, or other use with a
controlled substance.  In determining whether an object or collection of
objects is drug paraphernalia as described above, the following factors may
be considered, in addition to other logically relevant factors.





      (1)   Statements by an owner or employee of the retailer
concerning the use of an object.





      (2)   Opinions of persons who qualify as experts by knowledge,
skill, experience, training, or education as to the principal use of the
object by virtue of its design characteristics or by virtue of the manner in
which it is displayed.





      (3)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale,
including but not limited to, the following.





         (a)   Within the same room, the display of words,
publications, symbols, posters, or other items visible to customers which
either promote, condone, or represent the use of controlled substances other
than under legal or prescribed circumstances.





         (b)   Written instructions provided with or displayed
near the object concerning its use or the use of similar objects.





         (c)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object
which explain or depict the use of the object or similar objects.





      (4)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the
object or similar objects.





      (5)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community.





      (6)   Provided they meet the foregoing criteria, the following
items shall be presumed to be drug paraphernalia.





         (a)   Kits principally designed or marketed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance
can be derived.





         (b)   Kits principally designed or marketed for use in
the manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or
preparing controlled substances.





         (c)   Isomerization devices principally designed or
marketed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance.





         (d)   Testing equipment principally designed or marketed
for  use  in  identifying,  or  in analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances.





         (e)   Scales and balances principally designed or
marketed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances.





         (f)   Diluents and adulterants such as quinine
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, principally designed
or marketed for use in cutting controlled substances.





         (g)   Separation gins and sifters principally designed
or marketed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise
cleaning or refining, marijuana.





         (h)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing
devices principally designed or marketed for use in compounding controlled
substances.





         (i)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other
containers principally designed or marketed for use in packaging small
quantities of controlled substances.





         (j)   Containers and other objects principally designed
or marketed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.





         (k)   Hypodermic or other syringes, needles, and other
objects principally designed or marketed for use in parenterally introducing
controlled substances into the human body.





         (l)   Objects principally designed or marketed for use
in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish,
or hashish oil into the human body, such as the following.





            1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone,
plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish
heads, or punctured metal bowls.





            2.   Water pipes.





            3.   Carburetion tubes and devices.





            4.   Smoking and carburetion masks.





            5.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold
burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or
too short to be held in the hand.





            6.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.





            7.   Chamber pipes.





            8.   Carburetor pipes.





            9.   Electric pipes.





            10.   Air-driven pipes.





            11.   Chillums.





            12.   Bongs.





            13.   Ice pipes or chillers.  (Ord. 2436, passed
4-24-84)









141.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.




   (A)   No person shall sell or offer for sale or display for sale any
drug paraphernalia without first obtaining a license as described herein. 
The license shall be in addition to any other licenses held or required to be
held by the applicant.










   (B)   Annual applications for licenses shall be made to the Chief of
Police upon forms supplied by his office and shall require that the following
be furnished.





      (1)   The name of the applicant and of each of its officers,
partners, business associates, and managers.





      (2)   The location of the enterprise and its name, if
different from applicant's name.





      (3)   Acknowledgment and representation by the applicant that
it is familiar with the requirements of this chapter and will inform all
persons it employs within this municipality of the requirements thereof.





      (4)   The annual license fee shall be $500.  The licenses are
not transferable.





      (5)   Such application shall be accompanied by an affidavit by
each individual applicant and each person employed by the applicant within
the municipality that such person has never been convicted of a drug abuse
offense.





      (6)   A separate license shall be required for each location
at which drug paraphernalia is sold or held for sale within this municipality.










   (C)   Within 15 days after an application is received for such
licenses, an inspection of the premises will be made by the Chief of Police
or his designated representative for purpose of determining whether the
premises comply with the requirements of this chapter.  In particular, any
such premises must be reasonably designed so as to limit the controlled entry
of minors into an area where drug paraphernalia is either sold or displayed. 
(Ord. 2436,passed 4-24-84)  Penalty, see § 141.99









141.03  REQUIRED RECORDS.




   (A)   Every licensee must keep an accurate record of every item,
affect, paraphernalia accessory, or thing which is designed or marketed for
use with illegal cannabis or drugs which is sold by the licensee or his
employees or agents, and this record shall be open to the inspection of any
police officer at any time during the business hours of the establishment
selling these items.










   (B)   Such records shall contain the following information.





      (1)   The name and address of the purchaser.





      (2)   The name and quantity of the product and the generic
name or type of product.





      (3)   The date and time of sale.





      (4)   Licensee or his agents signature.





      (5)   The type of identification used to verify the age of
purchaser.










   (C)   The records described in divisions (A) and (B) shall be
retained by the licensee for not less than two years and shall be open to the
inspection of the Chief of Police or his designated representative upon
request at reasonable times during the two-year period. 
(Ord. 2436, passed 4-24-84)  Penalty, see § 141.99









141.04  SALE OR DISPLAY TO MINORS REGULATED.




   (A)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any drug paraphernalia
to any minor, unless the minor is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian.










   (B)   No person shall permit any minor to enter, view the interior
of, or remain in any room or enclosure wherein drug paraphernalia is sold,
offered for sale, or displayed for sale unless such minor is accompanied by
his parent or legal guardian.  Each entrance to any such room or enclosure
must be conspicuously posted with a sign which states that the entry of
minors into such room or enclosure unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian is prohibited.










   (C)   No person shall display for sale or permit the display for
sale of drug paraphernalia under circumstances where it is likely to be
viewed by minors other than as permitted under division (B) of this section.
(Ord. 2436, passed 4-24-84)  Penalty, see § 141.99









141.05  EXCEPTIONS.




   This chapter shall not apply to any of the following.





   (A)   Any pharmacist or other authorized person who sells or
furnishes drug paraphernalia described in § 141.01(B) upon the prescription
of a physician, dentist, podiatrist, or veterinarian.










   (B)   Any physician, dentist, podiatrist, or veterinarian who
furnishes or prescribes drug paraphernalia described in § 141.01(B) to his
patients.










   (C)   Any manufacturer, wholesaler, or retailer licensed by the Ohio
State Board of Pharmacy to sell or transfer drug paraphernalia described in
§ 141.01(B). 
(Ord. 2436, passed 4-24-84)









141.99  PENALTY.




   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 141.02 or 141.03 of
this chapter shall be fined not more than $500.  Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. Imposition of such
a fine shall in no way waive any right of the municipality to enjoin the
continued violation of this chapter.










   (B)   Whoever violates any provisions of § 141.04 shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Each day that a violation of §
141.04(C) continues shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. 2436, passed 4-24-84)





Cross-reference:





   Classification of misdemeanors, see § 130.99
























CHAPTER 142
MINOR'S CURFEW









Section










142.01   Definitions





142.02   Curfew for minors





142.03   Exceptions





142.04   Parental responsibility





142.05   Disposition of minor





142.99   Penalty




 



142.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.










   MINOR.  Any person under the age of 18 years.










   PARENT.  Any natural or adoptive parent, guardian, or any adult person
responsible for the care and custody of a minor.










   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any public street, highway, road, alley, park,
playground, public building, vacant lot, or privately-owned property
permitted to be used by the public or certain members thereof.










   SHALL.  Always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(Ord. 2623, passed 12-8-87)









142.02  CURFEW FOR MINORS.




   (A)   No minor under the age of 16 years shall loiter, idle, wander,
stroll, or play in, on, or about public places or public buildings, or be
found upon a bicycle, motorcycle, or any vehicle on any public place or place
of amusement or entertainment, or on vacant lots or other unsupervised places
in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following
day; however, on Saturdays and Sundays the hours shall be from 12:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.










   (B)   No minor 16 years old or older shall loiter, idle, wander,
stroll, or play in, on,  or  about  public places or public buildings, or
be found upon a bicycle, motorcycle, or any vehicle on any public place or
place of amusement or entertainment, or on vacant lots or other unsupervised
places in the city between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the
following day; however, on Saturdays and Sundays the hours shall be from 1:00
a.m. to 6:00 a.m.





(Ord. 2645, passed 1-26-88)  Penalty, see § 142.99









142.03  EXCEPTIONS.




   (A)   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to a minor
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having care
and custody of such minor, or where such minor is attending a legitimate
school, church, or youth activity or function, provided that the minor shall
have permission to attend such function or other activity from the minor's
parent, guardian, or other adult person having his or her custody and care.










   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a minor that
is on an emergency errand or on legitimate business directed by his or her
parents, guardian, or other adult person having care and custody of the minor.










   (C)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any minor
where the minor is gainfully employed, the employment requires the minor to
be in violation of this chapter, and the employment is with the consent and
permission of the parent, guardian, or other person having the care and
custody of the minor.





(Ord. 2623, passed 12-8-87)









142.04  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.




   No parent, guardian, or other adult person having legal custody or
control of any minor shall knowingly permit or allow such minor to be on or
remain on any public place in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
KNOWINGLY includes knowledge  which  a  parent  should  reasonably  be
expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that person's
custody or control.  It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section when a child is found in violation of § 142.02 and the parent of
such child has. been served with a warning under § 142.05 hereof.





(Ord. 2623, passed 12-8-87)  Penalty, see § 142.99









142.05  DISPOSITION OF MINOR.




   (A)   Any police officer who finds a minor in violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter shall obtain from the minor his or her name,
address, age, and the names of his or her parents, and shall  advise the
minor that he or she is in violation of the curfew.  The officer shall
escort the minor to the Police Department or to his or her home or usual
place of abode, as the situation warrants.  Upon contacting the parents,
guardian, or person having custody or care of such minor, a written notice
shall then be issued to such parent or parents, guardian, or person having
custody and care of such minor, advising them of the minor's violation of
this chapter and advising them that a violation of this chapter may result in
full enforcement of this chapter, including enforcement of parental
responsibility and applicable penalties under the terms of this chapter.










   (B)   If the police officer is unable to contact the parent or
parents, guardian, person having custody and care of such minor, or another
responsible adult, he shall detain such minor until such person may be
located to take charge of the minor, or the minor may be transferred to the
juvenile authorities.





(Ord. 2623, passed 12-8-87)  Penalty, see § 142.99









142.99  PENALTY.




   (A)   Any minor violating any provision of this chapter shall be
dealt with in accordance with Juvenile Court law and procedure.










   (B)   Any parent, guardian, or person having care and custody of a
minor who violates the terms of this chapter, after having been previously 
notified  under  § 142.05, shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.





(Ord. 2623, passed 12-8-87)



















CHAPTER 143: PANHANDLING














Section










143.01      Definitions.





143.02      Panhandling restrictions and prohibitions.





143.03      False or misleading representations.





143.04      Panhandling by minors.





143.05      Exclusion.





143.99      Penalty.














143.01  DEFINITIONS.




   (A)    As used in Sections 143.01 to 143.03 of the Code of City
Ordinances:





      (1)   "Public Property" means all property owned, controlled,
or operated by any governmental entity, including but not limited to
governmental offices or facilities, public streets, publicly owned parking
lots, schools, libraries, post offices, transit facilities, and other public
lands, parks, buildings, or grounds.





      (2)   "Automated-teller machine" means a bank or other
financial institution's machine that is able to carry out financial
transactions, including, but not limited to cash withdrawals, deposits,
transfers, and other financial transactions or inquiries.





      (3)   "Right-of-way" shall have the same meaning as in Section
4511.01 (UU) of the Ohio Revised Code and/or Section 70.01 of the West
Carrollton Code of Ordinances.





      (4)   "Panhandling" shall mean to request verbally, in
writing, or by gesture or other actions, money, items of value, a donation,
or other personal financial assistance.  Further, panhandling shall further
include any request for a person to purchase an item for an amount that a
reasonable person would consider to be in excess of its value.










   (B)   "Aggressive Manner" shall mean as follows:





      (1)   Both before, during, or after attempting to engage in
panhandling, any behavior that would cause a reasonable person to feel
intimidated, threatened, or restrained, including but not limited to the use
of any verbal threats, threatening gestures, abusive language, obscene
gestures or obscene language, or screaming and other unreasonable noises.





      (2)   Both before, during, or after attempting to engage in
panhandling, blocking the passage of any person or vehicle.





      (3)   After a person has given a negative response to a
solicitation for panhandling, any further attempt to solicit for panhandling.





      (4)   Both before, during, or after attempting to engage in
panhandling, having any physical contact with the person that is being
solicited by the person panhandling and/or touching or having physical
contact with the clothing, purse, or other personal property of the person
being solicited by the person panhandling.





      (5)   Both before, during, or after attempting to engage in
panhandling, following the person that is being solicited.





      (6)   Any further attempt to solicit for panhandling after the
owner or occupant of private property requests that the person cease all
solicitation for panhandling, upon the request of the owner or occupant of
the private property for the person panhandling to leave the property.





      (7)   Any type of panhandling which interferes or disrupts any
activity or event occurring on public property, as defined in this Chapter.





      (8)   By coming within three (3) feet of the person solicited
after that person has indicated that he does not wish to make a donation.





      (9)   By following a person who walks away from the solicitor.





      (10)   By making unreasonable noise or offensively course
utterance, gesture, or display or communicating unwarranted or grossly
abusive language, either during the solicitation or following a refusal; or





      (11)   By panhandling in a group of two or more persons.





         (Ord. 3500.  Passed 1-10-12.)









143.02  PANHANDLING RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.




   No person shall solicit for panhandling in any of the following manners:










   (A)   In any type of aggressive manner as defined in this chapter.










   (B)   On any private property in which there is any type of written
notice prohibiting solicitation and/or panhandling.










   (C)   On any other private property, unless the person panhandling
has obtained prior permission from the owner or occupant.










   (D)   Within twenty (20) feet of any pedestrians waiting in line for
service or waiting in line for an event.










   (E)   Within twenty (20) feet of any pedestrians waiting in line to
obtain access to a building.










   (F)   Within twenty (20) feet of any entrance or exit of the
building for any check cashing business, bank, credit union, or savings and
loan during the hours of operation for any of these businesses.










   (G)   Within twenty (20) feet of any automated-teller machine, as
defined in this chapter, during its hours of operation.










   (H)   At any bus stops or bus shelters.










   (I)   In any vehicle within the right-of-way as defined in this
chapter.










   (J)   In any public transportation vehicle or any public
transportation facility.










   (K)   Within twenty (20) feet of the area of the sidewalk used by an
outdoor restaurant.










   (L)   Within twenty (20) feet of the entrance or exit of any public
facility.










   (M)   On public property within twenty (20) feet of an entrance to a
building.










   (N)   On public property within twenty (20) feet of an entrance to a
parking lot.










   (O)   On a public street, by intentionally or recklessly blocking
the safe or free passage of a person or vehicle.










   (P)    From any operator or passenger of a motor vehicle or any
person entering or exiting a motor vehicle.  (Ord. 3500.  Passed 1-10-12.)









143.03  FALSE OR MISLEADING REPRESENTATIONS.




   No person shall solicit for panhandling in any of the following manners:










   (A)   Making statements or representing, either verbally or in
writing, that the person panhandling suffers from a medical condition, mental
or physical disability, or deformity, when in fact the person does not suffer
from a medical condition, mental or physical disability, or deformity;










   (B)   Making statements or representing, either verbally or in
writing, that the person panhandling has a minor child or other family member
they are supporting who suffers from a medical condition, mental or physical
disability, or deformity, when in fact that child or other family member does
not suffer from a medical condition, mental or physical disability, or
deformity and/or the person panhandling does not support that minor child or
other family member;










   (C)   Making a statement or representing, either verbally or in
writing, that the person panhandling is a military veteran or active duty
military member, when a person is not a military veteran or active duty
military member;










   (D)   Making a statement or representing, either verbally or in
writing, that the person panhandling needs a donation to meet a specific
need, when the person panhandling does not have the specific need and/or that
person already has sufficient funds to meet that need and does not disclose
that the person already has sufficient funds;










   (E)   Making a statement or representing, either verbally or in
writing, that the person panhandling is unemployed when the person
panhandling is not unemployed; or










   (F)   Making a statement or representing, either verbally or in
writing, that the person panhandling is homeless and/or is stranded when in
fact the person is not homeless or stranded.





(Ord. 3500.  Passed 1-10-12.)









143.04 PANHANDLING BY MINORS.




   No parent, guardian, or other custodian of a minor child shall allow or
cause, or direct a minor to engage in panhandling.  Further, no other adult
shall cause a minor to panhandle.





(Ord. 3500.  Passed 1-10-12.)









143.05 EXCLUSION.




   Panhandling shall not include solicitations made for money or a
donation by a charitable or civic organization which does so with the prior
permission of the owner or occupant of the premise.





(Ord. 3500.  Passed 1-10-12.)









143.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates this section is guilty of panhandling, a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree.





(Ord. 3500.  Passed 1-10-12.)





























TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE









Chapter










Chap. 150.   BUILDING CODE










Chap. 151.   FIRE PREVENTION CODE










Chap. 152.   SUBDIVISION CODE










Chap. 153.   SIGNS










Chap. 154.   ZONING CODE










Chap. 155.   FAIR HOUSING PRACTICES










Chap. 156.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION CODE APPENDIX:   EROSION AND
SEDIMENTATION CONTROL MEASURES










Chap. 157.   FEES FOR LAND USAGE APPLICATIONS










Chap. 158.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE










Chap. 159.   PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT





























CHAPTER 150
BUILDING CODE









Section










Adoption of Building Codes










150.01   Adoption of National Electrical Code





150.02   Adoption of International Building Code (IBC)





150.025   Adoption of Residential Code of Ohio.





150.03   Adoption of Ohio Building Code





150.035   Adoption of Ohio Mechanical Code





150.04   Conflict of provisions





150.05   Plan review fee schedule for construction under the Ohio Building
Code





150.06   Plan review fee schedule under the Residential Code of Ohio.





150.07   Permit fee schedules





150.08   Duties of Building Inspector; flood areas





150.09   Violations and enforcement










Park Development Fees










150.10   Building permit fees





150.11   Use of fees





150.12   Park and recreation capital improvement fund





150.13   Fee required prior to permit issuance





150.14   Conflict





150.15   City interests protected










Moving Buildings










150.20   Permit required





150.21   Application information; outside corporate limits





150.22   Application information; within corporate limits





150.23   Public meeting for property owners in close proximity





150.24   Council decision on application





150.25   Fee required





150.26   Bond required





150.27   Liability insurance





150.28   Council recommendations for moving





150.29   Inspector of building moving





150.30   Leaving structure on public property





150.31   Application of building codes





150.32   Application of subdivision and zoning code










House Trailers










150.40   Definitions





150.41   Location of house trailer





150.42   Permit required for trailer tourist camp





150.43   Application for permit





150.44   Investigation and approval of camp





150.45   Issuance of permit





150.46   Proximity to residence district





150.47   Location of tourist camp





150.48   Minimum area for individual house trailers





150.49   Fence required for trailer camp





150.50   Sanitary and other facilities





150.51   Refuse and sewage disposal





150.52   Water supply





150.53   Entrances and roadways





150.54   Management





150.55   Parking house trailers





150.56   General regulating authority





150.57   Revocation or suspension of permits





150.58   Notice; appeal










Fences and Walls










150.60   Definitions  (Repealed)





150.60.1   Classification of fences  (Repealed)





150.61   Permit, plan, and inspection  (Repealed)





150.62   Location of fences and walls  (Repealed)





150.63   Intersection visibility  (Repealed)





150.63.1   Construction requirements  (Repealed)





150.64   Swimming pools  (Repealed)





150.65   Barbed wire fences  (Repealed)





150.66   Height of fences atop retaining walls  (Repealed)





150.67   Variances  (Repealed)





150.68   Fences or walls required by the Planning Commission or the Board
of Zoning Appeals  (Repealed)





150.69   Electrified fences  (Repealed)





150.69.1   Fences around trash receptacles  (Repealed)










Nuisances Relative to Buildings or Structures










150.70   Definitions





150.71   Abatement notice; remedy; hearing





150.72   No restriction on authority










Nuisances Relative to Premises










150.75   Definitions  (Repealed)





150.76   Prohibited conditions  (Repealed)





150.77   Order for removal  (Repealed)





150.78   Time limit for storing materials (Repealed)





150.79   Removal of garbage  (Repealed)





150.80   Procedure after notice and failure to comply  (Repealed)





150.81   Removal of litter by owner or occupant  (Repealed)










Street Address Numbers










150.85   Display of street numbers  (Repealed)





150.86   Removing or defacing numbers  (Repealed)










Demolition of Structures










150.87   Definitions  (Repealed)





150.88   Permit required; disconnection of utilities  (Repealed)





150.89   Bond or other surety required  (Repealed)





150.90   Site conditions  (Repealed)





150.91   Time limit for permit  (Repealed)





150.92   Demolition permit fee  (Repealed)










150.99   Penalty




 




ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODES




 



150.01  ADOPTION OF NATIONAL  ELECTRICAL CODE.




   (A)   Except as hereinafter stated, the 2005 edition of the National
Fire Protection Association's National Electrical Code (NEC) and any
subsequent revisions of such code or amendments thereto, is adopted by
reference for the purpose of safeguarding persons and property from hazards
arising from the use of electricity in the city.










   (B)   Prior to the commencement of any work covered  by the
provisions  of  the  National Electrical Code, a permit shall be obtained
by the property owner or a legal agent for the property owner.










   (C)   A final inspection and approval must be obtained before the
use or occupancy of any equipment or structure.





(Ord.  3288.  Passed 2-8-05.)









150.02  ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE (IBC).




   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, the latest edition as
published of the International Building Code (IBC) and any subsequent
amendments thereto, is adopted by reference by the City in order to provide
for the safety of the citizens from all the hazards incident to the design,
erection, repair, removal, demolition, or use and occupancy of buildings,
structures, or premises.










   (B)   Prior to the commencement of any work under the IBC Code, the
property owner or a legal agent for the property owner must obtain a permit
for the work.










   (C)   A final inspection and approval must be obtained before the
use or occupancy of any equipment or structure. 





(Ord.  3288.  Passed 2-8-05.)









150.025 ADOPTION OF RESIDENTIAL CODE OF OHIO.




   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, the most current State
mandated version of the Residential Code of Ohio  is adopted by reference by
the City in order to provide for the safety of the citizens from all hazards
incident to the design, erection, repair, removal, demolition, or use and
occupancy of buildings, structures or premises.










   (B)   Prior to the commencement of any work covered under the
Residential Code of Ohio, the property owner or a legal agent for the
property owner shall obtain a permit.










   (C)   A final inspection and approval must be obtained before the
use or occupancy of any equipment or structure. 





(Ord.  3329.  Passed 5-23-06.)









150.03  ADOPTION OF OHIO BUILDING  CODE.




   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, the state mandated edition of
the Ohio Building Code and any subsequent amendments thereto, is adopted by
reference by the City in order to provide uniform minimum standards and
requirements for the erection, construction, repair, alteration, and
maintenance of buildings, structures, or premises in the City.










   (B)   Ohio Building Code and appendices shall be enforced by the
City, excepting only the Plumbing Chapters.










   (C)   The Chief Building Inspector is authorized and directed to
delegate to the proper department of Montgomery County, Ohio, the authority
to issue permits for and make inspections of plumbing within the City, to
insure compliance with the Unified Building Code adopted by Montgomery County
pursuant to §108.03 of such Building Code or other codes as may be adopted
by Montgomery County.










   (D)   Prior to the commencement of any work covered by the Ohio
Building Code, a permit shall be obtained by the property owner or a legal
agent for the property owner.










   (E)   A final inspection and approval must be obtained before the
use or occupancy of any equipment or structure.





(Ord.  3288.  Passed 2-8-05.)









150.035 ADOPTION OF OHIO MECHANICAL CODE.




   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, the state mandated edition of
the Ohio Mechanical Code and any subsequent amendments thereto, is adopted by
reference by the City in order to provide uniform minimum standards and
requirements for the erection, construction, repair, alteration, and
maintenance of buildings, structures or premises in the City.










   (B)   Prior to the commencement of any work covered by the Ohio
Mechanical Code, a permit shall be obtained by the property owner or a legal
agent for the property owner.










   (C)   A final inspection and approval must be obtained before the
use or occupancy of any equipment or structure.





(Ord.  3288.  Passed 2-8-05.)









150.04  CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS.




   (A)   In the event of a conflict between any requirements of the
National Electrical Code, the International Building Code, the Residential
Code of Ohio, the Ohio Building Code, or the Ohio Mechanical Code, the more
stringent requirements shall be applicable and enforced.





(Ord. 3329.  Passed 5-23-06.)










   (B)   Nothing contained in the provisions of this chapter shall
relieve or be interpreted as relieving any person, firm, or corporation from
complying with all other ordinances, laws, rules, and regulations of the city
or other government agencies, whether now in force or hereafter enacted,
regulating and governing the issuance of building permits for the
construction of residential, commercial, business, or industrial structures
in the city. 





(Ord.  3288.  Passed 2-8-05.)









150.05  PLAN REVIEW FEE SCHEDULE FOR  CONSTRUCTION UNDER THE OHIO 
BUILDING CODE.




   (A)   The fee for a plan review shall be at the current hourly rate
of the city's designated plans examiner for each hour or part thereof.










   (B)   The plan review fee is designed to reflect costs incurred for
this service, and the fee is nonrefundable.










   (C)   The applicant for any Zoning Certificate for new construction
of, addition to, or demolition of a principal structure within the Heritage
District and the Conservation District shall pay the City a plan review fee
for the cost of architectural review of the proposal as required by Sections
154.10.481 through 154.10.502 and 154.15.01 through 154.15.10.  This cost
shall be as set forth in Section 37.23 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule,
of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton.  (Ord. 3346. 
Passed 7-10-07; amend. Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22- 09.)









150.06  PLAN REVIEW FEE SCHEDULE UNDER THE RESIDENTIAL CODE OF OHIO.




   (A)   The fee for a plan examination of one, two, and three family
structures shall be as set forth in Section 37.24 of Chapter 37, General Fee
Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton.










   (B)   The applicant for any Zoning Certificate for new construction
of, addition to, or demolition of a principal structure within the Heritage
District and the Conservation District shall pay the City a plan review fee
for the cost of architectural review of the proposal as required by Sections
154.10.492 and 154.15.01 through 154.15.10.  This cost shall be the actual
cost which the City paid the architectural consultant to review the proposal
and shall be paid at the time the permit is approved by the City.  (Ord.
3346.  Passed 7-10-07; amend. Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22- 09.)









150.07  PERMIT FEE SCHEDULES.




   The permit fees as set forth in Section 37.25 of Chapter 37, General
Fee Schedule of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton shall
apply.





(Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)









150.08  DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR; FLOOD AREAS.




   (A)   The Building Inspector shall review all building permit
applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is in a location that is a flood hazard, any proposed
new construction or substantial improvement, including prefabricated and
mobile homes, must:





      (1)   Be designed, or modified and anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure;





      (2)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that
are resistant to flood damage; and





      (3)   Use construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.










   (B)   The Building Inspector, Miami Conservancy, and the Planning
Commission shall review subdivision proposals and other proposed new
developments to assure that:





      (1)   All proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;





      (2)   All  public utilities  and  facilities,  such as 
sewer, gas,  electrical, and water  systems are located, elevated, and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and





      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.










   (C)   The Building Inspector shall require new or replacement water
supply systems and sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from
the systems into flood waters, and require on-site waste disposal systems to
be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them
during flooding. 
(Ord.  3288.  Passed 2-8-05.)









150.09  VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.




   (A)   No person shall:





      (1)   Violate any provision of these codes or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of these codes; or





      (2)   Erect, construct, alter, repair, or do any work upon or
in connection with any structure in violation of an approved plan or
statement of specifications therefor; or





      (3)   Fail to obey any legal order of any officer charged with
the enforcement of these codes. 
(Ord. 3288.  Passed 2-8-05.)










   (B)   Nothing contained herein or in the Ohio Building Code, the
National Electrical Code, the Residential Code of Ohio, or the International
Building Code shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding now pending
in any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred, nor cause or
causes of action accrued or existing under any act or ordinance repealed
hereby.  Nor shall any right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by the adoption of any provision hereof.










   (C)   The Building Inspection Department is hereby authorized to
enforce the provisions of the Ohio Building Code, the National Electrical
Code, the Residential Code of Ohio, and the International Building Code
adopted herein and to enforce all subsequent amendments to such codes.










   (D)   The Clerk of Council is hereby directed to keep one copy of
the National Electrical Code, the Residential Code of Ohio, the International
Building Code, the Ohio Building Code, and the Ohio Mechanical Code, and any
amendments thereto on file for inspection by any member of the public.





(Ord.  3329.  Passed 5-23-06.)










PARK DEVELOPMENT FEES









150.10  BUILDING PERMIT FEE.




   There is hereby established a fee of 1/2 of 1% estimated cost of
construction, to be paid on each building permit issued for the construction
of a residence structure, including but not limited to multiple-family
dwellings in the city. 
('70 Code, § 1311.01)









150.11  USE OF FEES.




   All fees shall be used for the acquisition, purchase, development, and
equipping of existing and future parks and park sites in the city.  However,
no part of the fees may be used for the purpose of paying salaries or wages. 
('70 Code, § 1311.02)









150.12  PARK AND RECREATION CAPITAL  IMPROVEMENT FUND.




   A parks and recreation capital improvement fund is established, into
which all fees collected under this chapter shall be paid.
('70 Code, § 1311.03)









150.13  FEE REQUIRED PRIOR TO PERMIT  ISSUANCE.




   No building permit for the construction of a residence structure,
including but not limited to  multiple-family dwellings in the city, shall
be issued unless and until the fee provided for in this chapter is paid. 
('70 Code, § 1311.04)









150.14  CONFLICT.




   Nothing contained in this chapter shall relieve or be interpreted as
relieving any person, firm, or corporation from complying with all other
ordinances, laws, rules, and regulations of the city or other governmental
agencies, whether now in force or hereafter enacted, regulating and governing
the issuance of building permits for the construction of residence structures
and/or commercial, business, or industrial structures, in the city. 
('70 Code, § 1311.05)









150.15  CITY INTERESTS PROTECTED.




   Nothing contained in this chapter shall affect or be interpreted as
affecting the right, title, and interest acquired by the city in and to any
of the areas heretofore purchased by or dedicated to the city by developers. 
('70 Code, § 1311.06)










MOVING BUILDINGS









150.20  PERMIT REQUIRED.




   No person shall commence any work on moving or preparing for moving any
building from or to any site within or without the limits of the city,
through the streets or over public property, without first securing a permit
therefor from the Council. 
('70 Code, § 1313.01)  Penalty, see § 150.99 (A)









150.21  APPLICATION INFORMATION; OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.




   Any person desiring to move any building through the city to a site
located outside of the corporate limits of the city shall make application to
Council, submitting the following exhibits:










   (A)   The location of the building to be moved, before it is moved,
the proposed streets or other public property  over  which  the 
building  will  be moved, the designation of the location to which the
building will be moved.










   (B)   The location of all sidewalks, curbs, culverts, and bridges
over which the building will be moved.










   (C)   The total combined weight of the building to be moved and the
moving vehicle and the total height and width of the building in place on the
moving vehicle. 
('70 Code, § 1313.02)  Penalty, see § 150.99 (A)









150.22  APPLICATION INFORMATION; WITHIN  CORPORATE LIMITS.




   Any person desiring to move any building to any site located within the
corporate limits of the city shall make application to Council, submitting
the following exhibits:










   (A)   The location of the building to be moved, before it is moved;
the proposed streets or other public property over which the building will be
moved; the designation of the location to which the building will be moved.










   (B)   The location of all sidewalks, curbs, culverts, and bridges
over which the building shall be moved.










   (C)   The total combined weight of the building to be moved and the
moving vehicle and the total height and width of the building in place on the
moving vehicle.










   (D)   Photographs of the building to be moved.










   (E)   Photographs of all adjoining buildings within 200 feet of the
proposed lot or site.










   (F)   Plot plan of the lot showing the proposed location of
construction and exact lot and building dimensions.










   (G)   Floor plan of the building to be moved, with exact dimensions.










   (H)   Plans of any remodeling.










   (I)   List of the property owners, with names and addresses, within
200 feet of the proposed site. 
('70 Code, § 1313.03)  Penalty, see § 150.99 (A)









150.23  PUBLIC MEETING FOR PROPERTY OWNERS IN CLOSE PROXIMITY.




   Where a building is proposed to be moved to a site within the city,
Council may notify all property owners within 200 feet of the proposed site
of a public meeting to be held to receive comments of the parties notified. 
('70 Code, § 1313.04)









150.24  COUNCIL DECISION ON APPLICATION.




   Council shall, within 30 days after the hearing set forth in § 150.23,
make its decision of approval or disapproval of the building moving permit
application. 
('70 Code, § 1313.05)









150.25  FEE REQUIRED.




   No building moving permit shall be granted until a fee as set forth in
Section 37.26, of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified
Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton is paid to the city by the
applicant therefor.  ('70  Code, § 1313.06 ; amend. Ord. 3436.  Passed
12-22-09.)  Penalty, see § 150.99 (A)









150.26  BOND REQUIRED.




   No building moving permit will be granted until the applicant therefor
has posted a bond, with sufficient sureties thereon, payable to the city, in
a principal sum to be fixed by council, insuring the city against any and all
damage to public property occasioned by the moving. 
('70 Code, § 1313.07) Penalty, see § 150.99 (A)









150.27  LIABILITY INSURANCE.




   No building moving permit will be granted until the applicant therefor
shall have furnished to Council, to its satisfaction, evidence that the
applicant is covered against general liability, including personal injury and
property damage to third parties, in an amount to be determined by Council,
but in no event, to be less than $100,000/$200,000. 
('70 Code, § 1313.08)  Penalty, see § 150.99 (A)









150.28  COUNCIL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR  MOVING.




   Council may prescribe conditions, requirements, routes, and
precautions, the day or days and the hours of the day during which the moving
operations shall be conducted, as deemed necessary in the public interest,
and all moving shall be performed in conformity therewith. 
('70 Code, § 1313.09)  Penalty, see § 150.99 (A)









150.29  INSPECTOR OF BUILDING MOVING.




   Whenever deemed necessary in the public interest, Council or the City
Manager may require that the moving operations be conducted in the presence
and under the supervision of an inspector of building moving, designated by
it or him, who shall perform the required services at the cost of the person
doing the moving or the owner of the property being moved. 
('70 Code, § 1313.10)









150.30  LEAVING STRUCTURE ON PUBLIC  PROPERTY.




   No person shall permit any building or other structure or part thereof,
to stand on any street or other public property for a period longer than that
prescribed in the permit therefor. 
('70 Code, § 1313.11)  Penalty, see § 150.99 (A)









150.31  APPLICATION OF BUILDING CODES.




   All applicants for a building moving permit shall, in addition to the
fee charged herein, be subject to the provisions of the codes adopted in §§
150.01, 150.02, and 150.03, and shall secure building permits for any
building or buildings to be located within the corporate limits. 
('70 Code, § 1313.12; amend. Ord. 2194, passed 3-11-80)  Penalty, see §
150.99 (A)









150.32  APPLICATION OF SUBDIVISION AND  ZONING CODE.




   All persons moving any house or building to any site within the
corporate limits shall be subject to the provisions of the subdivision code
and the city zoning code, where applicable. 
('70 Code, § 1313.13) Penalty, see § 150.99 (A)










HOUSE TRAILERS









150.40  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of §§ 150.41 through 150.58, the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.





   (A)   DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH.  The Montgomery County Board of
Health.  The county board of health inspectors or county health commissioner
shall have the final control of all plumbing, sanitary, or health facilities
and problems within any trailer camp or court.










   (B)   HOUSE TRAILER.  Any vehicle used by one or more persons as
sleeping or living quarters, mounted on wheels or to which wheels have been
or may be applied, and capable of being propelled either by its own power or
by power applied to it.  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing
definition, any street or traction car used for sleeping or living quarters
shall be considered, for purposes of this chapter as a house trailer.










   (C)   SELF-CONTAINED HOUSE TRAILER.  Any vehicle used by one or
more persons as sleeping or living quarters and which contains all necessary
sanitary, cooking, and other living facilities within the vehicle, and does
not require connection to any outside source, other than an electric
connection to an outside generator.










   (D)   TRAILER TOURIST CAMP.  Any plot or parcel of ground which
meets all regulations and requirements hereinafter prescribed and which has a
valid and subsisting permit, issued by the city manager, to operate the same
for the convenience of 2 or more house trailer owners and residents. 
('70 Code, § 1317.01; amend Ord. 1763, passed 1-23-73)









150.41  LOCATION OF HOUSE TRAILER.




   (A)   Except as provided in § 150.55, no person shall use for human
habitation within the city any house trailer, unless it is located in an
approved trailer tourist camp, and unless it is used in strict compliance
with the regulations hereinafter prescribed for the operation of trailer
tourist camps.










   (B)   No person, firm, or  corporation  owning  or operating a
camp car or trailer located in the city shall remove or cause to have removed
the wheels or any similar transporting devices from the camp car or trailer,
or otherwise permanently fix it to the ground in a manner that would prevent
the ready removal of the camp car or trailer. 
('70 Code, § 1317.02) Penalty, see § 150.99 (C)









150.42  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR TRAILER TOURIST CAMP.




   No person, firm, or corporation shall establish, maintain, operate, or
conduct within the city any trailer tourist camp on any plot or parcel of
land, for use of transients or other persons by the day, week, or season,
whether charge is or is not made, who does not possess a valid permit issued
by the city manager to do so, and unless the same shall be conducted in
strict compliance with the permit and all provisions of law or ordinance
relating to the same. 
('70 Code, § 1317.03)  Penalty, see § 150.99 (C)









150.43  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.




   (A)   Any person or persons, firm, or corporation hereafter applying
for a permit to establish, maintain, operate, or conduct within the city a
trailer tourist camp, shall file with the city manager a written application
for the permit, and shall include a complete plan of the proposed camp
showing:





      (1)   Legal boundaries of the area to be used for camp
purposes;





      (2)   Proposed entrance and roadways or driveway;





      (3)   Proposed locations or sites for house trailers;





      (4)   Location of all proposed sanitary conveniences, laundry
buildings, and slop sinks, basins, incinerator, and fire extinguishers;





      (5)   Plan for water supply;





      (6)   Proposed method of sewage and surface drainage disposal;





      (7)   Plan for electric lighting;





      (8)   Typical plan for proposed buildings to house toilets,
shower baths, washrooms, and laundry, and a statement of the proposed method
to be used for the disposal of garbage and other refuse.










   (B)   The application shall be filed by the owner, manager, or
proprietor of the camp and sworn to before a notary public.  The person
filing the application and making the affidavit before a notary public shall
be the person in charge of the camp and responsible for the upkeep,
maintenance, and sanitary condition thereof.  Any change in management of
the camp shall be registered with the city manager by sworn affidavit of the
new proprietor or manager.  The application for permit shall be accompanied
by a fee of $75 for 5 units or less, plus $40 for each additional 5 units or
fraction thereof, which fee, if a permit is subsequently issued, shall be
applied to the permit fee, otherwise to be returned to the applicant. 
('70 Code, § 1317.04)  Penalty, see § 150.99 (C)









150.44  INVESTIGATION AND APPROVAL OF CAMP.




   The city manager shall cause a complete inspection of the complete
trailer tourist camp to be made, and shall determine that all installations
have been made in accordance with the approved camp plan and in accordance
with all other regulations and requirements hereinafter set forth, prior to
final approval and issuance of the permit for the operation and occupancy of
the camp. 
('70 Code, § 1317.05)









150.45  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.




   Upon final approval of the trailer tourist camp by the city manager, he
may issue the permit therefor.  The permit shall be for a period of one year
and the fee therefor shall not be prorated for any less period. 
('70 Code, § 1317.06)









150.46  PROXIMITY TO RESIDENCE DISTRICT.




   Any trailer tourist camp hereafter established within the city shall be
at least 600 feet from any residence district, unless separated therefrom by
a natural or artificial barrier such as a river, railroad, levee, embankment,
etc. 
('70 Code, § 1317.07) Penalty, see § 150.99 (C)









150.47  LOCATION OF TOURIST CAMP.




   All land used as a tourist camp shall be located on well drained sites
of ample size, and free from heavy or dense growth of brush or weeds.  The
land shall be properly graded so as to insure rapid drainage during and
following rain, and shall be drained so as to be free from stagnant pools of
water. 
('70 Code, § 1317.08)  Penalty, see § 150.99









150.48  MINIMUM AREA FOR INDIVIDUAL HOUSE TRAILERS.




   In tourist or house trailer parks hereafter constructed, changed, or
added to, each house trailer shall be allocated an area of not less than
1,250 square feet.  The individual house trailer lot boundaries shall be
indicated by corner markers.  The site shall be level, free from rocks, and
well drained.  No house trailer shall be located:





   (A)   Closer than 20 feet to any street property line or any
adjacent property line;










   (B)   Closer than 6 feet to any individual house trailer lot
boundary line; and










   (C)   Closer than 10 feet to any other house trailer, building, slop
sink, garbage or refuse depository or water faucet within the defined camp. 
('70 Code, § 1317.09)  Penalty, see § 150.99 (C)









150.49  FENCE REQUIRED FOR TRAILER CAMP.




   Each trailer camp or court shall be separated from all adjoining
properties with a woven wire fence not less than 5 feet in height.
('70 Code, § 1317.10) Penalty, see § 150.99 (C)









150.50  SANITARY AND OTHER FACILITIES.




   Each camp for which a permit is issued shall provide at locations
hereinafter defined:  toilets, urinals, wash basins, slop sinks, showers or
baths, water faucets, etc., in accordance with the following specifications:





   (A)   One toilet or stool for each sex for every 15 house trailer
units or fraction thereof.










   (B)   Each toilet room provided for men shall have in addition, one
urinal stall.










   (C)   Each toilet room having 3 toilets or less shall be provided
with one lavatory or wash basin.










   (D)   One shower or bathtub shall be provided for each sex for each
15 house trailer units or fraction thereof.










   (E)   All toilets, basins, showers, baths or laundry facilities
shall be placed in properly constructed buildings located not more than 300
feet from any house trailer unit.










   (F)   Buildings shall be well lighted at all times, day or night,
well ventilated with screened openings and constructed of the moisture-proof
material, including well painted woodwork, as shall permit rapid and
satisfactory scouring and washing.










   (G)   The floors shall be of concrete or similar material, elevated
not less than 4 inches above ground level and each room provided with floor
drains.










   (H)   Slop sinks or basins with water supply shall be provided in
numbers and constructed in accordance with the design, size, and material as
required by the department of health, and the same shall be located not more
than 150 feet from each trailer unit.










   (I)   All plumbing installations shall be made in accordance with
the requirements set forth in the plumbing code of the state.










   (J)   Toilet facilities for men and women shall either be in
separate buildings at least 20 feet apart or shall be separated, if in the
same building, by a soundproof wall.










   (K)   A cement platform of adequate and approved size, completely
draining to a catch basin, shall be provided to be used for draining waste
water tanks and for the washing of automobiles and house trailers.  No waste
water shall be discharged from any waste tanks upon the ground or any other
place, except on the cement platform. Each platform shall be flushed as often
as necessary to keep it clean and in a sanitary condition. 
('70 Code, § 1317.11) Penalty, see § 150.99 (C)









150.51  REFUSE AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL.




   (A)   All garbage and waste shall be disposed of in accordance with
the regulations of the city garbage and other refuse collection service, or
otherwise removed from the premises in accordance with any other regulations
which may be deemed necessary by the city manager.










   (B)   Covered solid metal garbage pails and covered  solid  metal
rubbish containers  shall  be provided and shall be of the capacity and
number as to properly take care of all garbage and refuse emanating from the
house trailers intended to be serviced.










   (C)   All drains from showers, sinks, or toilets, wherever the
connection is available, must be connected with the city sewer system in a
manner approved by the city manager.  Where a sewer is not available, a
connection shall be made with a septic tank of the construction, capacity,
and location as shall meet with the approval of the city manager.










   (D)   The use of any type of chemical toilets or other similar
fixtures in house trailers, prohibited.










   (E)   No fires at any time shall be so located as to endanger
automobiles or other property.  No fires shall be left unattended at any
time, and all fires shall be completely extinguished before leaving.










   (F)   An approved incinerator shall be furnished in accordance with
specifications or regulations by the safety committee of council for the
burning of all combustible waste or rubbish, unless daily removal of all
waste, rubbish, trash, etc. is provided.
('70 Code, § 1317.12)  Penalty, see § 150.99 (C)









150.52  WATER SUPPLY.




   (A)   Each trailer tourist camp shall be provided with an adequate
supply of water furnished through an approved pipe distribution system
connected directly with city water mains.  No common drinking vessels shall
be permitted.  No drinking water faucets shall be placed in any toilet room
or water closet compartment.  Supply faucets should be located within at
least 100 feet from any house trailer.










   (B)   Fire hydrants of a type approved by the city manager shall be
provided so that no house trailer will be further than 300 feet from a fire
hydrant, measured along any public or private street.
('70 Code, § 1317.13)  Penalty, see § 150.99 (C)









150.53  ENTRANCES AND ROADWAYS.




   All entrances and exits from the camp shall be well marked and so
arranged that they will not constitute a traffic hazard.  All driveways
within the tourist camp shall be hard surfaced and not less than 20 feet in
width, well marked in the  day  time  and lighted at night, and so located
that each unit of the camp is easily accessible.





('70 Code, § 1317.14)  Penalty, see § 150.99 (C)









150.54  MANAGEMENT.




   (A)   Each trailer tourist camp shall be under the direct management
of the owner, his agent or representative.  The person or persons must be of
good reputation and character and shall operate the camp from an office
located on the grounds, and in which offices shall be maintained a record of
all guests noting:





      (1)   Name and address of each occupant;





      (2)   License number of all units;





      (3)   State issuing the licenses;





      (4)   Statement indicating the exact previous location of the
house trailer, (street, address, city and state).










   (B)   A copy of the registry shall be posted in or on the house
trailer for which it is issued.  The manager's copy shall be available for
inspection by any person at all times, shall be neatly and securely
maintained, and no record shall be destroyed until the expiration of a 12
month period following the date of registration.










   (C)   It shall be the duty of the camp manager to:





      (1)   Provide for the collection and removal of garbage or
other waste material;





      (2)   Prohibit the placing or storage of unsightly material or
vehicles of any kind;





      (3)   Provide for the regular cleaning, painting, repairing,
or disinfecting of all buildings within the camp area;





      (4)   Execute other measures as may be deemed necessary by the
officials charged with the enforcement of this chapter to preserve the
health, comfort, safety, and general welfare of all persons residing in the
camp and of the general public;





      (5)   Cause each dog, cat, or other pet animal to be kept
under control either by being tied up or confined in a proper enclosure;





      (6)   Report to the city manager all cases of diseases
effecting any resident of the camp;





      (7)   Prevent the committing of any nuisance on the camp
premises and report immediately to the proper authorities, all acts of a
disorderly character committed by any person or persons within the camp;





      (8)   Adopt any measures necessary to prevent trespassing upon
premises of adjacent property owner;





      (9)   Require that each trailer shall be equipped with a fire
extinguisher approved for oil and electrical types of fire;





      (10)   Post copies of standard state rules (Ohio Sanitary Code
regulations 260 through 290) in conspicuous places. 
('70 Code, § 1317.15)  Penalty, see § 150.99 (C)









150.55  PARKING HOUSE TRAILERS.




   (A)   Overnight parking of house trailers shall be prohibited on any
street or land in the city, except in an approved camp, provided that not
more than one house trailer of a nonpaying guest of a resident of the city
may park on the property of the resident for not exceeding 72 hours in one
month, provided a police permit has been secured and the trailer is located
not less than 10 feet from any building or other trailer.  No inhabited
house trailer shall be permitted in any trailer camp in the city for a period
of time to exceed one month in each 12 months, unless the trailer is located
in a trailer camp which is at least 600 feet from any residence district or
unless the trailer camp is separated from the district by a natural or
artificial barrier, such as a river, railroad, levee, embankment, etc.










   (B)   Parking and occupancy of self-contained house trailers shall
be permitted on city owned or operated parks for occupancy by persons serving
or operating recreational or other special events approved by the city,
provided a permit has been secured from the Building Inspector prior to the
occupancy of the trailer.  A fee of $3 shall be charged for each permit
issued hereunder and shall be issued under rules and regulations established
by the City Manager.
('70 Code, § 1317.16; amend Ord. 1763, passed 1-23-73)  Penalty, see §
150.99









150.56  GENERAL REGULATING AUTHORITY.




   (A)   The City Manager or his duly designated representative shall
at all times have the right to enter upon the premises of a trailer tourist
camp.










   (B)   The City Manager may prescribe additional reasonable
regulations governing the trailer camp or court operations as may become
necessary to protect the safety, health, and welfare of the inhabitants. 
('70 Code, § 1317.17)









150.57  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF  PERMITS.




   The City Manager may at any time, at his discretion or upon the request
of the Department of Health, Chief of Police, Fire Chief or any city
inspector, revoke or suspend a permit issued under the authority of this
chapter for failure to comply with any requirements herein set forth. 





('70 Code, § 1317.18)









150.58  NOTICE; APPEAL.




   In case of a revocation or suspension of a permit, a notice shall be
served on the camp manager specifying his failure to comply and requesting
him to appear before a board of review, composed of the City Manager, the
Chief Building Inspector and a representative of the County Board of Health,
not less than 72 hours after personal service of notice.  The camp manager
shall be required to show cause why the permit should not be revoked and he
shall have the right to introduce relevant evidence as he may desire, and the
board of review shall confront him with all charges placed against him. 
After the hearing, the board of review at its discretion may reinstate,
revoke, or suspend the permit. 





('70 Code, § 1317.19)










FENCES AND WALLS










   (EDITOR’S NOTE: Former Sections 150.60 to 150.69.1 were repealed by
Ordinance 3459, passed November 9, 2010.)















NUISANCES RELATIVE TO BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES









150.70  DEFINITIONS.




   (A)   For the purpose of §§ 150.70 through 150.81, the following
words and phrases shall have the following meaning ascribed to them
respectively.










   PUBLIC NUISANCE.  Any fence, wall, shed, house, building, structure,
or any part of the aforesaid, or the lot, lots, or parcel of land, basement,
cellar, sidewalk subspace, dock, wharf, or landing dock which, in its
entirety or in any part thereof, by reason of the condition in which the same
is permitted to be or remain, shall or may endanger the health, life, limb,
or property, or cause any hurt, harm, inconvenience, discomfort, damage, or
injury to any one or more persons in the city, in any one or more of the
following particulars:





      (1)   Being a nuisance to the general health of the community.





      (2)   Being a fire hazard.





      (3)   Being unsafe for occupancy or use on, in, upon, about,
or around the aforesaid premises.





      (4)   Being a nuisance because of long continued vacancy, lack
of reasonable or adequate maintenance of structure and/or premises adjacent
thereto, thereby depreciating the enjoyment and use of the property in the
immediate vicinity to the extent that it is harmful to the community in which
the structure is situated.





(`70 Code, Section 1321.01; amend. Ord. 2692, passed 1-10-89; amend. Ord.
2982, passed 7-11-95)









150.71  ABATEMENT NOTICE; REMEDY; HEARING.




   (A)   Whenever the City Manager or his designee, determines that
there has been a violation of any provision of § 150.70, in the city, he
shall give legal notice of such violation to the person or persons
responsible therefor, and require compliance with the ordinance, as
hereinafter provided.  Such legal notice and requirements shall be served
upon the owner, occupant, or agent, in person.  However, this notice shall
be deemed to be properly served upon the owner, occupant, or agent if a copy
thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to his last known mailing
address, residence, or place of business, or a copy is posted in a
conspicuous place in or on the premises affected.  If a registered or
certified mail envelope is returned with an endorsement showing that service
was refused, the notice may be served by ordinary mail to his last known
mailing address, residence or place of business.  The mailing shall be
evidenced by a certificate of mailing, and service shall be deemed complete 
on the date of mailing.  If the  registered or certified mail envelope is
returned with an endorsement showing that the service was unclaimed, the
notice may be served by ordinary mail to his last known mailing address,
residence or business.  The mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of
mailing, and service shall be deemed complete on the date of mailing,
provided that the ordinary mail envelope is not returned to the postal
authorities with an endorsement showing failure of delivery.  If service of
the written notice is unable to be perfected by any of the hereinbefore
methods, the City Manager or his designee shall cause the notice to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, once each week
for two consecutive weeks or a copy of the notice may be posted on the
premises.










   (B)   The aforesaid notice shall state, in brief, the findings of
the above mentioned officer or officers of the city with respect to the
existence of a public nuisance, as defined in § 150.70, and shall further
state that unless the owner or owners thereof shall cause the abatement of
the public nuisance within 30 days after the service of the notice, the same
will be abated by the city at the expense of the owner or owners. The owner
or owners may at any time after receipt of the notice make a request in
writing or in person to the City Manager or his designee, to be furnished
with a written list of the items which are alleged to constitute the public
nuisance and which are alleged to be in need of repair and/or replacement,
and/or removal. 
(Ord. 2982.  Passed 7-11-95.)










   (C)   The owner or owners may make immediate application in writing
or in person to the City Manager or his designee for a building permit to
undertake the repair or replacement of items alleged to constitute the public
nuisance.  The City Manager or his designee, upon receiving the complete
plans and specifications covering the repairs or replacements, indicating
abatement of the nuisance conditions and in conformity with the Ohio Building
Code, the Residential Code of Ohio, or the National Electric Code shall, upon
approval of the plans and specifications, cause a building permit to be
issued to the owner or owners.  The City Manager or his designee may grant
more than 30 days to the owner or owners, in which to effect the repairs
and/or replacements and/or removal, if there appears to be a bona fide
intention to abate the nuisance and good cause for a reasonable delay is
shown to exist.





(Ord. 3329.  Passed 5-23-06.)










   (D)   The owner or owners may, within 14 days after  receipt of the
notice, make a demand in writing to the Maintenance Code Appeals Board for a
hearing on the question of whether in fact a public nuisance, as defined by
§ 150.70, exists and/or whether more than 30 days should be granted to the
owner or owners to abate the nuisance.  The hearing shall be held within
reasonable time following receipt of the written demand and at least two
days' notice of the hearing shall be given to the owner or owners. The
hearing shall be conducted by the Maintenance Code Appeals Board. A majority
of the members of the Board must concur that a public nuisance, as defined by
§ 150.70, exists before enforcement of the abatement is carried out.  A
majority of the Board may amend or modify the notice and/or order, or extend
the time for compliance by the owner. A copy of the decision and order of the
Board shall be promptly served upon the owner or owners in the manner
provided by this section.  The decision and order of the Board shall be
final and conclusive, unless the owner or owners shall file, within ten days
after the decision is rendered, an appeal to a court of competent
jurisdiction.  Otherwise, the same shall become final and conclusive at the
termination of said ten day period.





(Ord. 2982, passed 7-11-95)  Penalty, see § 150.99(E)









150.72  NO RESTRICTION ON AUTHORITY.




   This chapter shall not be deemed to be a limitation or restriction on
the authority of any department, division, officer, official, or employee of
the city, but shall be deemed as an enlargement of any authority existing by
virtue of the statutes of the state, or any ordinance heretofore enacted by
Council.





(Ord. 2982, passed 7-11-95)










NUISANCES RELATIVE TO PREMISES










   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  Former Sections 150.75 through 150.81 were repealed
by Ordinance  3421, passed May 26, 2009.  See Chapter 158 for relevant
legislation.)










STREET ADDRESS NUMBERS










   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  Former Sections 150.85 and 150.86 were repealed by
Ordinance 3421, passed May 26, 2009.  See Chapter 158 for relevant
legislation.)










DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES










   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  Former Sections 150.87 through 150.92 were repealed
by Ordinance 3421, passed May 26, 2009.  See Chapter 158 for relevant
legislation.)














150.99  PENALTY.




   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 150.20 through 150.32
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.










   (B)   Whoever violates §§ 150.36 or 150.37 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.










   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 150.41 through 150.55
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.










   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 150.60 through 150.65,
150.69, or 150.69.1 shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor for the first
offense and shall be guilty of a fourth degree misdemeanor for each
subsequent offense.










   (E)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions
of §§ 150.71, 150.76, 150.77, 150.78, or 150.79 shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for a first offense and shall be guilty of a fourth degree
misdemeanor for each subsequent offense. Each violation or failure to comply
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.










   (F)   Whoever violates any provision of § 150.09 shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day that any violation or failure
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.










   (G)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 150.85 and 150.86 shall
be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.





(Ord. 2982, passed 7-11-95)









   (H)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of Sections 150.87 to 150.91 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree, and shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more
than six months, or both.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 




(Ord.  3192.  Passed 11-27-01.)

























CHAPTER 151
FIRE PREVENTION CODE









Section










151.01   Code adopted; identity and purpose





151.02   File and distribution copies





151.99   Penalty




 



151.01  CODE ADOPTED; IDENTITY AND PURPOSE.




   Pursuant to Section 5.07 of the Charter, there is hereby adopted by and
for the Municipality the latest and most current edition of the Ohio Fire
Code, as adopted by the Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire
Marshal, published in Division 1301:7 of the Ohio Administrative Code.





(Ord. 3542.  Passed 1-14-14.)









151.02  FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.




   Copies of the Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in Section 151.01, are on file
with the Clerk of Council for inspection by the public.  Copies are also on
file in the County Law Library.  In addition, the Clerk of Council has
copies available for distribution to the public at cost.





(Ord. 3542.  Passed 1-14-14.)









151.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any provision of the Ohio Fire Code as herein adopted
or any other provisions of this chapter, or fails to comply with any lawful
order made thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.  Any violations shall constitute a separate offense on each
successive day continued.










   Penalty, see Section 130.99.





(Ord. 3542.  Passed 1-14-14.)





























CHAPTER 152
SUBDIVISION CODE









Section










152.01   Adoption by reference




 



152.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.




   The booklet entitled “Subdivision Regulations for the City of West
Carrollton” is adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out herein. 
Copies of the “Subdivision Regulations for the city of West Carrollton”
shall be available for public inspection at the city offices. 
(Ord. 2145, passed 7-10-79; Am. Ord. 2360, passed 1-25-83; Am. Ord. 2908,
passed 10-5-93)





























CHAPTER 153
SIGNS









Section










153.01   Purposes





153.02   Findings





153.03   Definitions





153.04   Computations





153.05   Maximum sign area permitted





153.06   Supplemental requirements for wall signs





153.07   Maximum height of freestanding signs





153.08   Supplemental requirements for freestanding signs





153.09   Temporary signs





153.10   Signs exempt or partially exempt from regulation





153.11   Prohibited signs





153.12   Construction standards for signs





153.13   Maintenance





153.14   Administrative procedures





153.15   Regulations for nonconforming signs





153.16   Permit conditions and refunds





153.17   Inspections





153.18   Licenses





153.19   Indemnification and insurance





153.20   Application of chapter





153.21   Severability





153.22   Signs allowed in the right-of-way and on public property.





153.99   Penalty





Appendix A





Appendix B





Appendix C





Appendix D





Appendix E





Appendix F





Appendix G














153.01 PURPOSES.




   In the interest of promoting the general health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the City, as more fully set forth in the following findings,
these regulations are herein established to provide for the use, location,
size, height and design of signs, in order to ensure that all signs are
appropriate to, and compatible with, the character of the associated uses and
of the surrounding area. 










   In establishing these purposes, the City has determined that no sign
shall be permitted, erected or maintained as a main or accessory use except
in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, unless such sign is
exempted from the provisions of this Chapter. 










   In establishing these purposes, the City has determined that, without
adequate regulation and design standards, signs are a nuisance. The number of
signs in West Carrollton is excessive and is unduly distracting to motorists
and pedestrians, creates a traffic hazard, and in some places reduces the
effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public. As the appearance of the
City is marred by the excessive number, oversized and poorly designed signs,
both residential and business property values are adversely affected.
Therefore, the number of such distracting signs ought to be reduced and signs
permitted should comply with the standards of this chapter in order to reduce
the aforementioned effects.










   The signs of least value to the people of West Carrollton are those
which carry commercial messages other than the advertisement of any product,
service, event, person, institution, or business located on the premise[s]
where the sign is located.










   In view of the foregoing, any sign that does not conform to the
regulations of this Chapter, or any subsequent amendment thereto, shall
therefore be deemed a public nuisance, and as such, must be abated as
provided herein.  It is further declared that the regulations contained in
this chapter are the minimum regulations necessary to abate the nuisance and
to achieve the purposes of this chapter.










   More specifically, the purposes of these regulations are to:










   (a)   Enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community.










   (b)   Promote and maintain attractive, high value residential,
retail, commercial and industrial districts, and preserve the scenic and
natural beauty of designated areas.










   (c)   Provide necessary, yet reasonable and appropriate, signage for
all residential, institutional and business uses in the community.










   (d)   Ensure that signs are located and designed to maintain a safe
and orderly pedestrian and vehicular environment, and to avoid confusion or
hazardous conflict between traffic control signs and devices, and any other
permitted sign.










   (e)   To provide the public with a safe and effective means of
locating businesses, services and points of interest within the municipality.










   (f)   To protect the rights of property owners and occupants to
display messages protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. 
Therefore, the purpose of these regulations include the intention to remove
any doubt that it is the public's right to receive and display message
protected by the First Amendment, including, but not limited to, religious,
political, economic, social and philosophical messages subject, however, to
reasonable regulations to assure safety and minimize visual blight.  It is
the further purpose of these regulations to affirm that an expedient appeal
process exists that addresses these First Amendment concerns.










   (g)   Provide review procedures that enable and ensure the
comprehensive evaluation of a sign's appropriateness to the site, building
and surroundings, adherence to these purposes, and consistent enforcement of
this Chapter's regulations.










   (h)   Establish and enforce a reasonable procedure for the eventual
removal of legally non-conforming signs. 










   (i)   Prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this Chapter.




(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)








153.02  FINDINGS.




   Findings for this Chapter are contained within the adopting ordinance.





(Ord. 3559.  Passed 4-28-15.)









153.03  DEFINITIONS.




   Signs shall further be defined as follows and as generally illustrated
in Appendix A:










   (a)   Abandoned Sign:    (A) Any sign or its supporting sign
structure which remains without a message or whose display surface remains
blank for a period of one (1) year or more (for a sign or its supporting sign
structure which conforms to this chapter at the time of adoption); or (B) any
commercial sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer
applies; or (C) a Deteriorated Sign (as defined in herein) or a sign that is
not adequately maintained, repaired, or removed within the specified time as
ordered by this Chapter.










   (b)   Animated or Flashing Sign: Any sign having a conspicuous and
intermittent variation in the physical position of any part of the sign
and/or in the illumination of the sign.










   (c)   Attention-Attracting Device:  Any device, such as balloons,
searchlights, twirling signs, inflatable objects, etc., intended to attract
the attention of the public to an establishment, location, product or
service.    










   (d)   Bandit Sign:  A small, portable temporary sign typically
comprised of doubled-sided corrugated plastic and measure up to twenty-four
(24) inches by twenty-four (24) inches, and  mounted on an H-wire stake
planted in the ground.










   (e)   Banner Sign:  A temporary sign consisting of lightweight
fabric or similar material either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame,
and secured or mounted to allow motion caused by the atmosphere.  Banner
signs shall also include those signs commonly known as "feather banners",
"banner flags", or "beachwings".










   (f)   Billboard: see "Off-Premises Sign". 










   (g)   Building Marker:  Letters, words, or insignia cut into the
building surface, or otherwise permanently mounted on the building at the
time the building was constructed.










   (h)   Candela: A candela is a unit of luminous intensity or
candlepower.  In layman's terms, a wax candle emits about one candela (or
candle) in all directions.  In technical terms, a candela is a lumen per
steradian, and is equal to 1/60 of the luminous intensity per square
centimeter of a blackbody radiating at the temperature of solidification of
platinum (2.046 degrees Kelvin).  It is used for "point" sources to
calculate how much light is cast on a surface no matter where the surface
is. 










   (i)   Canopy or Awning Sign: A sign painted or printed on, or
attached to any awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or similar
structural protective cover over a door entrance or window.










   (j)   Changeable Copy Sign:  A sign, where the message or graphics
are not permanently affixed to the structure, framing or background, where
the message may be replaced periodically, either manually, mechanically or
electronically, and provided such sign does not constitute an animated or
flashing sign as defined above, and regulated in Section 153.08(c). 
Electronic changeable copy shall include any portion of a sign using any
combination of light emitting diodes (LED's) or other light-emitting
technology, fiber optics, light bulbs, or other illumination device within
the display area, and shall meet the requirements of Section 153.08(c).










   (k)   Commercial Message:  Any sign wording, logo, or other
representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls
attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.










   (l)   Commercial Sign:  A sign which contains a commercial message.










   (m)   Corporate Limit Sign: Signs established by the City, located
on City property, to designate its boundaries to persons traveling into the
community. Corporate limit signs may include the signs of nonprofit
organizations.










   (n)    Deteriorated Sign: Showing signs of weathering, rust,
corrosion, exposed wiring, chipped paint or faces, cracked, broken, torn, or
missing faces, or loose materials, or other evidence of disrepair.










   (o)    Digital Gateway Sign:  A large-format off-premise sign,
commonly referred to as a billboard, containing only electronic displays of
advertising as permitted in Section 153.08(d)










   (p)   Festoons:  A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags,
pinwheels, incandescent light bulbs or similar devices that are not an
integral, physical part of the building or structure they are intended to
serve.










   (q)   Flag: Any fabric or similar light-weight material attached at
one (1) end of the material, usually to a staff or pole, so as to allow
movement of the material by atmospheric changes and which contains
distinctive colors, patterns, symbols, emblems, insignia, or other symbolic
devices used to represent a government, political subdivision, and/or any
organization, whether for-profit or not-for-profit, but not including a
commercial message.










   (r)   Footcandle: A measurement of light intensity at an illuminated
object.  One footcandle is the illuminance at a point on a surface which is
one foot from, and perpendicular to, a uniform point source of one candela. 










   (s)   Freestanding Sign:  A non-movable sign anchored directly to
the ground or supported by one or more posts, columns, or other vertical
structures or supports, and not attached to or dependent for support from any
building.










   (t)   Government Sign: A sign designed for control of, or to provide
information to, traffic and other regulatory functions, and signs of public
utilities and/or common carriers indicating danger and/or location of
facilities and/or components, and aids for service or safety which are
erected by the order of a public officer in the performance of his/her public
duty (see also Public Sign).










   (u)   Hand-held Sign:   A portable commercial sign that is held,
carried, worn, balanced by or otherwise mounted on a person which is
typically intended to target vehicular traffic as its audience.  A hand-held
sign shall include a human or animal used as an advertising device for
commercial establishments, typically by holding or wearing of insignia,
masks, or costumes associated with the commercial establishment.










   (v)   Identification Sign:  A sign located at or near the entrance
to an industrial, business or residential development, which is necessary for
the safety or convenience of motorists and which is therefore erected
primarily in the public interest.










   (w)   Illuminated Sign:  A sign with an artificial light source
incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the
sign.










   (x)   Marquee Sign: A sign attached to or supported by a permanent
roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and extending
from the main façade of a building.










   (y)   Menu Board:  A permanent changeable copy sign associated with
restaurants with drive-through windows, car washes, or other businesses with
drive-up services.










   (z)   Name Plate: A permanent, fixed-copy, on-premises sign placed
on the front of a structure or mounted in the front lawn of a property. 










   (aa)   Non-Commercial Message: A message intended to direct
attention to a political candidate, election issue, political, social,
religious, community or public service issue or idea, aim,  viewpoint,
aspiration or purpose and not intended to produce any commercial benefit or
tend to encourage a commercial transaction.










   (bb)   Non-Commercial Sign:  A sign containing a noncommercial
message.  Any sign that can be displayed under the provisions of this
Chapter may contain a non-commercial message.










   (cc)   Nonconforming Sign:  A sign which was erected legally, but
no longer complies with subsequently enacted sign restrictions and
regulations.










   (dd)   Obscene Sign: A sign which contains words or pictures in
which the dominant theme, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest
in sex or is patently offensive because it affronts the contemporary
community standard relating to the description or representation of sexual
material which is without redeeming social value.










   (ee)   Off-Premises Sign:  A commercial sign advertising any
business, profession, product, activity, commodity, or service which is not
offered, sold, manufactured or furnished upon the premises where such sign is
located.  A billboard is a type of off-premises sign.










   (ff)   On-Premises Sign. A commercial sign advertising any business,
profession, product, activity, commodity, or service which is offered, sold,
manufactured or furnished  upon the premises where such sign is located.










   (gg)   Permanent Sign: Any sign that is securely attached or
installed upon a building, structure, or the ground, constructed of durable
materials, and is intended to exist for the duration of time that the use or
occupant is located on the premises.










   (hh)   Pennant: Any sign of light-weight plastic, fabric, or other
similar material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, which is
suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, and which is
designed to move in the wind. Flags of any government or political
subdivision shall not be considered pennants.










   (ii)   Pole Sign: Any freestanding sign which has its supportive
structure(s) anchored in the ground and which has a sign face elevated above
ground level.










   (jj)   Portable Sign:  Any sign not permanently attached to the
ground or other permanent structure and which is designed or constructed in
such a manner that it can easily be moved or relocated in its entirety
without involving any structural or support changes and without significant
expense. 










   (kk)   Public Sign. Any sign required or specifically authorized for
a public purpose by any law, statute, or ordinance which may be of any type,
number, area, height above grade, location, illumination or animation,
required by the law, statute, or ordinance under which the signs are erected
(see also Government Sign).










   (ll)   Projecting Sign: A type of wall sign affixed to any building
or part thereof, or structure, extending beyond the building wall or parts
thereof, or structure, more than what is necessary for the construction and
support of that wall sign.










   (mm)   Real Estate Sign:  A temporary sign pertaining only to the
sale, rent or lease of the premises on which it is located.










   (nn)   Roof Sign:  A sign erected on or extending above the top of
a flat roof parapet, or above the eave of a pitched roof, but not including a
sign totally within the vertical elevations of the lower slope of a mansard
or gambrel roof.










   (oo)   Rotating Sign:  A sign in which the sign itself or any
portion of the sign moves in a revolving or similar manner.










   (pp)   Sandwich Board:   A type of changeable copy portable sign
with an "A-frame" or "T-frame" base, which is displayed only during business
hours and on which advertisements are typically changed on a daily or regular
basis.










   (qq)    Seasonal or Holiday Display:  Any temporary display, such
as Christmas decorations, used for a holiday and installed for a short,
limited period of time.










   (rr)   Shopping Center:  A commercial development under unified
control consisting of four or more separate commercial establishments sharing
a common building, or which are in separate buildings that share a common
entranceway or parking area.










   (ss)   Sign: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part
thereof, legible from a public place, a public right-of-way, any parking area
or right-of-way open to use by the general public, which is designed and used
to attract attention to an institution, organization, business, product,
service, event, or location by any means involving words, letters, figures,
numerals, designs, symbols, devices,  fixtures, logos, pictures, graphics,
trademarks, colors, illumination, or projected images.










   (tt)   Sign Face: The surface of the sign upon, against or through
which the message of the sign is exhibited.










   (uu)   Sign Structure: The supports, uprights, bracing or framework
for signs.










   (vv)   Site Sign:  A temporary sign located on any parcel during
the time of active construction for which a building permit has been issued
but on which construction related to such building permit is incomplete.










   (ww)   Temporary Sign:  A sign which is designed to be used only
for a limited period of time, as regulated in this Chapter, and is not, nor
intended to be, permanently attached to a building, structure or the ground.










   (xx)    Under-Canopy Sign:  A sign suspended beneath a canopy,
ceiling, roof or marquee, and intended to be viewed primarily by pedestrians
under, or nearly under, such canopy, ceiling, roof or marquee, not including
a wall sign as defined below.










   (yy)   Wall Sign:  Any sign painted on, attached to or erected
against the wall of a building or structure, with the exposed face of the
sign in a plane parallel to the plane of said wall, and not extending more
than what is necessary for the construction and support of that wall sign.










   (zz)   Window Sign:  A permanent or temporary commercial sign
affixed to a window, including windows within doors or any sign sufficiently
near the inside of a window as to make such sign clearly and/or intentionally
visible, and easily read, by motorists or pedestrians outside the building
for the specific purpose of directing attention to a business, profession,
service, product or activity sold or offered upon the premises where such
sign is located.





   





   (aaa)   Work of Art:  Any item expressing creative skill or
imagination in a visual form, such as a painting or sculpture, which is
intended to beautify or provide an aesthetic influence to a public area or
area which is visible from the public realm and which in no way identifies or
specifically relates to a commercial business, product or service.










   (bbb)   Yard Sign: A temporary sign, which is mounted on a stake or
a frame structure (often made from wire) that includes one (1) or more stakes.





(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.04  COMPUTATIONS.




   The following rules shall apply to the computation of sign area and
sign height:










   (a)   Determining Sign Area and Dimensions.










      (1)   For a sign which is framed, outlined, painted or
otherwise prepared and intended to provide a background for a sign display,
the area and dimensions shall include the entire portion within such
background or frame.










      (2)   For a sign comprised of individual letters, figures or
elements on a wall or similar surface of the building or structure, or an
irregularly shaped freestanding sign, the area and dimensions of the sign
shall encompass a regular geometric shape (rectangle, circle or triangle), or
a combination of regular geometric shapes, which form, or approximate, the
perimeter of all elements in the display.  When separate elements are
organized to form a single sign, but are separated by open space, the sign
area and dimensions shall be calculated by determining the geometric form, or
combination of forms, which comprises all of the display areas, including the
space between different elements. 










      (3)   The sign area shall include the frame, if any, but shall
not include:










         A.   A pole or other structural support unless such pole
or structural support is illuminated or otherwise so designed to constitute a
display device, or a part of a display device.










         B.   Architectural features that are either part of the
building or part of a freestanding structure, and not an integral part of the
sign, and which may consist of landscaping, building or structural forms
complementing the site in general.










      (4)   The area of a sign with more than one face shall be
computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one
point.  When two identical sign faces are placed back to back so that both
faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and are part of the
same sign structure, the sign area shall be computed as the measurement of
one of the two faces.










      (5)   In the event of a dispute in determining the area or
dimensions of any sign, the opinion of the Zoning Enforcement Officer may be
appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals, as provided in Section 153.14.










   (b)   Determining Sign Height. 










      (1)   As illustrated in Appendix B, the height of a
freestanding sign shall be determined by measuring the vertical distance to
the highest point of a sign or its structure from the elevation of the ground
directly beneath the sign.  In cases where the site is elevated above or
below an adjacent roadway on natural topography, the sign height shall be
determined by measuring the vertical distance from the centerline ground
elevation point of the sign or its structure to the highest point of the sign
or its structure.  In cases where signs are located on a man-made earthen
mound or similar man-made ground formation, the sign height shall be
determined by measuring the vertical distance from the nearest edge of
adjacent street pavement or the upper surface of the nearest street curb to
the highest point of a sign or its structure.










      (2)   Clearance for freestanding and projecting signs shall be
measured as the smallest vertical distance between finished grade and the
lowest point of the sign, including any framework or other embellishments.










   (c)   Determining Building Frontages and Frontage Lengths.










      (1)   Primary and Secondary Frontage.  As illustrated in
Appendix C, the frontage of any building or site shall include the
elevation(s) facing a public street, facing a primary parking area for the
building or tenants, or containing the public entrance(s) to the building or
building units.










         A.   For multi-tenant buildings, the portion of such
building that is owned, or leased by a single tenant, shall be considered a
building unit.










         B.   The primary frontage shall be considered the
portion of any frontage containing the primary public entrance(s) to the
building or building units.










         C.   The secondary frontage shall include frontages
containing secondary public entrances to the building or building units, and
all walls facing a public street or primary parking area not designated as
the primary frontage by subsection (c)(1)A hereof.










      (2)   Length of Frontage.










         A.    For measurement purposes, the length of any
primary or secondary frontage as defined in subsection (c)(1) hereof and
illustrated in Appendix C, shall be the sum of all wall lengths parallel, or
nearly parallel, to such frontage.










         B.    For buildings with two or more frontages, the
length and allowable sign area shall be calculated separately for each such
frontage.










         C.   The building frontage for a building unit shall be
measured from the centerline of the party walls defining the building unit.





(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.05  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA PERMITTED. 




   The maximum permitted area for all signs shall conform to Appendix D,
Maximum Sign Dimensions except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.  (Ord.
3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.06  SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR WALL SIGNS.




   In addition to the provisions of Section 153.05, and any subsequent
requirements in Sections 153.07 through 153.11, the following provisions for
wall signs shall also apply:





   





   (a)   The maximum permitted area for all identification wall signs
shall include all signs conforming to the definitions of identification signs
and wall signs, including awning, canopy and marquee signs, and projecting
signs where permitted, except as exempted in accordance with subsection (d)
below.










   (b)   Bonus Areas Permitted.










      (1)   Secondary Frontage.  For buildings with secondary
frontage(s) as set forth in Section 153.04(c) and illustrated in Appendix C,
the total permitted area of all identification wall signs for each such
secondary frontage may be increased as follows:










         A.   The additional permitted sign area shall not exceed
fifty (50) percent of the total sign area that would otherwise be permitted
for the secondary frontage if it had qualified as the primary frontage under
Section 153.04(c). 










         B.   The additional permitted sign area for a secondary
frontage facing a public street which is parallel to a primary frontage
street shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of the total sign area that
would otherwise be permitted for the secondary frontage if it had qualified
as the primary frontage under Section 153.04(c). 










         C.   Any additional sign area permitted under this
subsection shall only be utilized on the secondary frontage elevation(s).










         D.   At the owner's discretion, some or all of the sign
area permitted for the primary frontage may be transferred to a secondary
frontage, provided that the resulting total area on the secondary frontage
does not exceed the maximum area which would have been permitted on that
elevation if it had qualified as the primary frontage.










      (2)   Large Building Setbacks.  Where a building frontage
exceeds a setback of two hundred (200) feet from a facing public street or
Interstate highway, the total area of all identification wall signs permitted
for that frontage may be increased by one-half square foot of sign area per
lineal foot of such frontage.










      (3)   Notwithstanding any other requirement of this Chapter,
no individual wall sign shall exceed two hundred (200) square feet.










   (c)   Minimum Clearance.  Under-canopy, projecting, awning, and
marquee signs shall have a minimum clearance of fourteen (14) feet over any
vehicular use area and eight and one-half (8 ½) feet over any pedestrian use
area.





   





   (d)   Projecting Signs.  Where permitted, the area of all such
signs shall be included in the total allowable sign area for all wall signs,
and shall complement the building design and purposes of this Chapter.  In
no instance shall any such sign be permitted to project over any public
right-of-way, and shall comply with the clearance requirements set forth in
Section 153.04(b)(2).  Projecting signs shall be attached to the building
wall at an angle of ninety (90) degrees and shall not mask or interrupt a
major architectural feature such as, but not limited to, doors, windows, or
trim.










   (e)    Window signs.  Window signs shall be attached to the
interior of the window.  The combined areas of all permanent and temporary
window signs for any window shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total
window area.  Window signs shall not be included in the calculation of total
wall sign area.  (Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.07  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF FREESTANDING SIGNS.




   The maximum height of any sign shall conform to Appendix D, Maximum
Sign Dimensions, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.





(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.08  SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR FREESTANDING SIGNS.




   In addition to the provisions of Sections 153.05 and 153.07 regarding
maximum area and height, and any subsequent requirements in Sections 153.08
through 153.11, the following provisions for freestanding signs shall also
apply: 










   (a)   Identification Signs Located at a Residential Development. 










      (1)   Such signs shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet
from the street right-of-way line, and no closer than 25 feet from any side
lot line.










      (2)   Single or Two-Family Residential Use.   










         A.   Permanent freestanding signs shall be prohibited on
any individual residential lot.










         B.   A permanent freestanding sign may be permitted on a
reserve parcel or other lands owned in common by residents living within a
specific neighborhood, a neighborhood group or association for the purpose of
identifying their neighborhood, as follows:










            1.   The freestanding identification sign must be
located at the entrance to a neighborhood fronting on a public street.










            2.   A maximum of one (1), single-face sign shall
be permitted at each neighborhood entrance.










            3.   The sign face area shall not exceed the
maximum sign face area permitted by Section 153.05 and the maximum height
permitted by Section 153.07.















            4.   The sign shall be mounted onto a brick,
stone, or keystone wall; wood or wrought iron fence; or earthen mound and the
entire area shall be landscaped.










            5.   The sign may be illuminated by ground-mounted
lighting only.










      (3)   Multi-Family Residential Use.










         A.   Only one (1) sign shall be permitted on each
premise.  However, the two sign faces of a freestanding sign may be split
into two signs and situated on both sides of the main entrance to a
multi-family development providing:










            1.   Each sign shall have only one (1) sign face.










            2.   The sign face area shall not exceed the
maximum sign face area permitted by Section 153.05 and the maximum height
permitted by Section 153.07.










         B.   The sign shall be mounted onto a brick, stone, or
keystone wall; wood or wrought iron fence; or earthen mound and the entire
area shall be landscaped.










         C.   The sign may be illuminated by ground-mounted
lighting only.










   (b)   Identification Signs Located at a Non-Residential
Development.  Any freestanding business, office or other commercial or
manufacturing identification sign shall also comply with all of the following:










      (1)   Maximum Number.  One freestanding sign shall be
permitted per project or development, except as provided for corner lots,
large lots, and lots facing an Interstate highway (I-75), as provided in
subsections (b) (5), (6) and (7) below.










      (2)   Setbacks From Street Right-Of-Way.










         A.   A minimum of ten (10) feet, except as provided in
subsection (b)(2)C. hereof.










         B.   Minimum setbacks, if any, shall be determined as
part of the approval process for any development within the OD, PUD, and CC
Districts.










         C.   Signs may not be located within the public
right-of-way. 










      (3)   Visibility.  No freestanding sign shall be placed in a
manner that would obstruct any sight line necessary to protect the safety of
any vehicular or pedestrian traffic.










      (4)   Multi-Tenant Facilities.










         A.   When a freestanding sign is erected on a site that
has more than one tenant, it is the property owner's responsibility to
determine the portion of the total allowable sign area that will be devoted
to various purposes for the development, the building, anchor tenant(s), all
tenants, or some combination thereof.










         B.   When a new multi-tenant development is initially
proposed, City approval of a Special Sign Program may be requested in
accordance with Section 153.14(c), to which all future tenants must comply.










      (5)   Additional Sign, Area, and Height for Corner Lots.  One
additional freestanding sign shall be permitted for a corner lot only in
compliance with all of the following:










         A.   The total frontage of both streets is not less than
three hundred (300) feet;










         B.   The area of each freestanding identification sign
complies with Section 153.05, and the total area of both freestanding signs
does not exceed one hundred fifty (150) percent of the maximum area permitted
for a single sign;










         C.   The second freestanding sign is located in a manner
clearly intended to provide identification along the secondary street; and










         D.   The total area of the two signs permitted above may
be combined into a single sign at the corner, with visibility from both
streets, provided that the area of no single freestanding sign face shall
exceed the maximum area permitted in Section 153.05 and subsection (b)(5)(B)
above, and provided that the maximum height does not exceed one hundred fifty
(150) percent of the maximum height permitted in Section 153.07.










      (6)   Additional Signs, Area and Height for Large lots.  The
area, height and number of freestanding signs on large lots may be increased
according to the following:










         A.   The allowable area of any freestanding sign face
may be increased by five (5) square feet of area for every twenty (20) lineal
feet of lot frontage greater than two hundred (200) lineal feet.










         B.   The allowable area pursuant to this section may be
distributed among more than one freestanding sign, provided that each such
sign is no less than two hundred fifty (250) lineal feet from any other such
sign.










         C.   Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the
area of any freestanding sign face shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150)
square feet.










         D.   The total area of the multiple signs permitted
above may be combined into a single sign, provided that the area of no single
freestanding sign face shall exceed the maximum area permitted in Section
153.05 and subsection (b)(6)(A.) and (b)(6)(C.) above, and provided the
maximum height does not exceed one hundred fifty (150) percent of the maximum
height permitted in Section 153.07.










      (7)   Additional Sign and Height for Sites Adjacent to I-75. 
Notwithstanding any other requirement of this Chapter, one additional
freestanding sign shall be permitted for lots with adjacent frontage facing
an Interstate highway (I-75), provided such sign complies with all of the
following:










         A.   The total frontage facing the highway is not less
than 200 feet.










         B.   The area of such sign does not exceed 150 square
feet.










         C.   The height of such sign does not exceed 25 feet.










         D.   Such sign is located in a manner clearly intended
to provide identification along the highway.










      (8)     Identification signs for multiple occupancy complexes
or shopping centers.  One freestanding sign shall be permitted in lieu of
individual freestanding signs for each individual occupant.  A Special Sign
Program may be requested in accordance with Section 153.14(c).










      (9)     Drive-up and drive-in menu board signs. 





         A.   Drive-up menu board signs located immediately
adjacent to the drive-up lane are permitted as follows:










            i.   Such signs shall not exceed seven (7) feet in
height.










            ii.   The total area of all such signs shall not
exceed sixty (60) square feet.










            iii.   All such signs shall conform to the
landscaping requirements for freestanding signs as specified in Section
153.08(d).










         B.   One (1) drive-in menu board sign shall be permitted
per drive-in stall and outdoor patio area, not to exceed eight (8) square
feet in area.










      (10)   A property owner may exchange the permitted
freestanding sign for a wall sign(s) provided:










         A.   The sign area for this wall sign shall not exceed
the sign face area of the freestanding sign that is permitted for the
property by this Chapter.










         B.   The wall sign that is exchanged for a freestanding
sign shall be located on a building wall that is not used to generate
permitted wall signage for the property.










         C.   The building wall used to locate this wall sign
shall not primarily face towards an abutting residential use.










         D.   No other freestanding sign shall be permitted on
the property unless otherwise permitted by this Chapter. 










      (11)   Instructional Signs. Sites which have a one-way pattern
of circulation and take access from a non-residential street are permitted
the following additional signage:










         A.   Each access point shall be permitted a single sign
located no further than ten (10) feet from the edge of pavement of such
access point.










         B.   Such signs shall be limited to four (4) square feet
in sign area and three (3) feet in sign height. 










         C.   Such signs shall not contain any changeable copy.










      (12)   All projects regulated by Zoning Code Section
154.17.01, Architectural Design Standards, shall comply with the freestanding
sign design requirements of Section 154.17.01(F)(2).










      (13)   No posts, columns, or other vertical structures or
supports shall be visible on freestanding signs measuring eight (8) feet or
less in height, except when necessary to protect the public health, safety
and welfare as determined by the City.










   (c)   Changeable Copy Signs.  Permanent changeable copy signs shall
only be permitted in compliance with the following:





   





      (1)   The area of changeable copy for permanent signs shall
not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total area of the sign face.










      (2)   A change in copy for signs in the following zoning
districts shall only be permitted manually:  RE Residential Estate District,
R-1 Single-Family Residential District, R-2 Single Family Residential
District, R-3 Single-Family Residential District, R-4 Multiple-Family
Residential District, R-5 Multiple-Family Residential District, R-PUD
Residential Planned Unit Development District, R-MHP Mobile Home Park
District, H Heritage District, A Agricultural District, and LD Limited
Development District.  However, electronic changeable copy signs with a
permanent black background and single-color copy (text only) in compliance
with this Chapter shall be permitted for public or private non-profit
institutional uses including but not limited to schools, libraries,
government, hospitals, and places of worship.










      (3)   Electronic changeable copy signs:





         A.   The interval for a change in electronic copy shall
not be less than five (5) seconds.  The change sequence must be accomplished
by means of instantaneous re-pixalization.










         B.   No portion of the image may constitute an animated
or flashing sign as defined in Section 153.03. 










         C.   All electronic changeable copy signs shall comply
with the illumination requirements of Section 153.12.










         D.   The leading edge of an electronic changeable copy
sign must be a minimum distance of thirty five (35) feet from other
electronic changeable copy signs. 










         E.   Audio speakers which project sound which is audible
beyond the premises are prohibited.










         F.   There shall be no more than two (2) electronic
changeable copy signs for each development.










         G.   Any malfunctioning electronic sign shall be turned
off or display a blank screen until repaired.










   (d)   Digital Gateway Signs.  To achieve the City's economic
development goals for the Miami Bend Community Entertainment District, as
supported by the West Carrollton Sustainable Comprehensive Plan, the Downtown
Corridor Master Plan, the City Center District regulations and other
long-range plans, off-premise Digital Gateway Signs meeting the following
criteria shall be permitted within the Miami Bend Entertainment District:










      (1)   Digital Gateway Signs shall be located within the
approved boundaries of the Miami Bend Entertainment District as approved by
the State of Ohio Division of Liquor Control on property used for legal
conforming non-residential purposes. 










      (2)   Digital Gateway Signs shall be associated with a major
entertainment, retail, recreational, educational, sporting, social, cultural,
or arts facility which will serve as a destination attraction drawing
customers primarily from outside of the city, as determined by the City of
West Carrollton.  Examples of a major facility include but are not limited
to a 3,000-seat soccer stadium, a 140,000 square foot multi-purpose event
center, or a 120,000 square foot shopping center.  No more than one (1)
Digital Gateway Sign shall be permitted per such facility, not to exceed a
maximum of three (3) Digital Gateway Signs within the district.










      (3)   Digital Gateway Signs shall be approved by the Planning
Commission in accordance with the requirements of Section 153.14(c), Special
Sign Programs.  Written notice shall be given to all property owners within
two hundred (200) feet of the proposed sign location at least seven (7) days
prior to the Planning Commission meeting.  Such approval shall ensure that
the Digital Gateway Sign meets the goals of the Miami Bend Community
Entertainment District, Sign Code, and Comprehensive Plan to protect and
enhance the physical appearance of the community and to promote and maintain
an attractive, high-value entertainment district. 










      (4)   Due to their scale and visibility, Digital Gateway Signs
shall comply with the following design criteria in order to meet the
aforementioned city goals.  However, in accordance with the Special Sign
Program regulations, proposed Digital Gateway Signs may vary from the strict
requirements of the Sign Code upon determination by the Planning Commission
that such variation will still meet those goals without substantial detriment
to the public good. 










         A.   Size. 










            i.   The area of a Digital Gateway Sign permitted
by Ohio Revised Code Chapter 5516 to be located within six hundred sixty feet
of the edge of the right-of-way of Interstate 75 shall not exceed six hundred
seventy two (672) square feet of display area per face with a maximum of two
(2) faces placed back to back.  The height of such Digital Gateway Signs
shall not exceed fifty (50) feet in height to the top of the digital display
panel.  The overall sign structure may exceed these dimensions to
accommodate architectural features or static non-commercial and non-digital
display area as determined by the Planning Commission.










            ii.   All other Digital Gateway Signs shall not
exceed three hundred seventy eight (378) square feet of display area per face
with a maximum of two (2) faces placed back to back.  The height of such
Digital Gateway Signs shall not exceed forty (40) feet in height to the top
of the digital display panel.  The overall sign structure may exceed these
dimensions to accommodate architectural features or static non-commercial and
non-digital display area as determined by the Planning Commission.










         B.   Spacing.










            i.   Digital Gateway Signs shall not be located
within three hundred (300) feet of a conforming single-family residential
structure in a single-family residential district.










            ii.   A Digital Gateway Sign shall not be located
within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of any other Digital Gateway Sign located
on the same side of the street or highway to which the sign is oriented.










         C.   Display. 










            i.   Digital Gateway Signs shall be limited to a
total of six (6) separate "digital spots" per minute per face (twelve digital
spots total for two-sided signs).  A digital spot refers to the advertising
message for an individual advertiser who purchases space on the sign, similar
to vinyl advertisements placed on a traditional sign. 










            ii.   Each digital spot shall have a "dwell time"
period, or delay between messages, of not less than eight (8) seconds, with a
transition time between digital spots accomplished by means of instantaneous
repixalization. 










            iii.   Digital Gateway Signs shall employ a
minimum physical pixel pitch of twenty (20) millimeters and shall be capable
of producing true NTSC (National Television System Committee) color. 










            iv.   No portion of the digital spot may
constitute an animated or flashing sign as defined in Section 153.03.










            v.   Any malfunctioning Digital Gateway Sign shall
be immediately turned off or revert to a black screen until such time as the
sign is fully repaired.










            vi.   All federal and state restrictions regarding
advertising content shall apply, including but not limited to restrictions on
the advertising of tobacco and alcohol products.










         D.   Illumination Level. 





            i.   Digital Gateway Signs shall not be of such
brightness as to cause glare that is hazardous to pedestrians or motorists. 










            ii.   Digital Gateway Signs shall meet
illumination requirements as specified in Section 153.12(a)(2)D.-F. 










         E.   Communication Devices.  Digital Gateway Signs
shall not have any communication device installed and/or used for the purpose
of transmitting or receiving any radio, optical, or other similar signals
directly or indirectly from vehicles in a manner intended to convey
customized advertising or other services to motorists or allow them to
interact with a message.  Audio speakers are prohibited on all Digital
Gateway Signs.










         F.   Community Feature. 










            i.   Digital Gateway Signs shall be permanently
identified with the name of the City of West Carrollton with letters of
sufficient size to be easily read by passing motorists. 










            ii.   Each sign is encouraged to provide access to
"space-available" spots for community-oriented messages by the City of West
Carrollton and other non-commercial entities, at no charge.  The failure to
provide this access shall not be used by the City as grounds to deny an
application.  All Digital Gateway Signs shall be equipped with the Amber
Alert chip technology.










         G.   Design.  Consistent with the City's goals
articulated above and the city's Architectural Design Standards, Digital
Gateway Signs shall be designed to produce an overall positive visual quality
and a unique, inviting, and decorative gateway into the community.  The
signs shall meet the following design criteria:










            i.   Digital Gateway Signs shall consist of a
base, body, and cap.  The base shall occupy the lowest portion of the
elevation and shall be comprised of masonry material, either brick or
stone.  The body shall occupy the middle portion of the elevation, shall be
set on the base, and shall consist of the display area fully encased within a
textured trim material such as EIFS or masonry.  The cap shall occupy the
highest portion of the elevation and shall consist of an architectural
feature distinguishable from but compatible with the design of the base and
body.  Appendix G provides a representative illustration of these design
standards.










            ii.   Colors utilized for the sign structure shall
be of low-reflectance, subdued earth-tones and compatible with traditional
brick and natural stone colors.  The sign shall not utilize neon,
fluorescent, bright primary colors, metallic colors, or other similar
high-intensity colors. 










         H.   Applicability.  Digital Gateway Signs shall comply
with all other requirements of this Chapter unless in conflict with this
Section, in which case the requirements of this Section shall apply.










         J.   Permit Required.  Prior to the installation of a
Digital Gateway Sign, the owner or their designee shall be required to apply
for and receive approval of a sign permit as required in Section 153.14.  A
non-refundable sign permit application fee shall accompany the application as
set forth in Chapter 37 of the City of West Carrollton Code of Ordinances.










      (5)   Damage/Abandonment.










         A.   In the event an approved Digital Gateway Sign is
damaged beyond repair and/or abandoned, the property owner shall be required
to remove the billboard within fifteen (15) days of the date of damage and/or
abandonment.  Upon request by the owner, the City may approve an extension
of up to no more than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of damage
and/or abandonment, provided property owner can show cause for the inability
to remove the sign within the original fifteen (15) day period. 










         B.   Prior to approval of a permit for the Digital
Gateway Sign, a performance bond, letter of credit, or other surety
acceptable to the City shall be issued to the City in which the issuer
guarantees removal of the Digital Gateway Sign within one hundred eighty
(180) days of its damage and/or abandonment.  This bond, letter of credit,
or other surety shall be in an amount equal to the estimated cost of removal
of the Digital Gateway Sign and restoration of the site to its former
condition, as approved by the City.  If the Digital Gateway Sign is not
removed by the issuer within the one hundred eighty (180) day period, the
City may exercise its right to foreclose on the bond, letter of credit, or
other surety and use as much of the proceeds as necessary to remove the
Digital Gateway Sign and restore the site to its former condition.  The
bond, letter of credit, or other surety shall run indefinitely until released
by the City.  Following a final inspection in which the City certifies that
the Digital Gateway Sign has been removed and the site restored in accordance
with City requirements, the City shall release any remaining portion of the
bond, letter of credit, or other surety.










   (e)   Landscaping.  A permanent freestanding sign shall be required
to provide a single continuous landscaped area to be installed and maintained
around the base of the sign in accordance with the following standards, as
illustrated in the general design guideline provided in Appendix E. and
provided below:










      (1)   The minimum landscaped area shall be equal to or exceed
the total area of the sign face, and shall include all points where the sign
structural supports attach to the ground.










      (2)   The landscaped area shall include two or more of the
following plant materials, selected to provide a variety of color, heights,
hardiness, foliage/flowering characteristics, and massing:










         A.   Evergreen or deciduous shrubs.










         B.   Flowering perennials (#1 container).










         C.   Groundcover or seasonal annuals.










         D.   Ornamental trees or grasses.










      (3)   All landscaping shall be permanently located and
properly maintained with dead vegetation replaced as soon as weather
permits.  The use of concrete, asphalt or any other any paved surface inside
the required landscaped area is prohibited.  (Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.09  TEMPORARY SIGNS.




   (a)   Temporary signs shall comply with all applicable requirements
of this Chapter unless specified otherwise, and shall also comply with the
following requirements:










      (1)   Temporary commercial signs may be permitted for a
maximum of thirty (30) days.  Temporary signs shall meet all height, size,
and setback requirements as specified in this Chapter, but may be used to
exceed the maximum allowable message area for a parcel or individual occupant.










      (2)   A maximum of one (1) temporary freestanding or wall sign
shall be permitted per occupant per public street frontage at any one time,
except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.  On property with
multiple-occupancy, a maximum of two (2) temporary freestanding signs shall
be permitted per public street frontage at any one time, except as otherwise
provided in this Chapter.  Signs shall be separated by at least thirty (30)
linear feet. 










      (3)   Permit rights may be transferred by one occupant to
another occupant located on the same property provided that written
authorization is granted by the occupant transferring its permit rights. 
Permit rights may not be transferred from a vacant space, nor between
different addresses for the same occupant.










      (4)   Temporary signs may be displayed for a maximum of thirty
(30) days within any sixty (60) day period.  The thirty (30) days may be
utilized in smaller increments of time during the sixty (60) day period with
prior approval of a display schedule by the City.  Unused days within one
permit period may not be transferred to another permit period.  Permit fees
will be calculated as the pro-rated percentage of the 30-day permit fee;
however, the full refundable deposit fee shall be required with each permit.










      (5)   Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.










      (6)   The minimum setback for all freestanding temporary signs
shall be ten (10) feet from the public right-of-way.










      (7)   Temporary signs with changeable copy shall also comply
with the requirements of Section 153.08(c).










      (8)   Sign supports shall consist of metal or other similar
fabricated, durable material.










      (9)   Permits for temporary signs shall require an application
fee plus a refundable deposit as required by Chapter 37:  General Fee
Schedule, which shall be refunded if the temporary sign is removed within
five (5) days of the expiration date of the permit.  Any applicant not
removing the temporary sign within this time period shall forfeit the deposit
and the temporary sign shall become an unlawful sign.










      (10)   Non-commercial signs are exempt from the requirements
of this Section.










      (11)   Temporary signs shall be legible, neat, and
professional in appearance.  Manual or freehand application of graphics and
text, including but not limited to paint, is prohibited.










   (b)   Site Signs.  A site sign shall be permitted only in
compliance with the following:










      (1)   There shall be not more than one site sign per
residential subdivision, planned residential development, multi-family
project or lot proposed for a non-residential development.










      (2)   The site sign shall be an accessory use to a lawful
temporary activity of land development.










      (3)   The site sign shall be erected and maintained on a lot
only during the period of time that the building project is under
construction.  A site sign shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of
completion of the project or within two days of the erection of a permanent
identification sign, whichever comes first.










   (c)   Temporary Signs in Residential Districts. Limited temporary
signs are permitted in any Residential District, subject to the following
provisions:










      (1)   No such sign shall exceed the size and height
requirements provided in Section 153.05 and 153.07. 










      (2)   Each residential unit shall be permitted to erect one
temporary sign either in a window or as a freestanding sign in the front
yard.  Such temporary sign shall be displayed for a duration not to exceed
thirty (30) days, after which time the sign shall be removed.










      (3)   Temporary freestanding signs shall be located no closer
than ten (10) feet from a public right-of-way or a side lot line.










      (4)   Commercial signs shall not be permitted in residential
districts except:










         A.   Temporary real estate signs shall be permitted as
provided in Section 153.09(e). 










         B.   Three (3)  temporary yard signs shall be
permitted, not to exceed four (4) square feet in area or three (3) feet in
height, up to two (2) times per calendar with a maximum duration of
seventy-two (72) hours.  Such signs shall not be located within the public
right-of-way, and shall be located on the property on which the sign owner
resides or shall have the permission of the owner of the property on which
the sign is located.  All such signs shall be removed within twenty-four
(24) hours of expiration of the seventy-two (72)-hour period. 










      (5)   Temporary signs located at single-family residences are
exempt from permit requirements as provided in Section 153.14.










      (6)   Temporary signs permitted in residential districts shall
comply with the requirements of subsection (a), unless specified otherwise in
this Section.










   (d)   Temporary Signs in Non-Residential Districts. Limited
temporary signs are permitted as provided in Section 153.05 and Section
153.07, subject to the following provisions:










      (1)   Temporary window signs










         A.   The combined areas of all permanent and temporary
window signs for any window shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total
window area.










         B.   Temporary window signs are exempt from permit
requirements as provided in Section 153.14.










      (2)   Sandwich Boards or Bandit Signs.  Sandwich boards or
bandit signs shall be permitted in addition to signage otherwise permitted in
this Chapter as follows:










         A.   Sandwich boards or bandit signs may only be
displayed by commercial businesses located within the OD Olde Downtown
District, the CC City Center District, the B-1 Convenience Commercial
District, and the B-2 General Commercial District.










         B.   Sandwich boards or bandit signs shall only be
displayed during the operating hours of the business to which it pertains.










         C.   A maximum of one (1) sandwich board or bandit sign
per business per public street frontage shall be permitted on private
property at any one time, except within vehicular use areas or as otherwise
restricted by this section.  For a business fronting directly onto a public
sidewalk, a  sandwich board or bandit sign may be placed on the sidewalk
provided that it does not impede pedestrian access or pose a safety
concern.  Bandit signs shall not be placed within any public right-of-way,
except as provided herein, nor posted on trees, utility poles, public
benches, public property, or other objects.










         D.   Sandwich boards shall not exceed six (6) square
feet per sign face or twelve (12) square feet in sign area if two-sided, and
shall not exceed three (3) feet in height.  Bandit signs shall not exceed
four (4) square feet per sign face or eight (8) square feet in sign area if
two-sided, and shall not exceed three (3) feet in height.










         E.   Illuminated or electronic sandwich boards or bandit
signs are prohibited.  Copy may only be changed manually.










         F.   Sandwich boards and bandit signs as provided herein
are exempt from permit requirements as provided in Section 153.14.










         G.   The requirements of Section 153.09(a) shall not
apply to sandwich boards and bandit signs.  However, all other provisions of
this Chapter shall apply unless specified otherwise above.










      (3)   Temporary signs permitted in non-residential districts
shall comply with the requirements of subsection (a), unless specified
otherwise in this Section.










   (e)   Temporary Real Estate Signs.  One (1) temporary real estate
sign per lot frontage shall be permitted which complies with the following
requirements:










      (1)   Temporary real estate signs shall comply with the
maximum area and height requirements for temporary signs provided in Section
153.05 and Section 153.07.  However, for lots with frontage facing an
Interstate Highway (I-75), one temporary freestanding real estate sign shall
be permitted up to a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet in area and a
maximum of twelve (12) feet in height, to be placed adjacent to the
Interstate Highway frontage. 





         





      (2)   The sign shall be either a freestanding or wall sign. 
Banners shall not be permitted to be used as temporary real estate signs. 
However, one temporary real estate banner shall be permitted on a building
face fronting directly on Interstate Highway 75 (I-75) right-of-way which
meets the area requirements for permanent wall signs and all other pertinent
requirements of this Chapter. 















      (3)   A sign permit shall not be required.










      (4)   Temporary real estate signs are not subject to time
restrictions specified in section 153.09(a)(1), but must be removed
immediately upon the sale, lease, or rental of the property or space to which
it pertains.










      (5)   Temporary real estate signs shall comply with the
requirements of subsection (a), unless specified otherwise in this subsection.










   (f)   Temporary Sign for Grand Opening.  One temporary sign is
permitted per public street frontage for no more than seven (7) days prior to
nor more than fourteen (14) days following the first day a new establishment
or an existing establishment with new ownership is open to the public. 
These signs shall be in addition to other signage permitted in this Chapter,
and shall meet all height, size, setback, and other temporary sign
requirements as specified in this Chapter, but shall not require a permit.





(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.10  SIGNS EXEMPT OR PARTIALLY EXEMPT FROM REGULATION.




   The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this chapter.










   (a)   Any sign located entirely inside a building that is not
legible from the public right-of-way or from property other than the property
on which the sign is located.










   (b)   Works of art that do not include a commercial message.










   (c)   The flag or insignia of any nation, state, city or other
political unit and/or any organization, whether for-profit or
not-for-profit.  Such flags may contain any noncommercial message but shall
contain no commercial message other than the name and/or symbol of an entity.
Where applicable, flags must be flown in accordance with protocol established
by the Congress of the United States for the Stars and Stripes.  (Public Law
829, "The Flag Code").  Any flag not meeting these conditions shall be
considered a sign and shall be subject to regulations as such. 










   (d)   Government signs and/or public signs.










   (e)   Seasonal or holiday displays that contain no commercial
message.










   (f)   Signs on a truck, bus, trailer or other vehicle while such
vehicle is operated in the normal course of a business which is not primarily
the display of such signs.










   (g)   Tablets, grave markers, headstones, statuary or remembrances
of persons or events that contain no commercial message.










   (h)   Cornerstones containing no advertising message incorporated
into the building design as an architectural feature.










   (i)   Corporate limit signs.










   (j)   The following signs may be erected or constructed without a
permit, but may be subject to additional regulations under this Chapter. 
Where a sign is erected pursuant to a federal or state statute or a court
order, the sign may exceed the size standards of this ordinance or otherwise
deviate from the standards set forth in this ordinance to the extent that the
statute or court order expressly requires the larger size or other
deviation.  In all other respects, such signs shall conform to the standards
of this Chapter:










      (1)     Signs installed by employees or officials of a state
or federal agency in the course of their governmental duties and bearing no
commercial message;










      (2)   Signs required by an order of a court of competent
jurisdiction;










      (3)     Signs installed by a transit company with a franchise
or other right to operate in the City where such signs are installed along
its routes and bear no commercial message.










      (4)   Yard signs bearing no commercial message.  (Ord.
3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.11  PROHIBITED SIGNS.




   All signs not expressly permitted in this Chapter or exempt from
regulation pursuant to Section 153.10, are prohibited in the City.  Such
signs include but are not limited to the following:










   (a)   Abandoned signs.










   (b)   Animated, flashing, rotating signs and festoons, inflatable
signs, tethered balloons, pennants, searchlights, streamers, exposed light
bulbs, strings of lights, used other than as a minor decorative accent to a
building or property, and any clearly similar features, except those
specifically exempt from regulation in Section 153.10, or temporary special
event signs or banner signs permitted in Section 153.09 and the West
Carrollton Banner Policy.










   (c)   Off-premises signs, except as provided in Section 153.08(d),
Digital Gateway Signs.










   (d)   Roof signs.










   (e)   Signs attached to or placed on a vehicle, including but not
limited to automobiles, trucks, boats, campers, and trailers, which is parked
in a manner to convey visible information to or attract the visual attention
of a person in a public right-of-way for the purposes of providing
advertisement for products or services or directing people to a business or
activity, in addition to legally permitted signage for the site.  This
restriction shall not apply to buses or other forms of public transportation,
taxicabs, or to vehicles with permanently applied vehicle graphics such as
vinyl decals, lettering, or wraps that are displayed within the normal
unaltered lines of the vehicle so long as  the vehicle is parked entirely
within a legal parking space and is engaged in the usual business of the
owner, and not merely, mainly, or primarily used to display advertising.










   (f)   Signs that would cause confusion because of their resemblance
to highway traffic control or direction signals.










   (g)   Merchandise, equipment, products, vehicles or other items
which are not available for purchase, but are intended to attract attention,
or for identification or advertising purposes.










   (h)   Signs located on trees, utility poles, public benches, traffic
control devices, bus shelters, trash receptacles, mechanical equipment,
fence, permanent sign, or any other form of public property or unapproved
supporting structure; or which obstruct any sight line necessary to protect
the safety of any vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or within any public
right-of-way.  The required sight distance shall be as specified in the
current edition of the State of Ohio Department of Transportation Location
and Design Manual, Volume 1, Roadway Design Section 201.










   (i)   Signs located on any accessory structure, as defined in the
Zoning Code.










   (j)   Hand-held signs in or on the public right-of-way or in a
manner visible from the public right-of-way.  This provision is directed
toward such displays intended to draw attention to a commercial message or
for a commercial purpose, and is not intended to limit such displays by
persons participating in demonstrations, political rallies, displaying
non-commercial messages or otherwise exercising their valid First Amendment
rights.










   (k)   Obscene signs; or signs that contain advertising matter which
is untruthful or that advertise illegal activity.










   (l)   Attention-attracting devices.










   (m)   Deteriorated signs.










   (n)   Any sign requiring a permit in accordance with this Chapter
and not having said permit approved and issued by the City.





(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.12  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR SIGNS.




   In addition to ensuring compliance with the numerical standards and
other requirements of this Chapter, signs shall comply with the following
minimum construction standards:










   (a)   Illuminated Signs.  Illuminated signs shall be permitted only
in compliance with all of the following provisions:










      (1)   Residential Districts and Uses.










         A.   No such sign shall be internally illuminated except
as provided in Section 153.08(c)(2).










         B.   The brightness or intensity of any external
illumination shall be limited to what is necessary to identify the use's
location.










         C.   The illumination shall comply with all requirements
provided in paragraph (2) below.










      (2)   All Other Districts and Uses.  Either internal or
external illumination shall be permitted, only in accordance with all of the
following:










         A.   Light sources shall be shielded from all adjacent
buildings and streets.










         B.   Lights shall not be of such brightness as to cause
glare that is hazardous to pedestrians or motorists, or to cause reasonable
objection from adjacent residential districts.










         C.   No exposed incandescent or fluorescent lamp shall
be permitted.










         D.   At no time shall a sign exceed an illumination
level of three tenths (0.3) footcandles above the ambient light illumination
level, as measured in conformance with the following process:










            i.   The illumination level of a sign shall be
measured with an illuminance meter set to measure footcandles accurate to at
least two decimals. 










            ii.   Light measurements shall be taken with the
footcandle meter aimed directly at the sign message face, or at the area of
the sign emitting the brightest light if that area is not the sign message
face, at a distance from the sign being measured as specified in Appendix F.










            iii.   An ambient light measurement shall be taken
using a footcandle meter at some point between the period of time between
thirty (30) minutes past sunset and thirty (30) minutes before sunrise, with
the sign turned off to a black screen.










            iv.  Immediately following the ambient light
measurement taken in the manner required by this subsection, an operating
sign light measurement shall be taken with the sign turned on to full white
copy for a full color-capable sign or a solid message for a single-color sign.










            v.   The illumination level of a sign conforms
with the illumination requirements of this subsection if the difference
between the ambient light measurement and the operating sign light
measurement is three tenths (0.3) footcandles or less.










         E.   All signs utilizing light-emitting diodes (LED) or
other light-emitting technologies shall be equipped with a sensor or other
device that automatically determines the ambient illumination level and shall
be programmed to automatically dim according to ambient light conditions to
meet the illumination requirements articulated above.  The illumination
level must be capable of being both remotely and manually adjusted.










         F.   If necessary, the City may seek assistance from a
professional lighting engineer to evaluate proposed illumination levels. The
applicant shall pay costs associated with such a review. In this case,
compliance with illumination requirements shall be determined following a
site inspection that includes field verification of illumination levels.










      (3)   Signs shall not be lighted to obstruct traffic control
or any other public informational signs.  Signs visible from sight lines
along streets shall not contain symbols or words, or red and green lights
that resemble highway traffic signs or devices.  These regulations shall not
apply to permitted holiday display lighting.










   (b)   Construction Standards.  The construction, erection, safety
and maintenance of all signs shall comply with the Ohio Building Code and all
of the following:










      (1)   Signs shall be structurally sound and located so as to
pose no reasonable threat to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.










      (2)   No sign shall be suspended by non-rigid attachments that
would allow the sign to move significantly because of wind.










      (3)   All permanent freestanding signs shall have
self-supporting structures erected on, or permanently attached to, concrete
foundations. 










      (4)   Sign supports shall consist of metal or other similar
fabricated, durable material.





All signs shall be legible, neat, and professional in appearance.  Manual
application of graphics and text, including but not limited to paint, is
prohibited.










      (5)   No signs shall be erected, constructed or maintained so
as to obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window, or door opening used
as a means of egress. 










      (6)   Signs shall be located in such a way as to maintain
horizontal and vertical clearance of all overhead electrical conductors in
accordance with National Electrical Code specifications, depending on
voltages concerned.  However, in no case shall a sign be installed closer
than twelve (12) inches horizontally or vertically from any conductor or
public utility guy wire.










      (7)   All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the
Ohio Building Code (OBC) and the National Electric Code (NEC).





(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.13  MAINTENANCE.




   All signs shall be maintained in accordance with the following:










   (a)   Every sign, whether requiring a sign permit or not, shall be
properly maintained in a safe and presentable condition at all times and must
not appear to be in a deteriorated or dilapidated condition.  Proper sign
maintenance includes, but is not limited to, the replacement of missing sign
panels and defective parts, painting, cleaning, and other acts required for
maintenance of the appearance and structural condition of the sign in order
to comply with all applicable code requirements.










   (b)   Each sign shall contain the name, address and telephone number
of a firm or person responsible for erecting the sign.  Such information
shall be placed on the frame or other supports and large enough to be read by
a person standing on the ground, sidewalk or parking lot nearest the sign.










   (c)   If a sign is deemed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer to be in
an unsafe, deteriorated or dilapidated condition, the provisions of Section
153.14(g) shall apply.










   (d)   In cases of emergency, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may
cause the removal of a dangerous or defective sign twenty-hour (24) hours
after providing notice to the property owner or lessee. 










   (e)   Whenever any sign, either conforming or non-conforming to
these regulations, is required to be removed for the purpose of repair,
re-lettering or repainting, the same may be done without a permit or any
payment of fees provided that all of the following conditions are met:










      (1)   There is no alteration or remodeling to the structure or
the mounting of the sign itself;










      (2)   There is no enlargement or increase in any of the
dimensions of the sign or its structure;










      (3)   The sign is accessory to a legally permitted,
conditional or nonconforming use.





(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.14  ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.




   (a)   Signs Requiring a Permit.  All signs regulated by this
Chapter shall require a permit prior to its construction or alteration,
except as exempted in subsection (b).










   (b)   Signs Not Requiring Permit. The following signs shall be
permitted without  first obtaining a sign permit, provided such sign is
reviewed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or his/her designee, and is
determined to be in full compliance with the criteria set forth by all
applicable regulations of this Chapter:










      (1)   Temporary signs located at single-family residences.





      





      (2)   Nameplates.










      (3)   Window signs.










      (4)   Real estate signs.










      (5)   Temporary yard signs.










      (6)   Signs conforming to the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and bearing no commercial message.










      (7)   Signs installed by employees or officials of a state or
federal agency in the course of their governmental duties and bearing no
commercial message.










      (8)   Signs installed by employees of the City or Montgomery
County in the course of their governmental duties and bearing no commercial
message.










      (9)   Signs required by a state or federal statute or state or
federal court.










      (10)   Signs installed by public utilities in their
rights-of-way or on their facilities and bearing no commercial message other
than such message is necessary to identify the use.










      (11)   Signs installed by a transit company with a franchise
or other right to operate in the City and bearing no commercial message,
where such signs are installed along its routes and relate to schedules or
other information about the transit route.










      (12)   Signs in parks that relate to the use of one or more
facilities (including temporary uses by particular entities or individuals),
provided that such signs shall not be legible from any public right-of-way
outside the park and such signs shall bear no commercial message except one
that relates to a lawful commercial activity or lawful temporary use of a
facility within the park.










      (13)   Signs located inside stadia, arenas, ball fields or
other such facilities.  Where a facility is located adjacent to another such
facility, such as in an athletic complex, such signs shall be located
completely within the separate stadium, arena, ball field, or other such
facility.  Signs located inside an outdoor facility shall be deemed not to
be legible from such right-of-way even if they may be legible from some
locations outside the facility.










      (14)   Temporary identification signs for businesses, the
access to which has been restricted, altered or otherwise impacted by a
public construction project.  Such signs, bearing no commercial message, may
be off-premises signs but shall be subject to the provisions of Sections
153.05 and 153.07.










      (15)   Sandwich boards or bandit signs, subject to the
provisions of Section 153.09(c)(2).










      (16)   Temporary signs for a Grand opening.










   (c)     Special Sign Programs.










      (1)   Diversity in the visual environment of the city requires
some flexibility in the regulation of signage.  This section provides this
flexibility by permitting a property owner or his/her designee to submit a
Special Sign Program for consideration of approval which may vary from the
regulations contained in this Chapter.  A Special Sign Program is a creative
incentive for a unified visual statement that integrates the design of
signage with the design of the building on which it will be displayed and
with the surrounding area, resulting in a more visually appealing sign
display and improved community aesthetics.  This Special Sign Program shall
supersede and may be either more or less restrictive than the regulations
contained in this Chapter.   










      (2)     A property owner may submit a Special Sign Program to
the Planning Commission that need not comply with some or all of the
requirements of this Chapter.  The Special Sign Program shall contain a
visual representation of the proposed signage, including lettering,
illumination, color, size, height, placement, and location.  A Special Sign
Program application shall include all information required in Section
153.14(d), and shall follow review procedures specified in Section
153.14(e)(3).










      (3)   The Planning Commission may approve a Special Sign
Program if the signage visually represented in the program is:










         (a)   Consistent with the purposes of this Chapter;










         (b)   Compatible with the theme, visual quality, and
overall character of the surrounding area; and










         (c)   Appropriately related in size, shape, materials,
illumination, and character to the function and architectural character of
the building and/or premises on which it will be displayed, and is compatible
with existing adjacent activities.










      (4)   A premises for which a Special Sign Program has been
approved by the Planning Commission may only display signage that complies
with the approved Special Sign Program, which shall supersede and replace the
regulations for signage in this Chapter.  Any subsequent application by a
tenant or other occupant of the site shall be reviewed and approved by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer only as consistent with the approved Special Sign
Program.










   (d)   Application Requirements.  An application for a sign permit
shall be made to the Zoning Enforcement Officer or his/her designee, and
shall include two (2) copies; one depicting the actual colors of the proposed
sign(s) and building, and one letter-sized copy suitable for reproduction. 
Specifically, the application shall include all of the following:










      (1)   Name, address and signature of the property owner or
his/her legal agent.










      (2)   Street address or location of the property proposed for
the requested sign(s).










      (3)   A complete site plan or photograph showing the location
of the sign, its relationship to the building, the locations, areas and
dimensions of all existing signs on the site, the adjacent parcels and the
parking lots, drives and sidewalks;










      (4)   Detailed drawings showing the design of the sign,
including size, content, style of lettering, logo and other graphic features,
colors of the applied lettering and background, and materials of the sign and
the frame or structure;










      (5)   Construction, erection and fastening details as
applicable; and










      (6)   A permit fee for each sign application, in accordance
with Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule.










      (7)   A presentation of the proposed sign or signs which best
illustrates how it or they would be experienced by the public if approved and
erected.










   (e)   Review and Approval.










      (1)   The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall review a submitted
application to assure full compliance with the requirements of this
Chapter.  The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall determine whether a submitted
application is in full compliance with the requirements of this Chapter
within fourteen (14) days of its submission.










         A.   If the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines that
the application is not in full compliance, the application shall be denied by
the Building Inspection Division or shall be approved subject to the
applicant's compliance with the conditions required to bring the application
into full compliance.  The Building Inspection Division shall return the
application to the applicant with the written decision described in Section
153.14(f)(1),  indicating the section or sections with which the application
does not comply.










         B.   If the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines that
the application is in full compliance, he/she shall either:





   





            1.   Issue a permit for the erection, alteration,
or relocation of the sign within thirty (30) days of receipt of such
application; or










            2.   Submit such application to the Planning
Commission for review and approval, of any sign, or required signage program
where the associated building or project would otherwise require the review
and approval of the Planning Commission.










      (2)   Requests for a variance from any requirement of this
Chapter shall be immediately forwarded to, reviewed by, and approved or
disapproved by, the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the procedures
set forth in Section 154.06.01 of the Zoning Code.  Variances related to
this Chapter shall be limited to setback, area, and height requirements only,
unless the Board finds that requiring strict compliance with the provisions
of this chapter may impose an undue hardship and that the granting of the
variance from the provisions of this chapter will not depreciate or damage
neighboring property, will not create a safety hazard and will not be
contrary to the purposes of this chapter.










      (3)   Any application requiring review by the Planning
Commission shall be received by the Zoning Enforcement Officer a minimum of
thirty (30) days prior to the next scheduled regular or special meeting of
the Planning Commission.  If the application is not received at least thirty
(30) days in advance, consideration of the application shall be deferred to
the following scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission or, at the
discretion of the Planning Commission, to a special meeting.










         A.   The Planning Commission shall review a submitted
sign application for full compliance with all applicable provisions of this
Chapter, and shall approve, disapprove, or approve with suggested
modifications which would achieve full compliance.










         B.   Upon the approval of an application by the Planning
Commission, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall issue a sign permit within
ten (10) business days of submission of a completed sign permit application,
provided that the proposed sign complies with all other applicable
regulations.










         C.   Upon the disapproval of an application by the
Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall convey its reasons for
disapproval to the applicant, in writing, within five (5) business days. 
Such notification may also include suggested modifications, which, if
incorporated by the applicant, could bring the sign into compliance with this
Chapter.  Applications so modified may be resubmitted for review at the next
scheduled Planning Commission meeting.










      (4)   In any application where a matter of interpretation
arises, the more specific definition or higher standard shall prevail.










   (f)   Appeal.










      (1)   If a permit application is denied or approved with
conditions, the City shall prepare a written decision within ten (10) days of
its decision, stating the reason or reasons for the action and describing the
applicant's appeal rights under this Section and the applicant's rights to
seek a variance





under Section 153.14(e)(2-3) of this Code and serve it upon  the applicant
by certified mail.










      (2)   If the Zoning Enforcement Officer prepares a Notice of
Violation pursuant to Section 153.14(g), the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
include within such Notice a description of the recipient's appeal rights
under this Section.










      (3)   An applicant representing the recipient of a denial or
conditional approval of a permit application or a Notice of Violation, who
wishes to appeal from the denial or conditional approval of a permit
application or from a Notice of Violation, shall file a notice of the appeal
with the Board of Zoning Appeals within ten (10) days following the
applicant's receipt of the written decision described in Section (f)(1) or
the receipt of a Notice of Zoning Violation described in Section (f)(2).










      (4)   When the Board of Zoning Appeals receives a notice of
appeal from the denial or conditional approval of a permit application or
from a Notice of Violation, the Board shall hold a public hearing within
thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice of appeal and shall provide
notice of said hearing pursuant to Section 154.05.06(C)(1) of the Zoning Code.










      (5)   The Board shall issue a written decision to affirm,
reverse or modify the denial or conditional approval of a permit application
or a Notice of Violation within ten (10) days following the public hearing
and serve it upon the applicant by certified mail.










      (6)   If the applicant elects to file an appeal from the
Board's decision in Common Pleas Court, the applicant must follow the
procedure set forth in Chapters 2505 and 2506 of the Ohio Revised Code and
Rules 3 and 4 of the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure.










   (g)    Removal of signs outside of the right-of way by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer.










      (1)    The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall cause to be removed
any temporary or permanent sign that constitutes a public nuisance in that it
endangers the public safety, such as a sign which has been abandoned, is
illegal, is dangerous, is deteriorated, is dilapidated, or is materially,
electrically, or structurally defective. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
also cause to be removed any sign, except a valid non-conforming sign, for
which no permit has been issued or a sign which is not in compliance with the
permit issued. Before removing any such sign, however, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall first prepare a notice which describes the sign and specifies
the violation involved. This notice shall require that the violation or
violations be corrected within twenty-four (24) hours after proper service of
the notice when the violation or violations pertain to temporary commercial
signs, or within fourteen (14) days after proper service of the notice when
the violation or violations pertain to permanent signs or temporary
noncommercial signs.  If this notice is not complied with, the sign shall be
removed immediately following the applicable time frames by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer in accordance with the provisions of this section.










      (2)    All notices issued by a Zoning Enforcement Officer may
be served by certified mail, by placing in a prominent place on the property
or delivery to the property owner, current occupant, to a person temporarily
or permanently in charge of the establishment or the sign owner in case of
temporary signs. Any time periods provided in this section shall be deemed to
commence on the date of the service of the notice.










      (3)    The property owner and current occupant shall be jointly
and severally obligated to reimburse the city immediately for all third party
and administrative expenses, including an administrative fee for city
inspection and administrative costs as set forth in Chapter 37, General Fee
Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton, incurred
in removing any sign including but not limited to costs to the city for the
time of city employees.  The city shall provide notice of said expenses and
in the event the same is not paid within thirty (30) days after the mailing
of the notice, the amount owed shall be a certified as an assessment against
the property of the sign owner, and lien upon that property, together with an
additional 10 percent penalty for collection as prescribed for unpaid real
estate taxes.  If the violations are corrected and removal obligations paid,
the property owner, the occupant or the sign owner may reclaim the sign from
the city.










   (h)       Removal of unlawful sign in the public rights-of-way.
Signs, other than those signs identified in Section 153.14(b)(6-11), are
specifically prohibited in public rights-of-way. The city shall immediately
remove or cause to be removed from the public rights-of-way any sign other
than governmental as referenced in this section. Just as a private property
owner may remove any sign placed on his or her private property so may the
city if the sign is in violation of this section. Such removal authority must
be exercised in a non-discriminatory manner.  Any sign so removed shall be
held for thirty (30) days, after which it shall be discarded if not claimed
by the owner.  Such sign may be claimed by the owner within this thirty (30)
day period upon payment of an administrative fee for city inspection and
administrative costs as set forth in Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the
Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton.










   (i)    Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the
Municipality from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent
or remedy any violation.  (Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.15  REGULATIONS FOR NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.




   (a)   Nonconforming signs shall be maintained in good condition
pursuant to Section 153.13.










   (b)   A nonconforming sign shall not be altered, modified, relocated
or reconstructed except as follows:










      (1)   When such alteration, modification, relocation or
reconstruction would bring such sign into conformity with these regulations;










      (2)   When the existing use has new ownership which results in
a change in the name of the use or business on the property, and such change
complies with subsection (b)(4) below; or










      (3)   When the space is re-occupied by a similar use and the
new occupant requires no external building or site renovation, and such
change complies with subsection (b)(4) below.










      (4)   Any alteration, modification, relocation or
reconstruction permitted in this section shall be limited to the replacement
of a sign panel or repainting a sign face, and does not permit changes to the
structure, framing, erection or relocation of the sign unless such changes
conform to subsection (b)(1) above.










   (c)   Alteration and Removal of Nonconforming Signs.  A
non-conforming sign shall be removed upon verification that any of the
following conditions have been met:










      (1)   Damage or deterioration has resulted in a loss of more
than fifty (50) percent of the value of such non-conforming sign; or










      (2)   The use to which such non-conforming sign refers has
been abandoned for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or










      (3)   The regulation or amendment to this Chapter which made
the sign non-conforming has been in effect for ten (10) years or more; or










      (4)   The non-conforming sign has been altered, modified,
relocated or reconstructed except as provided by this Section.










   (d)   A change in copy is not considered an alteration for the
purposes of this section.










   (e)   Any permit issued for a sign under this Chapter shall require
that any non-conforming sign displayed on the premises for which the permit
is issued shall be modified or removed to conform to the provisions of this
Chapter.










   (f)   Any approval by the City of West Carrollton that authorizes
the development of a premises, any building addition, an increase in gross
floor area of twenty five (25) percent or more, or any exterior structural
remodeling of a building façade on which a nonconforming sign is located,
shall require all non-conforming signs on the premises for which the approval
is issued to be brought into conformity with the provisions of this Chapter.










   (g)   As an incentive to remove existing nonconforming signs, a
bonus of twenty-five (25) percent shall be added to the maximum permitted
area and height of any new permanent freestanding or wall sign which replaces
an existing nonconforming sign and which meets all other requirements of this
Chapter.










   (h)   For purposes of this Section, "verification" shall include:










      (1)   Notice to the City by the sign owner and/or the
proprietor of the use to which the sign refers that said use is abandoned;










      (2)   A response to an inquiry from the City by the sign owner
and/or the proprietor of the use to which the sign refers that said use is
abandoned;










         (aa)   The City shall send an inquiry to the sign owner
and the proprietor of the use to which the sign refers by certified mail on
or after one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days after it reasonably
appears to the City that the use to which such nonconforming sign refers has
been voluntarily abandoned;










      (3)   If the City receives no response within ten (10) days
from the sign owner and/or the proprietor of the use to which the sign refers
to the inquiry set forth in section 153.15(h)(2).





(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.16 PERMIT CONDITIONS AND REFUNDS.




   (a)   A permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall become
invalid if work is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days of
issuance, or if work is subsequently suspended or abandoned for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days.  Any invalidated permit must be renewed with an
additional payment of one-half the original fee.










   (b)   If the installation or placement of any sign is commenced or
completed prior to the issuance of a permit, the specified permit fee shall
be doubled.  Payment of such additional fee, however, shall not preclude any
or all other requirements or penalties prescribed in this Zoning Ordinance.





(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.17  INSPECTIONS.




   Any person installing, altering, or relocating a sign for which a
permit has been issued shall obtain all required inspections.  The Zoning
Enforcement Officer may require a final inspection, including an electrical
inspection and/or inspection of the footings for freestanding signs.





(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.18 LICENSES.




   No person may engage in the business of erecting, altering, relocating,
constructing, or maintaining signs requiring permits, without all required
state and federal licenses. 





(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.19  INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE.




   All persons involved in the maintenance, installation, alteration, or
relocation of signs near or upon any public right-of-way or property shall
agree to hold harmless and indemnify the City, its officers, agents, and
employees, against any and all claims of negligence resulting from such work
insofar as this Zoning Ordinance has not specifically directed the placement
of a sign.  All persons involved in the maintenance, installation,
alteration, or relocation of signs shall maintain all required insurance and
shall file with the state a satisfactory certificate of insurance to
indemnify the State, County or City against any form of liability to a
minimum of $100,000.





(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.20  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.




   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to and govern signs
in all districts. No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in
compliance with the regulations governing location and bulk of structures for
the district in which it is located, unless such sign is otherwise
specifically regulated by special use provisions relating to variances.










   (b)    Any sign already established on the effective date of this
Zoning Code, which sign is rendered nonconforming by the provisions of this
Zoning Code, and any sign which, as a result of subsequent amendments of this
Zoning Code, shall be rendered nonconforming, shall be subject to the
provisions of Section 153.15, Regulations for Nonconforming Signs.










   (c)     Wherever a commercial sign is allowed or permitted under
this Chapter, an owner may place a non-commercial sign, subject to the time,
place and manner provisions of this Chapter, without applying for a permit
and/or paying a fee that otherwise would be required for the placement of a
commercial sign on the lot; provided, that the sign structure or mounting
device is legal without consideration of message content. The purpose of this
provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over
non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular non-commercial message
over any other non-commercial message. This provision prevails over any
provision to the contrary in this Chapter.





   This provision does not:










      (1)    create a right to increase the total amount of signage
on a parcel or lot;










      (2)    affect the requirement that a sign structure or
mounting device be properly permitted under this Chapter;










      (3)    allow a change in the physical structure of a sign or
its mounting device; or










      (4)    authorize the substitution of an off-site commercial
message in place of an on-site commercial message or in place of a
non-commercial message.










   (d)   All non-commercial speech is considered on-premise signage and
is entitled to the privileges that on-premise signs receive under this
section.










   (e)   Notwithstanding any other provision herein, signs that display
a non-commercial message are entitled to the maximum square footage allowed
any parcel within the same zoning district.










   (f)   Notwithstanding any other provision herein, signs that display
a non-commercial message are not subject to the temporal limitations
otherwise set forth in this Chapter; however, such signs remain subject to
the provisions of Section 153.13, Maintenance.  (Ord. 3622.  Passed
12-19-17.)









153.21  SEVERABILITY.




   The invalidation of any section, subsection, clause, or phrase of this
Chapter by any court of competent jurisdiction shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this Chapter.





(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.22 SIGNS ALLOWED IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY AND ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.




   The following signs, and only the following signs, shall be allowed in
the public right-of-way in the City or in parks or on other public property
controlled by the City:










   (a)   Government signs;










   (b)   Public signs;










   (c)   Signs installed by employees or officials of a state or
federal agency in the course of their governmental duties and bearing no
commercial message;










   (d)   Signs required by an order of a court of competent
jurisdiction; and










   (e)   Signs installed by a transit company with a franchise or other
right to operate in the City, where such signs are installed along its routes
and bear no commercial message.










   (f)   Signs installed and maintained by the City that may contain
either commercial or non-commercial messages as part of a logo
sign/directional sign program, through which space is made available to users
on a nondiscriminatory basis in accordance with separately published criteria
and with payment of a fee.










   (g)   Corporate limit signs.










   (h)   Additional signs in parks that relate to the use of one or
more facilities (including temporary uses by particular entities or
individuals), provided that such signs shall not be legible from any public
right-of-way outside the park.










   (i)   Signs for concessionaires and event sponsors inside stadiums,
arenas or ball fields or other such facilities.  Signs located inside an
outdoor facility, if such facility is located 400 feet or more from the
nearest right-of-way, shall be deemed not to be legible from such
right-of-way even if they may be legible from some locations outside the
facility.










   (j)   Street banners as permitted by the City's Banner Policy. 
(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)









153.99  PENALTY.




   Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the following penalties at the discretion
of the court.










   (a)   A first offense resulting in a conviction shall be deemed a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  The court shall impose upon the offender
a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250) but not less than
one hundred fifty dollars ($150), or may impose a sentence of imprisonment
for not more than thirty (30) days, or may impose both such a fine and
sentence of imprisonment.










   (b)   A second offense of any section of this chapter occurring
within one (1) year after the conviction of the first offense shall be deemed
a misdemeanor of the third degree.  The court shall impose upon the offender
a fine of not more than five hundred ($500) dollars but not less than two
hundred fifty ($250) dollars, or may impose a sentence of imprisonment for
not more than sixty (60) days, or may impose both such a fine and sentence of
imprisonment.










   (c)   A third and subsequent offense of any section of this chapter
occurring within one (1) year after the conviction of the second offense
shall be deemed a misdemeanor of the second degree.  The court shall impose
upon the offender a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty ($750) dollars
but not less than five hundred ($500) dollars, or may impose a sentence of
imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or may impose both such a
fine and sentence of imprisonment.





(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)











APPENDIX A









 













APPENDIX B




 


















APPENDIX C









 













APPENDIX D










MAXIMUM SIGN DIMENSIONS









 




Sign Type

 
LD, A, RE, R-1, R-2 & H

Single

Family

Residential

Districts
 
R-4, R-5 & R-MHP

Multiple-

Family

Residential

Districts
 
OD

Olde

Downtown

District
 
O & O-R

Office and

Office-

Residential

Districts
 
B-1, B-2 & C

Commercial

and City

Center

Districts
 
M-1, M-2 & M-3

Business Park &

Manufacturi ng

Districts


(1) Nameplates (a)
 
2 sq. ft.
 
2 sq. ft.
 
2 sq. ft.
 
2 sq. ft.
 
2 sq. ft.
 
2 sq. ft.


(2) Identification Signs


A.  Signs at a Residential Development  (b)
 
32 sq. ft. area

6 ft. height
 
32 sq. ft. area

6 ft. height
 
32 sq. ft. area

6 ft. height
 
32 sq. ft. area

6 ft. height
 
32 sq. ft. area

6 ft. height
 
32 sq. ft. area

6 ft. height


B.  Signs at Non-Residential Development


1.  Wall Signs
 
1.0 sq. ft. per lineal ft. of bldg. frontage, not to exceed 32 sq. ft.
 
1.0 sq. ft. per lineal ft. of bldg. frontage, not to exceed 32 sq. ft.
 
1.0 sq. ft. per lineal ft. of bldg. frontage
 
1.5 sq. ft. per lineal ft. of bldg. frontage
 
1.5 sq. ft. per lineal ft. of bldg. frontage
 
1.5 sq. ft. per lineal ft. of bldg. frontage


a.  Projecting Signs
 
NP
 
NP
 
12 sq. ft.
 
NP
 
12 sq. ft.
 
NP


b.  Under- canopy signs
 
NP
 
NP
 
8 sq. ft.
 
NP
 
8 sq. ft.
 
NP


c.  Window signs
 
NP
 
NP
 
50% of window area
 
NP
 
50% of window area
 
50% of window area


2.  Freestanding signs


a.  Single Occupancy
 
1/2 sq. ft. per lineal ft. of street frontage, not to exceed 32 sq. ft. in
area nor 6 ft. in height
 
1/2 sq. ft. per lineal ft. of street frontage, not to exceed 32 sq. ft. in
area nor 6 ft. in height
 
1/2 sq. ft. per lineal ft. of street frontage, not to exceed 32 sq. ft. (c)

in area nor 6 ft. in height
 
1/2 sq. ft. per linear ft. of street frontage, not to exceed 50 sq. ft. in
area nor 8 ft. in height
 
1/2 sq. ft. per linear ft. of street frontage, not to exceed 50 sq. ft. in
area nor 8 ft. in height
 
1/2 sq. ft. per linear ft. of street frontage, not to exceed 50 sq. ft. in
area nor 8 ft. in height



















 


Sign Type

 
LD, A, RE, R-1, R-2 & H

Single

Family

Residential

Districts
 
R-4, R-5 & R-MHP

Multiple-

Family

Residential

Districts
 
OD

Olde

Downtown

District
 
O & O-R

Office and

Office-

Residential

Districts
 
B-1, B-2 & C

Commercial

and City

Center

Districts
 
M-1, M-2 & M-3

Business Park &

Manufacturi ng

Districts



 

b.  Multiple Occupancy or Shopping Center (d)
 
NP
 
NP
 
1/2 sq. ft. of lineal ft. of street frontage, not to exceed 50 sq. ft. in
area nor 8 ft. in height (c)
 
1.0 sq. ft. per lineal ft. of street frontage, not to exceed 100 sq. ft. in
area nor 8 ft. in height
 
1.0 sq. ft. per lineal ft. of street frontage, not to exceed 100 sq. ft. in
area nor 15 ft. in height
 
1.0 sq. ft. per lineal ft. of street frontage, not to exceed 100 sq. ft. in
area nor 15 ft. in height


(3)  Temporary Signs (e)


A.  Temporary Wall Sign
 
NP
 
32 sq. ft.
 
32 sq. ft.
 
32 sq. ft.
 
32 sq. ft.
 
32 sq. ft.


B.  Temporary Freestanding

Sign
 
6 sq. ft. area

4 ft. height
 
24 sq. ft. area

6 ft. height
 
24 sq. ft. area

6 ft. height
 
24 sq. ft. area

6 ft. height
 
32 sq. ft. area

6 ft. height
 
32 sq. ft. area

6 ft. height


NP - Not Permitted  (a) Includes home occupations (b) Maximum per street
entrance (c)  Where site permits  (d)  See Section 153.08(b)(8)  (e) 
See Section 153.09.



 




(Ord. 3622.  Passed 12-19-17.)




















APPENDIX E









 























APPENDIX F










ILLUMINANCE MEASUREMENT DISTANCES










SIGN AREA VERSUS MEASUREMENT DISTANCE




 




AREA OF SIGN


sq. ft.
 
MEASUREM ENT

Distance (ft.)


10
 
32


15
 
39


20
 
45


25
 
50


30
 
55


35
 
59


40
 
63


45
 
67


50
 
71


55
 
74


60
 
77


65
 
81


70
 
84


75
 
87


80
 
89


85
 
92


90
 
95


95
 
97


100
 
100


110
 
105


120
 
110


130
 
114


140
 
118


150
 
122


160
 
126


170
 
130


180
 
134


190
 
138


200
 
141


220
 
148


240
 
155


260
 
161


280
 
167


300
 
173










* For signs with an area in square feet other than those specifically listed
in the table (i.e., 12 sq. ft., 400 sq. ft. etc.), the measurement distance
may be calculated with the following formula:  Area of Sign Sq. Ft. x 100









 








 



CHAPTER 154
ZONING CODE









   EDITOR’S NOTE: The current City Zoning Code which is codified herein
as Chapter 154 was adopted by Ordinance 3248, passed September 9, 2003. 
Subsequent amendments to Ordinance 3248 will be indicated by legislative
histories placed at the end of the affected sections.










Section











Glossary











154.02.01   Definitions











General Zoning Provisions











154.03.01   Title and Jurisdictional Limits





154.03.02   Interpretation; Conflicts of Laws





154.03.03   Severability





154.03.04   Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances; Effective Date





154.03.05   General Requirements











Nonconforming Uses











154.04.01   Nonconforming Uses





154.04.01(H)   Nonconforming Lots of Record





154.04.01(I)     Conditionally Permitted Uses Not Considered
Nonconforming Uses











Administration and Enforcement











154.05.01   General Provisions





154.05.02   Duties and Responsibilities of the City Manager





154.05.03   Duties and Responsibilities of the Zoning Enforcement Officer





154.05.04   Duties and Role of the City  Planning Commission





154.05.05   Duties and Role of the City Council





154.05.06   Duties and Role of the Board of Zoning Appeals





154.05.07   Administrative Procedures





154.05.08   Enforcement Procedures





154.05.09   Penalty; Equitable Remedies











Variances











154.06.01(A)   Purpose





154.06.01(B)   Public Hearing and Notice





154.06.01(C)   Findings





154.06.01(D)   Authorized Variances





154.06.01(E)   Action by Board of  Zoning Appeals





154.06.01(F)   Supplementary Conditions and Safeguards











Conditional Use Regulations











154.07.01   Conditional Use Regulations





154.07.01(A)   Contents of Conditional Use Permit Application





154.07.01(B)   General Standards for All Conditional Uses





154.07.01(B)(1)   Expansion of Existing  Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.07.01(B)(2)   Findings





154.07.01(B)(3)   Substantially Similar Use





154.07.01(B)(4)   Supplementary Conditions and Safeguards





154.07.01(B)(5)   Joint Variance Application





154.07.01(B)(6)   Public Hearing





154.07.01(B)(7)   Action by the Planning Commission





154.07.01(B)(8)   Expiration of Conditional Use Permit











Amendments to Zoning Code











154.08.01   Procedure for Amendments





154.08.02   Zoning Map Amendments











Establishment of Districts and Official Zoning Map











154.09.01   Purpose





154.09.02   Establishment of Zoning Districts





154.09.03   Zoning District Map





154.09.04   Zoning Map Legend





154.09.05   Identification of Official Zoning Map





154.09.06   Interpretation of Zoning Districts; Map and Text





154.09.07   Zoning Upon Annexation











Zoning Districts











L-D Limited Development District











154.10.001   L-D Limited Development District Purpose





154.10.002   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.003   Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.10.004   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.005   Minimum Zoning Lot Size





154.10.006   Minimum Frontage





154.10.007   Maximum Height





154.10.008   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.009   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.010   Signs





154.10.011   Other Regulations











A Agricultural District











154.10.012   A Agricultural District





154.10.013   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.014   Conditional Permitted Uses





154.10.015   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.016   Minimum Zoning Lot Size





154.10.017   Minimum Frontage





154.10.018   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.019   Maximum and Minimum Height Requirements





154.10.020   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.020.01   Signs





154.10.020.02   Other Regulations











RE Residential Estate District











154.10.021   RE - Residential Estate District





154.10.022   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.023   Conditional Permitted Uses





154.10.024   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.025   Minimum Zoning Lot Size





154.10.026   Minimum Frontage





154.10.027   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.028   Maximum and Minimum  Height Requirements





154.10.029   Required Minimum Dwelling





154.10.030   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.031   Signs





154.10.032   Other Regulations











R-1 Single-Family Residential District











154.10.041   R-1 Single-Family Residential District





154.10.042   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.043   Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.10.044   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.045   Minimum Zoning Lot Size





154.10.046   Minimum Frontage





154.10.047   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.048   Maximum Height Requirements





154.10.049   Required Minimum Dwelling Size





154.10.050   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.051   Signs.





154.10.052   Other Regulations











R-2 Single-Family Residential District











154.10.061   R-2 Single-Family Residential District





154.10.062   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.063   Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.10.064   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.065   Minimum Zoning Lot Size





154.10.066   Minimum Frontage





154.10.067   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.068   Maximum Height Requirements





154.10.069   Required Minimum Dwelling Size





154.10.070   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.071   Signs.





154.10.072   Other Regulations











R-3 Single-Family Residential District











(intentionally left blank)











R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District











154.10.081   Multiple-Family Residential District





154.10.082   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.083   Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.10.084   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.085   Minimum Zoning Lot Size





154.10.086   Minimum Frontage





154.10.087   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.088   Maximum and Minimum Height Requirements





154.10.089   Required Minimum Dwelling Size





154.10.090   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.091   Signs





154.10.092   Other Regulations





154.10.093   Architectural design standards.











R-5 Multiple-Family Residential District











154.10.101   R-5 Multiple-Family  Residential District





154.10.102   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.103   Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.10.104   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.105   Minimum Zoning Lot Size





154.10.106   Minimum Frontage





154.10.107   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.108   Maximum and Minimum Height Requirements





154.10.109   Required Minimum Dwelling Size





154.10.110   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.111   Signs





154.10.112   Other Regulations





154.10.113   Architectural design standards.











R-PUD Planned Development District











154.10.121   R-PUD Planned  Development District





154.10.122   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.123   Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.10.124   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.125   Minimum Land Area, Maximum Density





154.10.126   Minimum Frontage and Lot Size





154.10.127   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.128   Maximum Height





154.10.129   Required Minimum Dwelling Size





154.10.130   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.131   Signs





154.10.132   Other Regulations





154.10.133   Procedures and Provisions for Approval of R-PUD  Developments





154.10.134   Architectural design standards.











R-MHP Mobile Home Park District











154.10.201   R-MHP Manufactured/Mobile Home Park District





154.10.202   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.203   Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.10.204   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.205   General Standards for Manufactured Home Parks











O-R Office Residential District











154.10.301   O-R Office Residential District





154.10.302   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.303   Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.10.304   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.305   Minimum Zoning Lot Size





154.10.306   Minimum Frontage





154.10.307   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.308   Maximum and Minimum  Height Requirements





154.10.309   Required Minimum Dwelling Size





154.10.310   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.311   Signs





154.10.312   Architectural design standards











O Office District











154.10.351   O-Office District





154.10.352   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.353   Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.10.354   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.355   Minimum Zoning Lot Size





154.10.356   Minimum Frontage





154.10.357   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.358   Maximum Height





154.10.359   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.360   Signs





154.10.361   Other Regulations





154.10.362   Architectural design standards.

















B-1 Convenience Commercial District











154.10.401   B-1 Convenience Commercial District





154.10.402   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.403   Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.10.404   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.405   Minimum Zoning Lot Size





154.10.406   Minimum Frontage





154.10.407   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.408   Maximum Height





154.10.409   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.410   Signs





154.10.411   Other Regulations





154.10.412   Architectural design standards











B-2 General Commercial District











154.10.421   B-2 General Commercial District





154.10.422   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.423   Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.10.424   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.425   Minimum Zoning Lot Size





154.10.426   Minimum Frontage





154.10.427   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.428   Maximum Lot Coverage





154.10.429   Maximum Height





154.10.430   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.431   Signs





154.10.432   Other Regulations





154.10.433   Architectural design standards











OD Olde Downtown District











154.10.451   Olde Downtown District





154.10.452   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.453   Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.10.454   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.455   Minimum Zoning Lot Size





154.10.456   Minimum Frontage





154.10.457   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.458   Maximum Lot Coverage





154.10.459   Maximum Height





154.10.460   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.461   Signs





154.10.462   Other Regulations





154.10.463   Architectural design standards'











CC City Center District











154.10.471   CC City Center District





154.10.472   Application and Review  Procedures of Site Development Plans





154.10.473   Use Regulations





154.10.474   Non-conforming Uses





154.10.475   Conditions for Review and Approval





154.10.476   Standards and Guidelines





154.10.477   Revisions of Final Site Development Plan after Approval





154.10.478   Architectural design standards





154.10.479   Guarantee for installation of public improvements











Heritage District











154.10.481   H Heritage Single-Family Residential District





154.10.482   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.483   Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.10.484   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.485   Minimum Zoning Lot Size





154.10.486   Minimum Frontage





154.10.487   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.488   Maximum and Minimum Height Requirements





154.10.489   Required Minimum Dwelling Size





154.10.490   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.491   Signs





154.10.492   Design Review Regulations





154.10.493   Definitions





154.10.494   Powers and Duties of the Design Review Architect





154.10.495   Triggering Mechanism for Design Review





154.10.496   Specific Architectural Design Guidelines





154.10.497   Limitation on Issuance of Zoning & Demolition Permits





154.10.498   Certificate of Appropriateness





154.10.499   Penalties





154.10.500   Minimum Maintenance Requirement





154.10.501   Severability





154.10.502   Other Regulations











M-1 Business Park District











154.10.601   M-1 Business Park District





154.10.602   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.603   Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.10.604   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.605   Minimum Zoning Lot Size





154.10.606   Minimum Frontage





154.10.607   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.608   Maximum Lot Coverage





154.10.609   Maximum Height





154.10.610   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.611   Signs





154.10.612   Other Regulations





154.10.613   Architectural design standards











M-2 Manufacturing District











154.10.621   M-2 Manufacturing District





154.10.622   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.623   Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.10.624   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.625   Minimum Zoning Lot Size





154.10.626   Minimum Frontage





154.10.627   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.628   Maximum Lot Coverage





154.10.629   Maximum Height





154.10.630   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.631   Signs





154.10.632   Other Regulations











M-3 Rural Manufacturing District











154.10.651   M-3 Manufacturing District





154.10.652   Principal Permitted Uses





154.10.653   Conditionally Permitted Uses





154.10.654   Accessory Uses and Structures





154.10.655   Minimum Zoning Lot Size





154.10.656   Minimum Frontage





154.10.657   Minimum Yard Requirements





154.10.658   Maximum Lot Coverage





154.10.659   Maximum Height





154.10.660   Off-Street Parking and Loading





154.10.661   Signs





154.10.662   Other Regulations





154.10.663   Architectural design standards











PUD Planned Unit Development District











154.10.701   PUD Planned Unit Development District





154.10.702   PUD Rezoning and Concurrent Plan Approval





154.10.703   Request for PUD District





154.10.704   Permitted Uses and Development Standards





154.10.705   Procedures and Provisions for Approval of PUD District





154.10.706   Plan Review and Approval











Supplementary Regulations for Zoning Districts











154.11.01   Conversion of Dwellings





154.11.02   Fencing and Wall Regulations





154.11.03   Performance Standards for Nuisance Values





154.11.04   Projections into Yards





154.11.05   Supplementary Height  Requirements











Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements











154.12.01   Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements





154.12.01(A)   General Requirements





154.12.01(B)   Specific Off-Street Parking and Loading Space Requirements











Landscaping Requirements











154.13.01   Landscaping Requirements; Screening, Buffer Yards, and Tree
Lawns





154.13.01(A)   Applicability





154.13.01(B)   General Requirements for Submission





154.13.01(C)   Approval





154.13.01(D)   Landscape and Buffer Yard Standards





154.13.01(E)   Screening and Buffering





154.13.01(F)   Right-of-Way, Easements and Setbacks





154.13.01(G)   Landscaping for Vehicular Use Areas





154.13.01(H)   Landscaping for Service Structures





154.13.01(I)   Landscape Requirements Matrix





154.13.01(J)   Modification





154.13.01(K)   Specifications for Plant Material





154.13.01(L)   Recommended Trees for West Carrollton











Site Plan Review and Access Management Requirements











154.14.01   Site Plan Review Requirements





154.14.01(A)   When Site Plan Required





154.14.01(B)   Applications for Site Plan Approval





154.14.01(C)   Site Plan Review





154.14.01(D)   Conformance with Approved Site Plans





154.14.01(E)   Amendments to Approved Site Plans





154.14.01(F)   Phased Site Plans





154.14.02   Access Management Requirement





154.14.02(A)   Purpose





154.14.02(B)   Traffic Impact Study Required





154.14.02(C)   Design Years





154.14.02(D)   Traffic Impact Study Contents





154.14.02(E)   Access Management Standards











Conservation District Design Review Guidelines











154.15.01   Design Review





154.15.02   Definitions





154.15.03   Powers and Duties of the Design Review Architect





154.15.04   Triggering Mechanism for Design Review





154.15.05   Specific Architectural Design Guidelines





154.15.06   Limitation on Issuance of Zoning & Demolition Permits





154.15.07   Certificate of Appropriateness





154.15.08   Penalties





154.15.09   Minimum Maintenance Requirement





154.15.10   Severability











Supplementary Regulations for Specific Land Uses











154.16.01   Accessory Buildings and Uses





154.16.02   Clustered Residential Subdivisions





154.16.03   Home Occupations





154.16.05   Resource and Mineral  Extraction





154.16.06   Satellite Dish Antennas





154.16.07   Sexually-Oriented Businesses





154.16.08   Temporary Buildings and Uses





154.16.09   Wireless Telecommunication Facilities





154.16.10   Garage sales





154.16.11   Mobile food vendors





154.16.12   Hookah bars.

















Architectural Design Standards











154.17.01   Architectural design standards










 




GLOSSARY




 



154.02.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively. Those items not
herein specifically defined shall be given their common ordinary meaning
whenever it is appropriate or reasonable to do so.











   ACCESSORY USE/ ACCESSORY BUILDING/ ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. An accessory
use, building, or structure is a use, object, subordinate building or
structure which is performed or constructed or installed on, above, or below
the surface of a zoned lot, customarily incidental to the principal or
conditionally permitted use and is regulated in § 154.16.01. Accessory uses,
buildings and related structures include but are not limited to the following
uses:





   (1)    Antennas used by an amateur radio operator holding a valid
amateur radio (HAM) license issued by the Federal Communications Commission;





   (2)    Decks, gazebos, and patios;





   (3)    (EDITOR'S NOTE:  Former subsection (3) was repealed by
Ordinance 3459, passed November 9, 2010.)





   (4)    Garages, storage sheds and utility buildings;





   (5)   Off-street parking and loading as regulated by §154.12.01;





   (6)    Poles;





   (7)    Retail sales and service use when not conducted for the
general retail public as regulated by §154.16.01(B)(3)(d);





   (8)    Satellite dish antennas;





   (9)    Signs;





   (10)    Swimming pools;





   (11)    Temporary uses as regulated by § 154.16.08;





   (12)    Waste receptacles; and





   (13)    Wireless telecommunications facility as regulated by
§154.16.09.











   ALLEY -  A public or private way 20 feet or less in width which is
used primarily for vehicular access to the back or side of properties which
otherwise abut on streets.











   ANIMAL HOSPITAL/VETERINARY CLINIC - Any establishment used for the
medical or surgical care, observation, or treatment of animals or pets.  Use
as a kennel shall be limited to short-time





boarding and shall be only incidental to such hospital use.











   ANTENNA –  AMATEUR RADIO TOWER. A free standing or building-mounted
structure, including any base, tower or pole, antenna, and appurtenances,
intended for airway communication purposes by a person holding a valid
amateur radio (HAM) license issued by the Federal Communications Commission.











   ANTENNA – SATELLITE DISH.  A device incorporating a reflective
surface that is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn or cornucopia.
Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive radio electromagnetic
waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is
meant to include, but not be limited to, what are commonly referred to as
satellite earth stations, television reception only satellite dish antennas
(TVROs), and satellite microwave antennas.











   AUTOMOBILE – LIGHT AND MEDIUM TRUCKS. An automobile includes every
motor vehicle with a single front and rear axle, except motorcycles, designed
for carrying 10 passengers or less and used for the transportation of
persons.  The term automobile will also include light and medium trucks
which have a single rear axle.











   AUTOMOBILE – CONVENIENCE MARKET/GAS STATION MINI-MART.  A facility
associated with the sale of gasoline products for automobiles, that also
offers for sale prepackaged food items and related, tangible consumer goods,
primarily for self-service by the consumer.  Hot beverages, fountain-type
beverages, and pastries may be among the food items offered for sale.











   AUTOMOBILE – CONVENIENCE DRIVE-THROUGH.  A facility designed for
automobiles to drive into the structure to purchase prepackaged food items
and tangible consumer goods.  Hot and cold beverages and snack foods are
typically among the food items offered for sale.










   AUTOMOBILE DETAILING SHOP.  A facility which provides automobile
cleaning services such as exterior hand washing and waxing; interior
vacuuming, shampooing, steam cleaning and polishing; and engine
cleaning/degreasing.  Other services may include minor scratch, swirl, and
dent repair; minor paint correction; paint detailing; fabric or paint
protection; headlight restoration; and installation of after-market
accessories such as tinting, auto alarms, spoilers, sunroofs, headlight
covers, and similar items.  Typically these services are provided by
appointment scheduled in advance and not on a walk-in basis.










   AUTOMOBILE – FUELING STATION.  A facility for dispensing gasoline,
kerosene, or any motor fuel for automobiles in typically a self-service and
automated manner.  These facilities usually have one or no employees working
on site and the sale of other goods is limited to travel aides and minor
automobile accessories.











   AUTOMOBILE – SERVICE STATION/REPAIR GARAGE. A place where gasoline,
kerosene, or any motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating
automobiles may be offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made
directly into motor vehicles, and may include greasing and oiling on the
premises and replacement or installation of parts and accessories, including
major repair work such as:  motor rebuilding or replacement (but not the
reconditioning of motor vehicles); collision services such as body, frame,
and fender repair; overall spray painting of automobiles; upholstery work;
auto glasswork; welding; tire recapping; radiator repairs; and other similar
major mechanical work.











   AUTOMOBILE WASHING FACILITY, FULL SERVICE. A building or portion
thereof containing facilities for washing automobiles using production line
methods.











   AUTOMOBILE WASHING FACILITY, SELF SERVICE.  A building or portion
thereof containing facilities for washing automobiles wherein the customer
provides labor and where no self- propelled wash racks are provided.











   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING.  The dismantling or disassembling of used motor
vehicles or trailers; or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled,
partially dismantled, nonoperating or wrecked vehicles or their parts.











   BASEMENT.  That portion of a building which is partly underground and
which has one half or more of its ceiling height below the average finished
grade of the ground adjoining the building in which it is located.











   BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.  The Board of Zoning Appeals of the city.











   BUILDING.  Any permanent or stationary structure having a roof
supported by columns or walls for the housing or enclosure of persons,
animals, or property.  At no time shall this definition be construed to
include mobile homes.











   BUILDING HEIGHT.  The vertical distance from the average contact
ground level at the front of the building to the highest point of the coping
of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the ridge for
gable, hip, or gambrel roofs.











   BUILDING SETBACK LINE.  The line nearest the front and across a lot
establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the front line of
the building foundation and the front lot line. The front lot line of the
foundation of enclosed porches or vestibules if nearer the front line than
the main foundation.











   BUSINESS.  An occupation, enterprise, undertaking, or employment which
engages in the purchase, sale, barter, or exchange of goods, wares,
merchandise, or services or where there is the maintenance or operation of an
office for the exhibition, sale, or offering of merchandise or services.











   CHARTER.  Charter of the city.











   CHURCHES AND OTHER SIMILAR PLACES OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP. An institution
that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services,
meetings, and other activities.  The term “church” shall not carry a
secular connotation and shall include buildings in which the religious
services of any denomination are held.











   CITY.  The City of West Carrollton, Ohio.











   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of West Carrollton.











   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of West Carrollton.











   CLEAR DISTANCE.  The open space between any structure, whether primary
or accessory.











   CLERK OF COUNCIL.  The Clerk of Council of the City of West Carrollton.











   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  A plan, or any portion thereof, adopted by the
City Planning Commission and the City Council showing the general location
and extent of present and proposed physical facilities including housing,
industrial, and commercial uses, transportation, parks, schools, and other
community activities. This plan establishes the goals, objectives, and
policies of the city.











   CONCEPT PLAN. See PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT, PRELIMINARY.










   CONTRACTOR. For the purposes of this Chapter, this term shall mean a
business involved in building, construction, remodeling, and/or landscaping,
which includes but is not limited to trades such as heating, air
conditioning, painting, plumbing, and roofing. 



 



   CONTRACTOR OFFICE.  A building or portion thereof used for conducting
the administrative affairs of a Contractor, which does not involve any
exterior storage or the parking of any trailers, machinery, equipment, or
vehicles measuring more than seven (7) feet in width, seven (7) feet in
height, or eighteen (18) feet in length.



 



   CONTRACTOR SHOP.  An enclosed space used for the housing and/or
operation of machinery, the provision of services, the fabrication of
building-related products, and the interior storage of a Contractor which
does not involve any exterior storage area.  A Contractor Shop may also be
comprised of a Contractor Office.



 



   CONTRACTOR STORAGE YARD. An outdoor space used primarily for the
storage of trailers, equipment, vehicles, machinery, building materials,
construction materials, landscape materials, or components by a Contractor,
who shall also be the owner and/or occupant of the premises.  The Contractor
Storage Yard shall be screened from public view as required by Section
154.13.01, Landscape Requirements.  A Contractor Storage Yard may also be
comprised of a Contractor Office and/or a Contractor Shop.



 



   CONTRACTOR SALES AND STORAGE YARD.  A Contractor Storage Yard also
used for the sale of building, construction, remodeling, and/or landscaping
materials to the public.  A Contractor Sales and Storage Yard may also be
comprised of a Contractor Office and/or a Contractor Shop.










   DAY CARE FACILITY, ADULT.  A facility, licensed by the state,
providing care or supervision for the elderly and/or functionally impaired
adults in a protective setting for a portion of a 24-hour day.  Services
include the monitoring of clients, social and recreation services, food and
nourishment, and health support services.  The operation of the facility
shall not include overnight occupancy by the clients.  Adult day care may be
operated within structures on church premises or publicly owned community
centers, provided such uses are lawfully permitted and operating in the
underlying zoning district.











   DAY CARE FACILITY – CHILD DAY CARE CENTER. Any place where child day
care is provided for 13 or more children at one time, or any place that is
not the permanent residence of the licensee or administrator in which child
day care is provided for 7 to 12 children. 
(Based on ORC 5104).











   DAY CARE FACILITY – TYPE A FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. A permanent
residence of the administrator in which private or publically-funded child
day care is provided for 7 to 12 children at one time, or a permanent
residence of the provider in which private child day care is provided for 4
to 12 children at one time if four or more are under two years of age.  In
counting children for the purposes of this section, no children of the
administrator shall be counted. 
(Based on ORC 5104).











   DAY CARE FACILITY – TYPE B FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. A permanent
residence of the provider in which child day care is provided for one to six
children at one time and in which not more than three children are under two
years old at one time.  In counting children for the purposes of this
section, no children of the day care provider shall be counted. 
(Based on ORC 5104).











   DENSITY.  The number of dwelling units per acre of land.











   DENSITY, HIGH.  Ten to 15 dwelling units per acre.











   DENSITY, LOW.  One to four dwelling units per acre.











   DENSITY, MEDIUM.  Five to nine dwelling units per acre.











   DISTRICT. Same as ZONING DISTRICT.











   DRAINAGEWAY.  A water course, gully, dry stream, creek, or ditch which
carries storm water runoff, which is subject to flooding or ponding, which is
fed by street or building gutters or by storm water sewers, or which serves
the purpose of draining water from the lands adjacent to such water course,
gully, dry stream, creek, or ditch.











   DRIVE-IN/DRIVE THROUGH/DRIVE- UP.  A business establishment designed
or operated to serve a patron who is seated in an automobile.











   DWELLING.  Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used
exclusively for residential purposes, including one-family, two-family, and
multi-family dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, boarding houses,
lodging houses, tents, cabins, travel trailers, or tree houses.  An
industrialized unit and a  permanently-sited manufactured home shall also be
considered to be a dwelling.











   DWELLING – CONDOMINIUM.  A multiple-family dwelling where each
family owns its own dwelling unit and the common areas of the building and
site are owned and maintained jointly by the occupants.











   DWELLING, DETACHED.  A building having no party wall in common with
another building.











   DWELLING, DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY. A building designed for or used for
residence purposes by one family.











   DWELLING – INDUSTRIALIZED UNIT. A residential building unit or
assembly of closed construction fabricated in an off-site facility pursuant
to a state building code, such as the Ohio Basic Building Code, that is
substantially self-sufficient as a unit or as part of a greater structure,
and that requires transportation to the site of intended use. An
industrialized unit is manufactured in such a manner that its structural,
plumbing, electrical, environmental control, or fire protection elements or
components are concealed and are not readily accessible for inspection at the
site of its intended use, without disassembly, damage, or destruction.  An
industrialized unit includes units installed on the site as independent
units, as part of a group of units, or incorporated with standard
construction methods to form a completed structural entity.  An
industrialized unit does not include a manufactured home or mobile home as
defined herein and is commonly referred to as a modular home.











   DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME. A manufactured home, as defined herein,
which is located in a manufactured-mobile home park, as defined herein.











   DWELLING, MOBILE HOME.  A mobile home, as defined herein, which is
located in a manufactured-mobile home park, as defined herein.











   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.  A building or portion thereof designed for
or used by three or more families living independently of one another.











   DWELLING, ROW.  A dwelling having a party wall on each side in common
with an adjoining dwelling unless it is situated as the outermost dwelling;
in the latter case, it will have a party wall on one side only.  A row
dwelling shall be considered to be a multiple-family dwelling.











   DWELLING – SINGLE-FAMILY, ZERO LOT LINE. A detached, single-family
dwelling unit distinguished by one exterior wall on a side property line; or
two attached, single-family units on separate lots sharing a common wall at
the side-property line.











   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed for or used by two families,
with the adjacent dwelling units separated by floor or by a common party wall.











   DWELLING UNIT.  A single-family dwelling or a single residential unit
in a dwelling used by one family for cooking, living, and sleeping
purposes.   











   ELDERLY.  Persons or households headed by a person age 60 or older.











   EMERGENCY.  A reasonably unforeseen occurrence with a potential to
endanger personal safety or health, or cause substantial damage to property,
that calls for immediate action.











   EMPLOYEE.  A person who performs any service on the premises of a
business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, whether or not the
person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or
otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage, or other
compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does not include a
person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises
or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.











   ENGINEER.  Any engineer licensed by the State of Ohio.











   ESCORT.  A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.











   ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.











   ESSENTIAL SERVICE.  The location, erection, construction,
reconstruction, change, alteration, maintenance, removal, use, or enlargement
by public utilities or city or other governmental agencies of underground or
overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water generation, transmission of
distribution systems, including buildings, structures, towers, poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call
boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment or accessories
and the use of land in connection therewith, for the furnishing of adequate
service by the public utilities or city or other governmental agencies or for
the public health, safety, and general welfare.











   ESTABLISHMENT.  A building or structure used for commercial or
industrial purposes, including stores, shops, plants, factories, warehouses,
wholesale houses, and the like.











   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed,
designated or elected agent or successor.











   FAMILY.  One or more persons related by blood (within six degrees of
consanguinity), marriage, or adoption with not more than two persons not so
related living and cooking together as a single household.  A“family”
shall also include a functional family of not more than four persons who need
not be related, living and cooking together in a single household, as
distinguished from a group occupying a rooming house, motel or hotel,
fraternity or sorority house.











   FAMILY, FUNCTIONAL. A functional family consists of two or more persons
who are not related by blood or marriage with a demonstrable and recognizable
bond characteristic of a cohesive unit.  This bond typically involves the
function of child- rearing (whether natural or foster) or group living
arrangements for the disabled, elderly persons over 60 years of age, or
mentally/developmentally disabled persons.











   FENCE.  An enclosure, barrier, or screen whose purpose is to
physically or visually contain certain uses and activities which are carried
out on a particular zoning lot.











   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION WITH DRIVE-IN. Any building wherein the primary
occupation is concerned with such federal or state- regulated businesses as
banking, savings and loans, loan companies, and investment companies where
walk-in and drive-in services to consumers is provided on-site.











   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION WITHOUT DRIVE-IN.  Any building wherein the
primary occupation is concerned with such federal or state-regulated
businesses as banking, savings and loans, loan companies, and investment
companies exclusively offering walk-in services to consumers. or clients on
site.











   FLOOD PLAIN.  The areas adjoining any river, creek, or stream which
are subject to flooding, as defined by the Miami Conservancy District.











   FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
flood plain that are required to carry and discharge the flood water, as
defined by the Miami Conservancy District.











   FLOOR AREA.  The total horizontal area of all floors finished as
usable area including roofed porches and roofed terraces. Measurements of
floor area shall be taken to the outside of the exterior walls.











   GARAGE, PRIVATE.  A detached accessory building or a portion of the
principal building used only for the storage of vehicles and incidental
personal property.











   GARAGE APARTMENT/CARRIAGE HOUSE APARTMENT. A garage apartment is a
structure above a private garage in which provision is made for one dwelling
unit.  A carriage house apartment is a garage apartment created from a
historic carriage house.  A carriage house is typically a large garage
structure that predates the advent of the automobile and was designed for the
storage of one or more carriages (or buggies) with provision for one or more
horse stalls.











   GOLF COURSE.  A tract of land laid out with at least nine holes for
playing a game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and
hazards.  A golf course includes a clubhouse, shelters, locker rooms, and
related retail sales that may include a restaurant or driving range as
accessory uses.











   GROUP HOME – ADULT CARE FACILITY. An Adult Care Facility can be
either an Adult Family Home or an Adult Group Home as separately defined. 
An Adult Care Facility is a residence, facility, institution, hotel, or
congregate housing project, providing accommodations and supervision to three
to sixteen unrelated adults, at least three of whom are provided personal
care services, regardless of how the facility holds itself out to the
public.  An Adult Care Facility does not include:





   (1)    A facility operated by a hospice care program.





   (2)    A nursing home, rest home, or home for the aging.





   (3)    A community alternative home.





   (4)    An alcohol and drug addiction program.





   (5)    A habilitation center.





   (6)    A licensed residential facility for the mentally ill.





   (7)    A licensed methadone treatment facility.





   (8)    A residential facility regulated/licensed under the
Department of Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities.





   (9)    A facility that provides personal care services to fewer than
three residents or that provides, for any number of residents, only housing,
housekeeping, laundry, meal preparation, social or recreational activities,
maintenance, security, transportation, and similar services that are not
personal care services or skilled nursing care. 





   (10)    Any facility that receives funding for operating costs from
the Department of Development to provide emergency shelter housing or
transitional housing for the homeless.





   (11)    A terminal care facility for the homeless that has entered
into agreement with a hospice care program.





   (12)    A facility approved by the Veterans administration.





   (13)    An assisted living facility.











   GROUP HOME – ADULT FAMILY HOME. An adult family home is an adult care
facility that provides accommodations to three to five unrelated adults and
supervision and personal care services to at least three of those adults. 
Adult family homes are licensed in accordance with ORC Chapter 3722.











   GROUP HOME – ADULT GROUP HOME.  An adult group home is an adult care
facility that provides accommodations to 6 to 16 unrelated adults, and
provides supervision and personal care services to at least three of the
unrelated adults.  Adult group homes are licensed in accordance with ORC
Chapter 3722.











   GROUP HOME – COMMUNITY ALTERNATIVE HOME.  A community alternative
home is a residence or facility that provides accommodations, personal
assistance, and supervision for three to five unrelated individuals who have
immunodeficiency syndrom or a condition related to Acquired Immunodeficiency
Syndrome (AIDS).  A community alternative homes does not include nursing
homes, rest homes, or homes for the aging, adult foster care facilities,
hospice care facilities, or an assisted living facility.











   GROUP HOME – CONGREGATE HOUSING.  A residential facility for four or
more elderly persons within which are provided living and sleeping
facilities, meal preparation, laundry services, and room cleaning.  Such
facilities may also provide other services, such as transportation for
routine social and medical appointments, and counseling.











   GROUP HOME – FOSTER CARE FACILITY/CERTIFIED FAMILY FOSTER HOME.  A
foster care facility, or foster home, is a family home in which any child is
received apart from his or her parents for care, supervision, or training.
(Based on ORC 2151.01).  A certified family foster home is foster home
operated by persons holding a certificate in force, issued under Section
5103.03 of the Revised Code.
(Based on ORC 2151.01).











   GROUP HOME – HOME FOR THE AGING. A home that provides accommodations,
supervision, and personal care services or accommodations, supervision,
personal care services, administration of medication, and supervision of
special diets for three or more unrelated individuals who are dependent on
the services of others by reason of age and physical or mental impairment,
and personal care services and skilled nursing care for three or more
unrelated individuals.











   GROUP HOME – HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY. A building or group of
buildings containing dwellings where the occupancy of the dwelling is
restricted to persons sixty (60) years of age or older or couples where
either the husband or wife is sixty (60) years of age or older.  This does
not include a development that contains convalescent or nursing facilities.











   GROUP HOME – LIFE CARE FACILITY. A facility for the transitional
residency of elderly and/or disabled persons, progressing from independent
living in single-family units to congregate apartment living where residents
share common meals, culminating in a full health and continuing care nursing
home facility.











   GROUP HOME – MR-DD FAMILY CARE FACILITY. A facility which provides
residential service in a residence for three to eight individuals, exclusive
of staff, who are not related to the resident householder. These individuals
are physically or mentally handicapped, disabled, or in need of adult
supervision, and are provided 24-hour services and supervision in accordance
with their needs, under the guidance of an individual or individuals approved
by the appropriate public or private health/welfare agency. This does not
include nursing homes, rest homes, or hospitals, but does include the
following:





   (1)    Facilities for children or adolescents who have been adjudged
delinquent or have social or emotional problems.





   (2)    Rehabilitation centers for adolescents or adults who have
been institutionalized and released, or who have or have had mental,
physical, or social disabilities which require a group setting to facilitate
the transition to a functional member of society.





   (3)    Resident facilities for mentally retarded, mentally ill, or
physically handicapped children or adults.











   GROUP HOME – MR-DD GROUP CARE FACILITY.  A facility which provides
residential service in a residence for nine to 16 individuals exclusive of
staff, who are not related to the resident householder. These individuals are
physically or mentally handicapped, disabled, in need of adult supervision,
and are provided 24-hour services and supervision in accordance with their
needs, under the





guidance of an individual or individuals approved by the appropriate public
or private health/welfare agency. This does not include nursing homes, rest
homes, or hospitals, but does include the following.





   (1)    Facilities for children or adolescents who have been adjudged
delinquent or have social or emotional problems.





   (2)    Rehabilitation centers for adolescents or adults who have
been institutionalized and released, or who have had mental, physical, or
social disabilities which require a group setting to facilitate the
transition to a functional member of society.





   (3)    Resident facilities for mentally retarded, mentally ill, or
physically handicapped children or adults.











   GROUP HOME – REST HOME.  A home that provides either of the
following:





   (1)    Accommodations for 17 or more unrelated individuals, and
supervision and personal care services for three or more of those individuals
who are dependent on the services of others by reason of age or physical or
mental impairment; or in the case of a rest home component of a home for the
aging, accommodations to three or more individuals and supervision and
personal care services for at least three of those individuals.





   (2)    Accommodations for three or more unrelated individuals,
supervision and personal care services for at least three of those
individuals who are dependent on the services of others by reason of age or
physical or mental impairment, and supervision of special diets and of the
administration of medication to at least one of those individuals.











   GROUP HOME – NURSING HOME.  A home used fo the reception and care of
individuals who by reason of illness or physical or mental impairment require
skilled nursing care or individuals who require personal care services, but
not skilled nursing care.  A nursing home is licensed to provide personal
care services and skilled care services.











   HEALTH DEPARTMENT.  The Montgomery County Combined Health District.











   HEDGE. A dense growth of shrubbery, usually planted to function as a
fence or boundary.











   HOME IMPROVEMENT CENTER. A facility more than 30,000 square feet gross
floor area involved in the sale of hardware or merchandise such as building
materials, tools, lawn and garden equipment, and durable household goods,
such as refrigerators, washing machines, and carpeting.











   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation conducted in its entirety within a
dwelling unit, provided that no person other than members of the family
residing on the premises shall be engaged in the occupation and the use of
the dwelling unit for the  home occupation  shall  be clearly incidental
and subordinate to use for residential purposes by its occupants.  This land
use is regulated by §154.16.03.











   HOOKAH.  A type of water pipe used to smoke tobacco or other legal
non-tobacco substances, in which air is heated by charcoal or burning embers
and passed through the tobacco or other substance to form smoke, and the
smoke then passes through a water-filled chamber where it is filtered and
cooled, and then inhaled through a tube and mouthpiece by one or more users
during a smoking session which may last from forty five (45) to sixty (60)
minutes or longer.  At the end of a smoking session, the dirty water is
discarded and the water chamber is refilled for the next user(s).  The term
"hookah" may also be referred to as a water pipe, narghile, argileh, goza, or
hubble bubble.











   HOOKAH BAR.  A smoking establishment whose business operation, whether
as its primary use or as an ancillary use, is devoted to the on-premises use
of hookahs.  The term "hookah bar" includes but is not limited to
establishments variously known as hookah parlors, hookah cafes, and hookah
lounges. 











   INDUSTRIAL BUILDING.  Any building or structure used for the purpose
of manufacturing, processing, testing, and similar industrial use, which may
generate some objectionable characteristics, such as noise, smoke, dust, or
pollution, requiring large sites, open storage, and service areas and ready
access to regional transportation.











   JUNK.  Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper,
rubber; junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles or parts thereof; iron,
steel and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous materials which are not
held for sale or remelting purposes by an establishment having facilities for
processing such materials.











   JUNK YARD. An establishment or place of business (other than an
establishment having facilities for processing iron, steel, or nonferrous
scrap and whose principal product is scrap iron and steel or nonferrous scrap
for sale for remelting purposes), which is maintained or operated for the
purpose of storing, keeping, buying or selling junk; or for the maintenance
or operation of an automobile graveyard, except an establishment or place
where automobiles, wrecked or otherwise, are held or impounded for a period
not to exceed ninety days exclusively for storage, repair, or resale without
alterations.











   KENNEL.  Any structure or premises within or on which four or more
canines or felines over four months of age are kept for any reason or purpose.











   LIVING AREA.  That portion of a dwelling which is devoted to ordinary
human activities such as sleeping, cooking, eating, socializing and relaxing.
Living area does not include garages, unfinished attics, or basements,
utility buildings, barns, and similar structures or spaces.











   LOADING SPACE.  A space for the standing, loading, or unloading of
motor vehicles.











      LODGING – BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT.  A single-family,
detached, private residence which offers sleeping accommodations to lodgers
in rooms for rent in the owner or operators principal residence.  While
renting rooms to lodgers, breakfast is served at no additional cost.  For
the purpose of this definition, a lodger is defined as a guest who rents a
room in a bed and breakfast establishment for fewer than 30 days.











   LOT.  A parcel of land defined by metes and bounds or boundary lines
in a recorded deed or on a recorded plat, fronting on a legally dedicated
public thoroughfare or public access easement.  In determining lot area, no
part thereof within the limits of the proposed thoroughfare rights-of-way
shall be included.











   LOT AREA.  The computed area contained within the lot lines, excluding
right-of-way.











   LOT, CORNER.  A lot at the juncture of and fronting on two or more
intersecting streets.











   LOT COVERAGE. A measure of intensity of land use that represents the
portion of a site that is covered by buildings and other structures. 











   LOT DEPTH.  The mean horizontal distance between the front and the
rear lot lines.











   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot  with only one frontage
on a street.











   LOT LINES. The property lines bounding the lot.











   LOT LINE, FRONT. The line separating the lot from a street
right-of-way, or if none exists, a public access easement.











   LOT LINE, REAR.  The lot line opposite and most distant from the front
lot line.











   LOT LINE, SIDE.  Any lot line other than front or rear lot line.











   LOT OF RECORD.  A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the
office of the county recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and
bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.











   LOT WIDTH. The width of the lot measured at the building setback line.











   MANUFACTURING.  The assembling, altering, converting, fabricating,
finishing, processing or treatment of a product.











   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A residential building unit or assembly of closed
construction that is fabricated in an off-site facility and constructed in
conformance with the federal construction and safety standards established by
the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 88 Stat. 700, 42
U.S.C.A. 5401, 5403 (commonly referred to as the “HUD Code”), and that
has a permanent label or tag affixed to it, as specified in 42 U.S.C.A. 5415,
certifying compliance with all applicable federal construction and safety
standards.











   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.  Any tract of land upon which three or more
manufactured or mobile homes used for habitation are parked, either free of
charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any roadway, building,
structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the
facilities of the park.  A manufactured home park must be licensed by the
public health council and must meet all applicable state laws, but it does
not include any of the following: 





   (1)    A tract of land used solely for the storage or display for
sale of manufactured or mobile homes;





   (2)    A tract of land used solely as a camping facility for
temporary occupancy; or





   (3)    A tract of land within an area that is subject to local
zoning authority and subdivision requirements and is subdivided, and the
individual lots are for sale or sold for the purpose of installation of
permanently sited manufactured homes for habitation.











   MANUFACTURING, HEAVY.  The mechanical or chemical transformation of
raw materials or substances into new products, including related accessory
buildings and uses, used in the assembling, altering, converting,
fabricating, finishing, processing, or treatment of a product. These
activities or processes may necessitate the storage of large volumes of
highly flammable, toxic matter or explosive materials needed for the
manufacturing process.  These activities may involve outdoor operations as
part of the manufacturing process.











   MANUFACTURING, LIGHT.  The manufacture, predominantly from previously
prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing,
fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of such products, and
incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products.  These
activities are operated entirely within enclosed buildings which do not
adversely affect their surroundings, have adequate access, are served with
the necessary utilities, and are not objectionable in their operation or
appearance.











   MINI-WAREHOUSES/SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITIES. A building, group of
buildings, or enclosed storage facility divided into independent,
fully-enclosed bays or compartments used to meet the self-service, personal
property, storage needs of small businesses, apartment dwellers, and other
residential uses; and may include refrigerated facilities.











   MOBILE HOME.  A building unit or assembly of closed construction that
is fabricated in an off-site facility, is more than thirty-five (35) body
feet in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty or more
square feet (320 sq. ft.), is built on a permanent chassis foundation, is
transportable in one (1) or more sections, and does not qualify as a
manufactured home as defined in division (C)(4) of Section 3781.06 of the
Ohio Revised Code or as an industrialized unit as defined in division (C)(3)
of Section 3781.06 of the Ohio Revised Code.











   NURSERY/GARDEN CENTER.  A establishment, or portion thereof, for the
retail handling of any article, substance, or commodity related to the
planting, maintenance, or harvesting of garden plants, shrubs, trees,
packaged fertilizers, soils, chemicals, or other nursery goods and related
products in small quantities to the consumer.











   OFFICE – PROFESSIONAL OFFICE/BUSINESS OFFICE. Any building or
structure, the use of which is limited to providing professional services
such as those provided by doctors, lawyers, accountants, architects,
engineers, photographers, insurance agents, Realtors, and similar
professions, or for the administrative aspects of a business where no goods
are sold on the premises.











   OPEN SPACE. Land developed to conservation or recreational purposes
and/or land designated by a municipality to remain undeveloped.











   PARKING, COMMERCIAL. A parcel of land or portion thereof, used for the
parking or storage of motor vehicles as a commercial enterprise for which any
fee is charged directly to the patron independently of any other use on the
premises.











   PARKING, ON-SITE.  An off-street, hard- surfaced, ground level open
area, used exclusively by the customers or persons engaged in the conduct of
one establishment on the same site of the establishment.











   PARKING, SHARED. An off-street, hard- surfaced, ground level open area,
used exclusively by the customers or persons engaged in the conduct of two or
more establishments in the immediate vicinity of its location, or by those
for whom such establishments are conducted.











   PARKING SPACE.  An off-street area available for the parking of one
motor vehicle, and having an area of not less than 171 square feet, exclusive
of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto and giving access thereto
and having direct access to a public street, alley, or public access
easement, but being located totally outside of any street or alley
right-of-way.











   PATIO ENCLOSURE.  An unheated or cooled space that is constructed
independent of and separated physically by means of doors, walls or windows,
from the principal structure to which it is attached. A patio enclosure must
be at least 66% open on its three outer walls, except for insect screens or
window glazing.











   PERMIT, CONDITIONAL USE. A permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer on approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals to allow a use other than
a principally permitted use to be established within the district.











   PERMIT, ZONING. A permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer of
the city stating that the  proposed erection,  construction, enlargement,
or moving of a building or structure referred to therein complies with the
provisions of this zoning code.











   PERSON.  Any natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether for
profit or not-for-profit.











   PERSONAL SERVICES.  Any enterprise conducted for gain which primarily
offers services to the general public such as shoe repair, barber shops,
beauty parlors, and similar activities.











   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT/PUD.  An area of land in which a variety of
housing types are accommodated in a preplanned environment under more
flexible standards.  A planned unit development typically features varied
setback lines, lot sizes, and cluster type site planning whereby maximum
allowable densities are established to permit the creation of usable areas of
open space.











   PLANNING COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission of the city.











   PRIVATE CLUB.  An association organized and operated not for profit
for persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires,
or leases premises, the use of which premises is restricted to the members
and their guests.  The affairs and management of the association are
conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body
chosen by the members at their annual meeting.  Food, meals, and beverages
may be served on the premises, provided adequate dining room space and
kitchen facilities are available.  Alcoholic beverages may be served to
members and their guests, provided the service is secondary and incidental to
the promotion of some other common objective of the organization, and further
provided that the sale or service of alcoholic beverages is in compliance
with all applicable federal, state, county, and local law.











   PRIVATE STREET.  A street that is not dedicated to the city.











   PUBLIC ACCESS EASEMENT.  An easement over private property granting to
the general  public the right of access, and authorizing the city to
regulate traffic and enforce maintenance thereon for the purpose of
protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare.











   PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATION AND TRANSMISSION FACILITIES. The use of land
outside the public right-of-way for electric substation or natural gas
transmission structures.











   RECREATION – ATHLETIC TRAINING FACILITIES. An indoor establishment
that provides facilities and equipment for the physical development and
enhancement of skill levels of athletes participating in a recognized
sport.  An athletic training facility shall not include bowling alleys,
miniature golf courses, driving ranges, pool halls or other uses of a
recreational nature.  Athletic training facilities may also include pro
shops selling a variety of sports equipment and clothing, food, and beverage
services, and other incidental uses provided that these uses do not occupy
more than five percent (5%) of the floor area.











   RECREATION – COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITIES. Any establishment
whose main purpose is to provide the general public with an amusing or
entertaining activity and where tickets are sold or fees are collected for
the activity.  Includes, but not limited to, arcades, ball fields, billiard
halls, bowling alleys, golf driving ranges, laser tag, miniature golf
courses, skating rinks, indoor and outdoor swimming pools, movie theaters
less than 50,000 s.f. gross floor area, water slides, and other similar
recreational facilities.











   RECREATION – HEALTH CLUBS. A facility where members or nonmembers use
equipment or space for the purpose of physical exercise.  Exercise
equipment, instruction programs, aerobic exercise classes, and weight control
programs may be part of the club.  The facility may include running and
jogging tracks, game courts, swimming facilities, saunas, showers, massage
rooms, and lockers.  Health clubs may also include pro shops selling a
variety of sports equipment and clothing.  Health clubs may also include
other incidental uses provided that these uses do not occupy more than five
percent (5%) of the floor area.











   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  Shall mean and include the following:





   (1)    A travel trailer, which is a vehicular, portable structure
built on a chassis designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreational, and vacation uses, permanently identified travel trailer by the
manufacturer;





   (2)    A pick-up camper, which is a structure designed primarily to
be mounted on a pick-up chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it
suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and
vacation uses;





   (3)    A motorized home, which is a portable dwelling designed and
constructed as an integral part of a self-mounted vehicle on wheels and
designed for travel and vacation use;





   (4)    Boats and boat trailers, including boats, floats, rafts, plus
the normal equipment to transport the same on the highway;





   (5)    Fold-out tent trailers;





   (6)    Utility trailers; and/or





   (7)    Any combination of the above.











   RESOURCE EXTRACTION.  Any mining, quarrying, excavating process,
storing, separating, cleaning, or marketing of any mineral natural resource.











   RESTAURANT, SIT-DOWN.  A sit-down eating establishment with a turnover
rate of 45 minutes or greater.











   RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD. An eating establishment with or without drive-in
facilities with a turnover of less than 45 minutes.











   REST HOME. Refer to Group Home - Rest Home definition.











   RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES.  Any local convenience retail sales and/or
service uses including but not limited to, antique shops, bakery shops,
barber shops, beauty salons, bookstores, cafes and coffee houses, clothing
stores, commercial studios,  drug stores, dry cleaning and laundry pick-up
stations, gifts and stationary shops, florists, furniture stores, grocery,
supermarket, or other food stores, hardware stores, laundromats, paint
stores, shoe stores, sporting goods stores, vehicle parts shops, and the
like, which supply commodities or perform services.











   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE.  A retail establishment that derives more than
eighty (80) percent of its gross revenue from the sale of cigars, cigarettes,
pipes, or other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking
accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
"Retail tobacco store" does not include a tobacco department, or section of a
larger commercial establishment, or of any establishment with a liquor
permit, or of any restaurant.  In the event of a conflict between this
definition and the definition of "retail tobacco store" provided in Ohio
Revised Code (O.R.C.) Chapter 3794: Smoking Ban, the O.R.C. definition shall
prevail.











   SCHOOL – BUSINESS TRADE SCHOOL/TECHNICAL SCHOOL.  A specialized
instructional establishment that provides on-site training of business,
commercial and/or trade skills, such as accounting, data-processing, and
computer repair.











   SCHOOL – NURSERY SCHOOL.  An education facility that is primarily
educational in nature where children between the ages of three to five years
receive schooling.











   SETBACK LINE. The closest point at which a building may be constructed
in relation to the lot line.











   SEWERS – CENTRAL SEWER/GROUP SEWER. An approved sewage disposal
system which provides a collection network and disposal system and central
sewage treatment facility for a single development, community, or region.











   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS.  An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual
encounter center.











   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS – ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the
public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug- operated, or for
any form of consideration, or electronically, electrically, or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc
players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.











   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS – ADULT BOOKSTORE/ADULT NOVELTY
STORE/ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration
any one or more of the following:





   (1)    Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, or video reproductions,
slides, or other visual representations that are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or





   (2)    Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for
use in connection with specified sexual activities.





   (3)    A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas and still be categorized as adult bookstore adult novelty store, or
adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, or adult video store as long as one of its principal business
purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified
materials that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.











   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS – ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar,
restaurant, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features:





   (1)    persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or





   (2)    live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or





   (3)    films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or
description of ‘‘specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.











   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS – ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment that:





   (1)    offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration, provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign
visible from the public right of way that advertises the availability of this
adult type of photographic reproductions; or





   (2)    offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is
less than ten (10) hours; or





   (3)    allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent
the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.











   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS – ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A
commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are
regularly shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.











   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS – ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall,
auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features
persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, or live performances
that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities.











   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS – LICENSEE, SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. 
A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually-oriented business has
been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the
application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose
name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually-oriented
business.











   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS – NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a
person who appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or who displays specified
anatomical areas and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay
money or any form of consideration. Nude model studio shall not include a
proprietary school licensed by the State of Ohio or a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a
private college or university that maintains and operates educational
programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:





   (1)    that has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is
available for viewing; and





   (2)    where in order to participate in a class a student must
enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and





   (3)    where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the
premises at any one time.











   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS – NUDITY/STATE OF NUDITY.  The showing of
the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or
cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or
the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.











   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS –  SEMI-NUDE/SEMI-NUDE CONDITION.   The
showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the
areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks.
This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female
breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female
breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other
wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.











   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS – SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.  A business or
commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers
for any form of consideration:





   (1)    physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or





   (2)   activities between male and female persons and/or persons of
the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-
nudity.











   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS – SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Specified
anatomical areas means:





   (1)   the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; or





   (2)   less than completely and opaquely- covered human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola.











   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS – SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Specified
sexual activities means any of the following:





   (1)   the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
public region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;





   (2)    sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or





   (3)    excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of
the activities set forth in (1) and (2) above.











   SMOKING ESTABLISHMENT.  An establishment in which tobacco products are
sold for use or consumption on the premises to persons age eighteen (18) and
older as provided by state law.  The term "smoking establishment" includes
but is not limited to establishments referred to as smoking, cigar, or
tobacco bars or lounges, but for the purposes of this Chapter shall not
include hookah bars.











   STORY.  That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, or if there is no
floor above, the portion between the floor and the ceiling above; also any
portion of a building used for human occupancy between the topmost floor and
the roof.  A basement shall not be counted as a story unless more than
one-half of the basement height is above grade level at the front of the
building.











   STRUCTURE.  An assembly of materials which form a construction for
occupancy or use, including, but not limited to:  buildings, structures,
tents, platforms, stages, observation towers, radio, television and telephone
towers, water storage tanks, trestles, piers, open sheds, shelters, fences,
signs, and the like, which shall be construed to mean the whole or parts
thereof.











   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS.  Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as walls, floors, columns, beams, or girders.











   STUDIO – INSTRUCTIONAL STUDIO/COMMERCIAL STUDIO. A commercial
operation which includes the sale of, and/or the instruction in, arts and
crafts, sculpting, ceramics, dance, music and instruments, commercial
photography, and other similar commercial and/or instructional-oriented
operations.











   SUBDIVISION, CLUSTER RESIDENTIAL.  A development technique regulated
by §154.16.02 that concentrates permitted residential density in specific
areas on a site allowing remaining land to be used for recreation, open
space, or the preservation of historically- or environmentally- sensitive
areas.  A cluster subdivision contains the same number of residential lots
and dwelling units as  would normally be permitted with conventional
subdivision design.  Clustering residential lots and  increasing density on
a portion of the site typically results in the provision of between 25 and 50
percent of the site being used for recreation, open space, or the
preservation of historically- or environmentally- sensitive areas.  Cluster
residential subdivisions must meet all requirements of the West Carrollton
Subdivision Regulations.











   SUBDIVISION, CONVENTIONAL RESIDENTIAL.  A development technique that
typically allocates all of a site in either individual lots or public rights
of way.  Conventional residential subdivisions must meet all requirements of
the West Carrollton Subdivision Regulations.











   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT.  An increase in floor areas occupied by the
business by more than twenty-five percent (25%) as the floor areas exist on
the date this ordinance takes effect.











   TAVERN.  Facilities or a building where liquors are sold to be
consumed on the premises, but not including restaurants where the principal
business is serving food.  Tavern shall also include private clubs in which
alcoholic beverages are regularly sold or served as a principal activity of
the organization.











   TEMPORARY FOOD VENDOR.  (EDITOR’S NOTE:  This subsection was
repealed by Ordinance 3475, passed April 12, 2011.)











   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. Structures of a temporary nature erected for a
period not to exceed 12 months for such uses as construction offices or
storage buildings at a construction site.











   THOROUGHFARE PLAN, OFFICIAL.  The official thoroughfare plan of, and
as adopted and periodically amended by the city, establishing the location
and official right-of-way widths of principal highways and streets in the
city, on file as part of the city comprehensive plan, in the office of the
City Manager, together with all amendments thereto subsequently adopted.











   TOWER. Any pole, spire, structure or combination thereof, including
supporting lines, cables, wires, braces and mast, designed and constructed
primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including 
self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. A
communication tower may include, but not be limited to, radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular
telephone  towers, and personal communication service towers.  The term
tower shall not include amateur radio operator's equipment, as licensed by
the FCC.











   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL.   Transfer of ownership or control
means and includes any of the following:





   (1)    the sale, lease, or sub-lease of the business;





   (2)    the transfer of securities that constitute a controlling
interest in the business, whether by sale exchange, or similar means; or





   (3)    the establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal
device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.











   TREE LAWN.  The area between the front of the curb and the front edge
of the sidewalk where grass is typically provided.











   TRUCK, HEAVY.  Heavy trucks are motor vehicles, including truck
tractors and similar vehicles designed to haul over 2.5 tons of freight or
passengers, with one or more rear axles.











   TRUCK STOP.  A facility, typically on a site in excess of two acres,
providing specialized facilities for retail fueling services for heavy
trucks.  The site may include related facilities including but not





limited to overnight parking, repair shops, automated washes, restaurants,
and motels; all as part of the facility.











   USE.  The employment or occupation of a building, structure, or land
for a person's service, benefit, or enjoyment.











   USE-BY-RIGHT.  A principal permitted use in a particular zoning
district which is permitted in that district as a legal right under the terms
of this zoning code.











   USE, CONDITIONAL.  A use permitted within a district other than a
principally permitted use, requiring a conditional use permit and approval of
the Board of Zoning Appeals that all prior conditions for approval have been
met.











   USE, NONCONFORMING.  A legally  existing use, building, or structure,
which fails to comply with the standards set forth in this code applicable to
the district in which it is located.











   USE, TEMPORARY.  A use of land, building, or structures not intended
to be of permanent duration.











   UTILITY BUILDING.  A detached accessory building used for the purpose
of storing equipment and materials or for housing parts of electrical,
plumbing, and heating systems for the main building.











   VARIANCE.  A variation from the strict interpretation of the terms of
this zoning code, owing to peculiar conditions or circumstances which apply
only to the property in question, and no other.  As used in this zoning
code, a variation is authorized only for height, yard, setback, minimum
building size, parking requirements, lot size, frontage, and area of all
accessory buildings located on the property.











   VEHICULAR USE AREA. All areas subject to vehicular traffic including
parking lots, access drives, loading areas and service areas.











   WALL.  A boundary enclosure or separating barrier which is usually
opaque.











   WAREHOUSE.  Any building or structure whose use is limited to the
storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and
equipment, excluding bulk storage of materials that are inflammable or
explosive or that present hazards or conditions commonly recognized as
offensive.  These facilities are characterized by extensive warehousing,
frequent heavy trucking activity, open storage of material, or nuisances such
as dust, noise, and odors, but not involved in manufacturing or production.











   WASTEWATER TREATMENT, ON-SITE. A septic tank or similar installation on
an individual lot which utilizes an aerobic bacteriological process or
equally satisfactory process for the elimination of sewage and provides for
the proper and safe disposal of the effluent, subject to the approval of the
Montgomery County Combined Health District.











   WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT.  An establishment that engages in the sale of
goods, merchandise, and commodities for resale by the purchaser.











   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  Any cables, wires, lines, wave guides,
antennas and any other equipment or facilities associated with the
transmission or reception of communications as authorized by the FCC which a
person seeks to locate or has installed upon a tower or antenna support
structure.  This land use is regulated by §154.16.09.  However, the term
wireless telecommunications facilities shall not include:





   (1)    Any satellite dish antenna regulated by §154.16.06;





   (2)    Antennas used by amateur radio operators holding a valid
amateur radio (HAM) license issued by the Federal Communications Commission.











   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS – ANTENNA, FACADE MOUNTED
COMMUNICATION.  A wireless telecommunication antenna mounted on the facade
of a structure such as a building, water tower, steeple, stack or existing
light pole or communication tower.











   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS -- CO-LOCATION.  The use of a wireless
telecommunications facility by more than one wireless telecommunications
provider.











   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS – EQUIPMENT SHELTER. The structure in
which the electronic receiving and relay equipment for a wireless
telecommunications facility is housed.











   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS – MONOPOLE. A support structure
constructed of a single, self-supporting hollow metal tube securely anchored
to a foundation.











   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS – SUPPORT STRUCTURE.  Any building or
other structure other than a tower which can be used for location of wireless
telecommunications facilities.











   YARD.  A space on the same lot with a main building, open, unoccupied,
and unobstructed by buildings or structures from the ground to the sky,
except as otherwise provided in this zoning code.











   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the
depth of which shall be the least perpendicular distance between the front
lot line and the front of the main building.











   YARD, REAR.  A yard extending across the full width of the lot between
the rear-most principal building and the rear lot line, the depth of which
shall be the least distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the
principal building. Where a lot abuts on an alley, one-half the alley width
may be considered as part of the required rear yard.











   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the main building and the side lot line,
extending from the front yard or front lot line where no front yard is
required, to the rear yard. The width of the required side yard shall be
measured horizontally and perpendicularly from the nearest point of the side
lot line toward the nearest part of the main building.











   ZONING CERTIFICATE.  The document issued by the zoning enforcement
officer authorizing buildings, structures, or uses consistent with the terms
of this zoning code and for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing its
provisions.











   ZONING CODE.  The term zoning code shall mean this chapter, and its
amendments.











   ZONING DISTRICT.  A portion of the incorporated area of the city for
which certain uniform regulations governing the use, height, area, and
intensity of use by buildings and land and open spaces about buildings are
herein established.











   ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  The Zoning Enforcement Officer is that
person designated by the City Manager in accordance with the city charter and
administrative code to administer and enforce this zoning code.











   ZONING LOT.  A single tract of land or portion of a tract which is
located within one zoning district.  Therefor, a ZONING LOT may or may not
coincide with a lot or record.  The zoning lot shall have adequate frontage
on an improved dedicated roadway of adequate width, or on a public access
easement.











   ZONING ORDINANCE.  The term zoning ordinance shall apply to the
content of this chapter as adopted by ordinance passed.





(Ord. 1959, passed 3-23-76; Am. Ord. 2557, passed 9-9-86; Am. Ord. 2639,
passed 1-26-88; Am. Ord. 2651, passed 7-12-88; Am. Ord. 2810, passed 7-23-91;
Am. Ord. 2854, passed 4-14-92; Am. Ord. 2909, passed 10-5-93; Am. Ord. 2943,
passed 5-24-94; Am. Ord. 2961, passed 11-22-94; Am. Ord. 3063, passed
9-23-97; Am. Ord. 3082, passed 2-24-98; Am.  Ord.  3092, passed 6-9-98; Am.
Ord. 3459, passed 11-9-10; Am. Ord. 3567, passed 8-25-15; Ord. 3591.  Passed
10-11-16; Ord. 3592.  Passed 10-11-16.)











GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS










154.03.01  TITLE AND JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS.




   (A)   For purposes of reference and citation, these regulations
shall be known as the West Carrollton, Ohio Zoning Code.











   (B)    The Zoning Code has been developed in accordance with the
objectives of the city comprehensive plan, and is designed and intended to
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the
community, to encourage sound and orderly urban growth, and to protect
existing development through the conservation of property values.











   (C) The entire land area within the incorporated limits of the city is
subject to the provisions specified in the Zoning Code.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.02;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.03.02  INTERPRETATION; CONFLICTS OF LAWS.




   (A)   The provisions specified in the Zoning Code shall be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and
general welfare.











   (B)    Where the provisions specified in this Zoning Code exceed the
requirements specified in other city ordinances, the provisions required in
this Zoning Code shall be followed.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.179 (A) and (B))










154.03.03  SEVERABILITY.




   Should any section or provision of this Zoning Code be declared by any
court to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of this Zoning Code as a whole, or any part thereof other than the
part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.





HISTORY:  (Newly Proposed)










154.03.04  REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; EFFECTIVE DATE.




   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Zoning Code
are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Zoning Code full
force and effect. This Zoning Code shall become effective from and after the
date of its approval and adoption, as provided by law.





HISTORY:  (Newly Proposed)










154.03.05  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)    No building or structure shall be constructed, enlarged,
converted, structurally altered, or reconstructed, nor shall any building or
structure be moved onto a zoning lot which does not conform with the
provisions specified in this Zoning Code, except as provided in Sections
154.06.01 and 154.07.01.










   (B)    No parcel of land which is described by metes and bounds, or
any other lot shall be created that is not in conformance with the provisions
specified in this Zoning Code.











   (C)    Following the adoption of this Zoning Code, no building or
structure shall be constructed or altered so as to:





      (1)    Exceed the height, area, or yard requirements of the
district in which the building or structure is located, as specified in the
Zoning Code.





      (2)    Accommodate or house more dwelling units than permitted
on a lot in the district in which the building or structure is located, as
specified in the Zoning Code.





      (3)    Be located on a permanent foundation over an easement.











   (D)    Following the adoption of this Zoning Code, no land use shall
be commenced that is not in conformance with the provisions specified in this
Zoning Code.











   (E)    Every building or structure constructed or placed on a lot in
the city shall be located on a lot as defined in this chapter; and in no case
shall there be more than one principal building on a lot except as permitted
in the R-4, R-5, PUD, B-1, B-2, M-1, or M-2 Districts.











   (F)    No yard, or part thereof, open space, off-street parking, or
loading space that is required for a building, structure, or use for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this Zoning Code shall be
considered in meeting the same requirements similarly required for another
building.











   (G)   No ingress and egress to properties from a public street shall
be permitted without proper approval from the Service Director.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.179(C) through (F) and (H) through (J))











NONCONFORMING USES










154.04.01  NONCONFORMING USES.




   Nonconforming uses include buildings, structures, or uses which were
lawfully existing prior to the adoption of this zoning code, but which are
prohibited or further restricted as a result of the provisions adopted in
this zoning code.











   (A)    All  nonconforming  uses  are  considered by  this 
zoning  code  to  be  incompatible with  the permitted uses of the
zoning district in which the nonconforming uses are located.











   (B)    Nothing contained in this zoning code shall be construed to
require any changes to be made, in the plans, construction, or designed use
of any building, structure, or use on which actual construction was lawfully
begun, or for which plans were officially approved by the city, prior to the
date of adoption of this zoning code.





      (1)    Actual construction includes projects already under
construction, whereby materials have been placed on the site and fastened
together in a permanent manner; where excavation of a site has begun; or
where demolition of a building to make way for rebuilding has begun, provided
the construction, excavation, or demolition and subsequent rebuilding shall
be carried on diligently.





      (2)    Officially approved plans shall include preliminary and
final subdivision plans which have been approved by the city, prior to the
adoption of this zoning code.











   (C)    All nonconforming buildings, structures, or uses of land
which were lawfully existing prior to the adoption of this zoning code may be
maintained and kept in repair providing no further enlargement of
nonconforming buildings, structures, or uses of land shall occur.  Any
nonconformity may be altered to decrease nonconformity.











   (D)    Any nonconforming building, structure, or use of land, which
is superseded by a use which is permitted within the zoning district in which
it is located shall thereafter be in conformance with this zoning code, and
the previous nonconforming use shall not be resumed.











   (E)    A nonconforming building or structure shall not be moved, in
whole or in part, to any other location on the lot on which it is located
unless it is made to conform with all the regulations of the zoning district
in which it is located.











   (F)    Any nonconforming use of a building, or any nonconforming use
of land which has been discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive
months, shall not be recontinued or reestablished unless it is made to
conform with all of the regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located.











   (G)    Any building, structure, or use of land which is devoted to a
use which is not permitted by this zoning code in the zoning district in
which it is located shall not be extended, enlarged, constructed, restored,
reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, except as hereinafter provided:





      (1)    To change its use to a use which is permitted and in
conformance with the regulations of this zoning code.





      (2)    All nonconforming buildings, structures, or uses of
land shall not be extended, enlarged, constructed, restored, or reconstructed
following destruction greater than 60% of the replacement value immediately
prior to the damage, unless in conformity with the provisions of this zoning
code, except that;





         (a)   Nothing in this zoning code shall prevent the
total restoration or reconstruction of any legal nonconforming single-family
residence, so long as such restoration is actually begun within one year
after the date of its damage or destruction.





         (b)    A residential nonconforming use of land located
in any R or B District, except as provided for in §154.04.01(G)(2)(a) may be
extended, enlarged, restored, or reconstructed following destruction greater
than 60%, one time after the date of adoption of this zoning code, subject to
the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals of the city.











   (H)    Nonconforming Lots of Record.





      (1)    The construction of a conforming structure or the
conduct of a permitted use shall be allowed on any lot of record which
existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this zoning code, and which
has a lot size or frontage less than that required for the structure or
permitted use in the zoning district in which the lot is located.  Variance
of any development standard other than the minimum lot size or frontage
requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Zoning
Appeals.





      (2)    Such nonconforming lots must be in separate ownership
and not of continuous frontage with other land in the same ownership at the
time of adoption or amendment of this zoning code.  Otherwise, development
shall be permitted only in accordance with the regulations of the zoning
district in which such ownership is located.





      (3)    An amendment to the zoning code as referred to in this
section shall be interpreted to mean only those amendments which change the
required lot size or frontage requirements of a lot of record in question.











   (I)   Conditionally Permitted Uses Not Considered Nonconforming
Uses.  Any use of a specific property which is conditionally permitted in a
zoning district in accordance with the provisions of this zoning code shall
not be considered as a nonconforming use in the zoning district in which it
is conditionally permitted. The conditionally permitted use shall be
considered a conforming use on the particular lot on which it is located.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.182;  Ord. 1990, passed 11-23-76; Am. Ord. 2306,
passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2739, passed 2-13-90; Am. Ord. 3441, passed 1-26-10.)











ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT










154.05.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.




   (A)    The Zoning Code is designed and intended to promote the
health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the community.











   (B)    The administration and enforcement of the Zoning Code is
vested in the following offices, boards, or commissions of the city.





      (1)    Zoning Enforcement Officer.





      (2)    City Manager.





      (3)    Planning Commission.





      (4)    City Council.





      (5)    Board of Zoning Appeals.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.07 (A-B), Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.05.02  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY MANAGER.




   The duties and responsibilities of the City Manager include the
appointment of a Zoning Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this
Zoning Code, as outlined in §154.05.03.





HISTORY:  (Formerly 154.09, Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.05.03  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.




   The duties and responsibilities of the Zoning Enforcement Officer or
his designated representative include:











   (A)    Enforce the provisions of the Zoning Code.











   (B)    Interpret the requirements of the text and map of the Zoning
Code.  Where there are questions in the interpretation, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer may consult with the necessary city staff, including the
Law Director, to clarify the questions.











   (C)    Approve zoning certificates and occupancy certificates to
insure that the proposed use is in accordance with all of the provisions of
this Zoning Code, and maintain a complete record of all the certifications. 
The Zoning Enforcement Officer, upon receipt of a request for a departure
from established dimensional requirements set forth in Chapter 153:  Signs
and Chapter 154:  Zoning Code, may administratively grant a waiver from said
dimensional requirements only if all of the following criteria are met:





      (1)   The request is a modest departure from the established
dimensional requirements, which shall constitute not more than ten (10)
percent of the maximum permitted dimension; and





      (2)   The adjacent property owners provide the City with a
signed letter of approval for such a waiver; and





      (3)   Such waiver will promote a more development-friendly
atmosphere while maintaining reasonable development standards and
administrative efficiency; and





      (4)   Special circumstances or conditions exist applicable to
the land or buildings for which the administrative variance is sought, which
are peculiar to such land or buildings and do not apply generally to land or
buildings in the area, and which are such that the strict application of the
dimensional requirement would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of
such land or building, thus creating a hardship.  These circumstances or
conditions may include exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape,
topographic conditions, visibility or other extraordinary physical features
of the land or buildings; and





      (5)   The administrative variance granted shall provide the
minimum necessary relief to alleviate the hardship; and





      (6)   Granting of the administrative variance will be in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of the applicable code, will not
be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare, and does not conflict with other local, state, or
federal laws or regulations; and





      (7)   The administrative variance does not constitute a change
in use.











   (D)    Receive and act on all applications for zoning certificates
within seven days of their date of filing.  Certifications, or a written
notification and explanation of noncertification shall be issued to the
applicant within seven days of the date of filing.  Failure to notify the
applicant within this time period shall constitute grounds for submitting the
zoning certificate application to the Board of Zoning Appeals.











   (E)    Where violations are reported or observed, determine whether
the use is in compliance with, or in violation of this Zoning Code, and where
a violation does exist, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner
in writing in accordance with Section 154.05.08(D).











   (F)    Maintain and keep current the permanent records required by
this Zoning Code, including but not limited to the official zoning district
map, certification of zoning, zoning inspections, and all other official
zoning actions of the City Council.  The records shall be made available for
use by the City Council, the Planning Commission, the Board of Zoning
Appeals, and the general public.











   (G)    Prepare and submit reports concerning the administration and
enforcement of this Zoning Code to the City Manager on request.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.08;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2962,
passed 11-22-94; Am. Ord. 3452, passed 8-12-10; Am. Ord. 3516, passed 10-23-
12.)










154.05.04  DUTIES AND ROLE OF THE CITY  PLANNING COMMISSION.




   (A)    The Planning Commission shall be organized and shall have
such powers and duties as provided in §§ 9.01 and 9.02 of the City Charter.











   (B)    The Planning Commission and its staff shall perform the
following duties, in accordance with the Charter, Article IX, ORC §§ 713.01
through 713.05, and ORC § 713.11 (A):





      (1)   Prepare the Zoning Code.





      (2)   Interpretation.  To determine if uses not specifically
mentioned in the zoning  are similar to uses permitted within a district.





      (3)    Initiate the Zoning of Newly Annexed Areas.  Whenever
lands are incorporated into the city through annexation, the Planning
Commission shall provide City Council with temporary and permanent zoning
classification recommendations as discussed in §154.09.07.





      (4)   Initiate Amendments to the Zoning Code or Official
Zoning Map.  Continuously review the code for the purpose of recommending
official map or text changes or amendments considered necessary and
appropriate to update this Zoning Code to promote the best interest of the
public in general, only if the amendment can be justified on one of following
grounds:





         (a)    The change is in conformance with the
comprehensive plan of the city;





         (b)    There has been a substantial and significant
change in area conditions;





         (c)    There is a need for additional land in the zoning
district classifications being requested for change; or





         (d)    There is an error in the Zoning Code.





      (5)    Maintenance of Code.  Maintain an up-to-date copy of
the text and map on permanent display in the municipal office.





      (6)    Maintenance of Proceedings Records.  The Planning
Commission shall cause to be made a record of all its proceedings, setting
forth its reasons for its decisions.  The record, immediately following the
Planning Commission's decision shall be filed in the offices of the 
Planning Commission, and shall be open to public inspection.





      (7)    Conditional Uses.  The Planning Commission may hear
and decide on, in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Code,
applications for a conditional use permit as well as applications for any
variance submitted with the application for a conditional use permit.





      (8)    Site Plan Review.  The Planning Commission may review,
define, and approve site plans and access management requirements for
substantial developments that warrant public review.





      (9)    Public hearings.  The Planning Commission may require
and hold public hearings concerning matters that come before the Planning
Commission.











   (C)    Appeals Procedure.  Appeals from the Planning Commission in
their decision on variances, conditional uses and related matters shall be to
the county court of common pleas, as provided by the state statutes.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.10 (A- B), Ord. 2306, passed
2-23-82)










154.05.05  DUTIES AND ROLE OF THE CITY COUNCIL.




   The City Council shall:




   (A)    Appoint five members to the Planning Commission in accordance
with the Charter, Article IX , § 9.01 ;









   (B)    Appoint five members to the Board of Zoning Appeals in
accordance with the Charter, Article IX, § 9.03;










   (C)    Initiate, or act on changes or amendments to the Zoning Code
or Official Zoning Map recommended by the Planning Commission.  The Council
shall act favorably upon the changes or amendments in accordance with the
procedures specified in the Charter and the Ohio Revised Code, only if the
request can be justified on one of the following grounds:





      (1)    The change is in conformance with the comprehensive
plan of the city;





      (2)    There has been a substantial and significant change in
area conditions;





      (3)    There is a need for additional land in the zoning
district classification being requested for a change;





      (4)    There is an error in the Zoning Code.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.11, Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.05.06  DUTIES AND ROLE OF THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   (A)    Membership.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of
five members who are residents of the city, and hold no other municipal
office or employment.  The members shall be selected by the City Council for
overlapping terms of five years,  in accordance with the Charter, Article IX
, §9.03 .  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall adopt its own rules and elect
its own officers annually.










   (B)    Official Action.  Three Board members shall constitute a
quorum, and must be present to conduct Board business, to hold public
hearings, to vote on requests for variances, interpretations, and decisions
on appeals.  When a request for a variance, interpretations, and decisions
on appeals does not receive three votes for approval or disapproval, the
request may be brought before the Board only when there are at least four
Board members in attendance. 
(Ord. 2453, passed 8-14-84)











   (C)    (1)   Administration appeals.  To hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged that there is an error in any interpretation, judgment,
determination or decision made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer in the
administration or enforcement of the provisions of this Zoning Code.





         (a)   Such appeal shall be made within ten (10) business
days after the decision by filing with the Board of Zoning Appeals a notice
of appeal on the forms provided for such purpose.  The appeal shall:





            (i)  Cite specific provisions of this Zoning Code
that are alleged to have been interpreted in error or the specific decisions
or action being appealed and the grounds on which the appeal is being made.





            (ii)    Include the required fee as set forth in
Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule.





            (iii)  Include such other information as the City of
West Carrollton or any of its Boards, Commissions, Departments or Officers
may reasonably require; and





            (iv)  Include a statement as to why the appellant
has standing to pursue the appeal from the administrative action by a
statement of the way in which the administrative action adversely affects the
appellant.





         (b)   Upon receipt of an appeal, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall set a time and place for a public hearing on the appeal and
shall provide the applicant written notice thereof.  The hearing shall be
commenced within a reasonable time after an appeal has been filed.  Notice
of the hearing shall be given not less than twenty (20) days prior to the
date of the public hearing by publishing notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city.  The Zoning Inspector shall transmit to the Board
of Zoning Appeals the materials constituting the record upon which the appeal
is based.





         (c)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not be required
to hear any case which has been the subject of an appeal during the previous
twelve (12) months, unless substantial new evidence, critical to the case,
becomes available.





         (d)   An appeal shall stay any further administrative
action in regards to the action being appealed, except that when the appeal
is of the issuance of a notice of violation pursuant to Section 154.05.08(D)
involving illegal construction, such construction shall cease until a
decision on the appeal is rendered by the Board of Zoning Appeals.





            (Ord. 3452, passed 7-13-10.)











   (D)    The Board shall cause to be made a record of all its
proceedings, setting forth its reasons for its decisions.  The record,
immediately following the Board's decision shall be filed in the offices of
the Board and Planning Commission, and shall be open to public inspection.











   (E)    Appeals Procedure.  Appeals from the Board of Appeals in
their decision on administrative error; variances; interpretations, and
related matters shall be to the county court of common pleas, as provided by
the state statutes.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.12, Ord. 1980, passed 7-13-76;
Am. Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2410, passed 9-27-83; Am. Ord. 2766,
passed 9-11-90; Am. Ord. 2816, passed 8-13-91; Former paragraph
§154.12(C)(3) deletion proposed)










154.05.07  ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.




   (A)    Zoning Certificate.





      (1)    Requirements.  No person shall locate, erect,
construct, reconstruct, enlarge, or structurally alter any building or
structure within the city, without having the required zoning certificate. 
The certificate shall not be issued unless the plans for the proposed
building or structure fully comply with all the provisions of this Zoning
Code. Any zoning certificate issued in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter shall be null and void.





      (2)    Application. Application for a zoning certificate shall
be made in writing to the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Each written
application shall include the following:





         (a)    Name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant;





         (b)    Two copies of a scale drawing showing the actual
shape and dimensions of the lot to be built on, or to be changed in its use,
in whole or in part;





         (c)    The location of the lot, existing zoning and land
use, including the immediately surrounding area;





         (d)    The location, size, and height of any building or
structure to be erected or altered;





         (e)    The existing or intended use of each building,
structure, or use of land where no buildings are included; and





         (f)    The number of families or dwelling units each
building is designed to accommodate, if applicable.





      (3)    Utility buildings. Zoning certificates shall be
required for all utility buildings, including those accessory to a dwelling.





      (4)    Time limit. If a zoning certificate is issued for the
purpose of constructing a new building or  structure and the construction is
not begun within a 180 day time period, then the zoning certificate shall be
null and void.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.13(B); Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2940,
passed 4-26-94; Am. Ord. 2962, passed 11-22-94; Am. Res. 29-97, passed
8-12-97)











   (B)    Occupancy Certificate.





      (1)    Requirements. No building, structure, or addition
thereto constructed, built, moved, remodeled, or reconstructed shall be
occupied or used for any purpose; and no vacant land shall be used for any
purpose; and no use of any land, building, or structure shall be changed to
any other use unless an occupancy certificate shall first have been obtained
from the Zoning Enforcement Officer certifying that the proposed use or
occupancy complies with all the provisions of this chapter.





      (2)    Every application for a zoning certificate shall be
deemed to be an application for an occupancy certificate also. Every
application for an occupancy certificate for a new or changed use of land,
building, or structures where no zoning certificate is required shall be
filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer and be in such form and contain
such information as the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall provide by general
rule.





      (3)    Issuance of occupancy certificate.





         (a)    No occupancy certificate for a building or
structure or addition thereto, constructed, built, moved, remodeled, or
reconstructed shall be issued until such work has been completed and the
premises inspected and certified by the Zoning Enforcement Officer to be in
full and complete compliance with the plans and specifications upon which the
zoning certificate for the property was issued. No occupancy certificate for
a new use of any building, structure or land shall be issued until the
premises have been inspected and certified by the Zoning Enforcement Officer
to be in full and complete compliance with all the applicable regulations for
the zoning district in which it is located. However, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer may issue a certificate of occupancy to an applicant who has not, or
whose predecessor or predecessors in interest has not obtained a certificate
of occupancy for a change in use of any land, building, or structure as
required by law at the time such change in use occurred, provided the Zoning
Administrator determines that such applicant, or his predecessor or
predecessors in interest, would have been entitled to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy if the application then required by law would have
been made.





         (b)    Pending the issuance of a permanent occupancy
certificate, a temporary occupancy certificate may be issued to be valid for
a period not to exceed 180 days from its date pending the completion of any
addition or during partial occupancy of the premises. An occupancy
certificate shall be issued, or written notice shall be given to the
applicant stating the reasons why a certificate cannot be issued, within 15
days after the receipt of an application therefore, or after the Zoning
Enforcement Officer is notified in writing that the structures or premises
are ready for inspection for an occupancy certificate.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.13(C); Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2940,
passed 4-26-94; Am. Ord. 2962, passed 11-22-94; Am. Res. 29-97, passed
8-12-97)










154.05.08  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.




   (A)    Enforcement.  This Zoning Code shall be enforced by the City
Manager, and the Zoning Enforcement Officer as may be designated by the City
Manager.











   (B)    Revocation of Certification of Zoning.  Any certification of
zoning issued upon a false and substantive statement shall be void. Whenever
the fact of the false statement shall be established to the satisfaction of
the City Manager, the certification shall be revoked by notice in writing to
be delivered to the holder of the void certification on the premises
concerned, or in some conspicuous place on the premises.  Any person who
shall proceed thereafter with the work or use without having obtained new
certification of zoning, in accordance with this Zoning Code, shall be deemed
guilty of violation thereof.











   (C)    Violation.  In case any building is, or is proposed to be
located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, changed, maintained,
or used, or any land is, or is proposed to be used in violation of this
Zoning Code, the City Council, the Law Director, and Zoning Enforcement
Officer, or any neighboring property owner who would be damaged by the
violation, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may institute
injunction, mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove the unlawful location,
erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement, change, maintenance, or
use.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.14 (Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2962,
passed 11-22-94))











   (D)   Notice of Zoning Violation.





      (1)   Whenever the Zoning Enforcement Officer, inspector or
designate thereof determines that there is a violation of the Zoning Code, a
notice of violation shall be issued.  Such notice shall:





         (a)   Be in writing;





         (b)   Identify the violation;





         (c)   Include a statement of the reason or reasons why
it is being issued and refer to the sections of this Zoning Code being
violated; and





         (d)   State the time by which the violation shall be
corrected.





      (2)   Service of notice of violation shall be as follows:





         (a)   Method of service.  Such legal notice shall be
deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is (a) delivered to the owner,
occupant or agent in person (b) sent by certified or registered mail
addressed to the owner at the last known mailing address with return receipt
requested or (c) posted in a conspicuous place in or about the premises
affected.





         (b)   If the registered or certified mail envelope is
returned with an endorsement showing that the service was unclaimed, the
notice may be served by ordinary mail to the owner's last known mailing
address.  This mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing, and
service shall be deemed complete on that date of mailing.





         (c)   When service is perfected by posting notice on or
about the premises affected, such posting shall be evidenced by a photograph
and a notarized certificate of service.  Such notice, photograph, and
certificate of service shall be sent by ordinary mail to the last known
mailing address as evidenced by a certificate of mailing and service shall be
deemed completed on that date.





         (d)   If service of written notice is unable to be
perfected by any of the hereinbefore methods, the City Manager or his/her
designee shall cause the notice to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city, once each week for two consecutive weeks, and
service shall be deemed completed on the second date of publication.











   (E)   Entry and Inspection of Property.





      (1)   Authorization.  An inspector designated by the City
Manager is authorized to make inspections of property and structures located
within the City of West Carrollton in order to safeguard the public health,
safety and welfare, and may enter, examine and survey at any reasonable hour
such properties for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Zoning
Code.





      (2)   Permission.  Prior to seeking entry to a property or
structure for the purposes of making inspections necessary to enforce the
provisions of this Zoning Code, the inspector or designate thereof shall
attempt to obtain the owner's or occupant's permission to inspect.  If such
permission is denied or is unable to be obtained, the enforcement officer
shall request assistance from the Law Director in securing a valid search
warrant prior to inspection.  For exterior property violations clearly
visible from the public right of way, or for properties previously declared a
public nuisance and/or determined by a code official to be a public nuisance,
permission need not be obtained.





      (3)   Liability.  No officer, agent or employee of the City
of West Carrollton shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue
to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of duties under this Zoning Code. 
(Ord. 3452, passed 7-13- 10.)










154.05.09  PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.




   (A)    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of
this Zoning Code, including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, and on conviction
thereof, shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than six
months, or both, and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved
in the case.  Each and every day during which the illegal location,
erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement, change, maintenance, or
use continues may be deemed a separate offense.  The owner or tenant of any
building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder,
contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or
maintains such violation, may each be found guilty of a separate offense and
suffer the penalties provided in this section. 











   (B)    Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the
Municipality from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent
or remedy any violation.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.999 (Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82); highlight
indicates newly proposed language)











VARIANCES










154.06.01  VARIANCES.




   (A)    Purpose:  The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize upon
appeal, by reasons of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, topographic
conditions, or other extraordinary situation or condition of a lot, a
variance from strict application of the provisions of this Zoning Code to
relieve exceptional difficulties or undue hardship, provided the relief can
be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and does not
substantially impair the intent of this Zoning Code. 











   (B)    Public Hearing and Notice: A public hearing shall be held by
the Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty (30) days after the receipt of an
application for an appeal or variance from the Zoning Enforcement Officer or
an applicant.  Notice thereof shall be given to the parties in interest not
less than 20 days prior to the date of the public hearing by first class mail
and by publishing notice in one or more newspapers of general circulation in
the city.  The notice shall set forth the time and place of the public
hearing, and the nature of the proposed variance.  Additional notice may
also be given by such other means as the granting authority deems
appropriate, such as by posting notice on or near the parcel of land involved
or at places which will be conspicuous to the neighboring properties and to
the public.  Failure of any person, other than the applicant, to receive
notice of any hearing or public hearing shall in no way affect the validity
of the action taken.  The public hearing must be open to the public and
testimony should be taken under oath and subject to cross-examination.











   (C)    Findings:  No variance shall be granted unless the Board
finds that all of the following conditions exist:





      (1)    Written Application: The requested variance must be in
writing and contain:





         (a)    Name, address, and phone number of applicant(s);





         (b)    Legal description of property;





         (c)    Description or nature of variance requested; and





         (d)    A fee as established by ordinance.





      (2)    Granting of the variance will be in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of this Zoning Code on the district in which it is
located, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise
detrimental to the public welfare.





      (3)    The proposed variance will not constitute a change,
including a variation in use, on the official zoning district map.  The
Board of Zoning Appeals shall not approve a variance for a use which is not
permitted or conditionally permitted in the zoning districts in which the
property, building, or structure is located.  No nonconforming use of
neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district and no
permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other
districts shall be considered grounds for issuance of a variance.





      (4)    There must exist special circumstances or conditions,
fully described in the findings, applicable to the land or buildings for
which the variance is sought, which are peculiar to such land or buildings
and do not apply generally to land or buildings in the area, and which are
such that the strict application of the provisions of this Zoning Code would
deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of such land or building.  Mere
loss in value shall not justify a variance; there must be deprivation of
beneficial use of land.





      (5)    There must be proof of hardship to the owner, as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience, created by the strict application of
this Zoning Code.  It is not sufficient proof of hardship to show that
greater profit would result if the variance were granted.  Furthermore, the
hardship complained of cannot be self-created; nor can it be established on
this basis by one who purchases with or without knowledge of the
restrictions; it must result from the application of this Zoning Code; it
must be suffered directly by the property in question; and evidence of
variances granted under similar circumstances need not be considered.





      (6)    Granting the variance requested will provide the
minimum necessary relief to alleviate the hardship.  Variances shall not be
granted on the grounds of convenience or profit, but only where strict
application of the provisions of this Zoning Code would result in unnecessary
hardship.





      (7)    The proposed variance will not impair an adequate
supply of light and air to adjacent property, substantially increase the
congestion in the public streets, increase the danger of fire, endanger the
public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values of the
adjacent area.





      (8)    The granting of the variance requested will not confer
on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this regulation to
other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.











   (D)    Authorized Variances.  Variances from the regulations of
this Zoning Code shall not be granted unless the Board makes specific
findings of fact, based directly on the particular evidence presented to it,
which support conclusions that the standards and conditions imposed in this
section, if applicable, have been met by the applicant.  Variances may be
granted as guided by the following:





      (1)    To permit any yard or setback less than the yard or
setback required by the applicable regulations.





      (2)    To permit the use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise
prohibited solely because of the insufficient area or width of the lot or
lots, but generally the respective area and width of the lot or lots should
not be less than eighty (80) percent of the required area and width.





      (3)    To permit the same off- street parking facility to
qualify as required facilities for two or more uses, provided that
substantial use of such facility by each user does not take place at
approximately the same hours of the same days of the week.





      (4)    To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading
facilities required, but generally by not more than thirty (30) percent of
the required facilities.





      (5)    To allow for the deferment of required parking
facilities for a reasonable period of time, such period of time to be
specified in the variance.





      (6)    To increase the maximum distance that required parking
spaces are permitted to be located from the use served, but generally not
more than forty (40) percent.





      (7)    To increase the maximum allowable size or area of signs
on a lot, but generally by not more than twenty-five (25) percent.





      (8)    To increase the maximum gross floor area of any use so
limited by the applicable regulations, but generally not more than
twenty-five (25) percent.











   (E)    Action by Board of Zoning Appeals.  Within thirty (30) days
after the public hearing required in this section, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall either approve, approve with supplementary conditions, or
disapprove the request for appeal or variance.  The Board of Zoning appeals
shall further make a finding in writing that the reasons set forth in the
application justify the granting of the variance that will make possible a
reasonable use of the land, building or structure.











   (F)    Supplementary Conditions and Safeguards.  The Board may
prescribe any additional conditions and safeguards that it deems necessary to
insure that the objectives of the regulations or provisions to which the
variance applies will be met.  Any violation of such conditions and
safeguards, when they have been made a part of the terms under which the
variance has been granted, shall be deemed a punishable violation under this
Zoning Code.











   (G)    Following disapproval by the Board of Appeals of an
application or request for variance from the literal interpretation of this
Zoning Code, no subsequent application requesting the same variance shall be
filed by any applicant, whether the person, firm, or corporation, until the
expiration of 12 months after the original or subsequent disapproval.











   (H)    Approval of a variance shall expire if the applicant or owner
fails to obtain the required zoning certificate or building permits within
180 days from the date of approval by the Board.  The Board may grant a
maximum of two extensions not exceeding 180 days each, upon written
application.  The Board shall not consider or grant any extension when a
zoning map or text amendment has been enacted, subsequent to the approval of
the original variance, which would affect the property subject to the
variance.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.12(C)(2))











CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS










154.07.01  CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS.




   A conditional use permit shall be required for all uses listed as
conditionally permitted uses in this Zoning Code.  The purpose of a
conditional use permit is to allow a proper integration into the city of uses
which may only be suitable in specific locations within certain zoning
districts, or only if the uses are designed or laid out in a particular
manner on the site to safeguard both the property rights of all individuals
and the health, safety, and general welfare of the community.





   (A)    Contents of Conditional Use Permit Application. All
conditionally permitted uses included in this Zoning Code must be approved by
the Planning Commission by filing an application with the Zoning Enforcement
Officer.  Application for a conditional use permit shall be made by the
property owner, or agent thereof, to the Planning Commission on a form
prescribed by the city.  Such application at a minimum shall contain the
following information:





      (1)    Name, address and phone number of the applicant;





      (2)    Legal description of the property;





      (3)    Zoning district;





      (4)    Description of proposed conditional use;





      (5)    Maps and drawings of the proposed site for the
conditional use showing the location of all buildings, parking and loading
areas, streets and traffic accesses, open spaces, refuse and service areas,
utilities, signs, yards, landscaping features, and such other information as
the Plan Commission may require.  When a proposed site is adjacent to
residential properties, a photo simulation of the proposed facility from
effected residential properties and public right-of-ways shall be taken at
designated locations.





      (6)    A narrative statement discussing the compatibility of
the proposed use with the existing uses of adjacent properties and with the
comprehensive plan, to include an evaluation of the effects on adjoining
properties of such elements as traffic circulation, noise, glare, odor,
fumes, and vibration, and such other information as the Plan Commission may
require.  At a minimum this narrative shall address the ability of the
application to meet each of the applicable criteria contained in paragraph
(B) of this section.





      (7)    A list containing the names and mailing addresses of
all owners of property within 200 feet of the property in question;





      (8)    A fee as established by Ordinance.











   (B)    General Standards for All Conditional Uses. The Planning
Commission shall not grant a conditional use permit and require the
subsequent issuance of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer unless it shall, in each specific case, review the particular facts
and circumstances of each proposed use and make specific findings of fact
directly based upon the particular evidence presented to it.





      (1)    Expansion of Existing Conditionally Permitted Uses.





         (a)    Any existing lawful use which is considered as a
conditionally permitted use by this Zoning Code, which is located in a zoning
district in which the use is conditionally permitted, shall be considered as
a conforming use.





         (b)    Any expansion of a conditionally permitted use
involving the enlargement of buildings, structures, or land area devoted to
the conditional uses, shall be subject to the procedures outlined in this
section.





      (2)    Findings.  In considering an application for a
conditional use permit, the Planning Commission must make an affirmative
finding that the proposed conditional use:





         (a)    Is in fact to be located in a district wherein
the use may be conditionally permitted;





         (b)    Facilitates and encourages the general
objectives, or any specific objective, of the City’s comprehensive plan
and/or Zoning Code, and does not adversely affect the envisioned predominant
character or purposes in the District;





         (c)    Serves to create a well-planned, visually
appealing development which will be designed, constructed, operated, and
maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the
existing or intended character of the general vicinity and that such use will
not change the essential character of the same area;





         (d)    Will not be an adverse influence or present
hazardous or disturbing impacts upon any existing or future abutting or
neighboring uses;





         (e)    Will not involve uses, activities, processes,
materials, equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to
any persons, property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive
production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare, or odors. (See
§154.11.03);





         (f)    Is designed to maximize the public interest and
private benefit in a balanced manner.





         (g)    Will be served adequately by essential public
facilities and services such as highways, streets, police and fire
protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer, and
schools; or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of
the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately any such services;





         (h)    Provides adequate ingress/egress to the
development, and relates effectively to the existing street system in terms
of safety and ease of access with vehicular approaches to the property so
designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
thoroughfares;





         (i)    Will not create excessive additional requirements
at public cost for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental
to the economic welfare of the community;





         (j)    Will not result in the destruction, loss, or
damage of a natural, scenic, or historic feature of major importance.





      (3)    Substantially Similar Use.  Where a specific use is
proposed that is not listed or provided for in this Zoning Code, the Planning
Commission may make a determination that the proposed use is substantially
similar to a permitted or conditional use listed in this Zoning Code.  Upon
making a determination that a proposed use is a substantially similar use,
the Planning Commission shall notify the Council of its decision and shall
include in its written findings the reasoning upon which the decision is
based.  Unless the decision is rejected within thirty (30) days of its
receipt by the Council, such substantially similar use determination by the
Planning Commission shall become effective.  A substantially similar use
shall then be permitted in the same manner and under the same conditions and
procedures as the use is permitted to which it has been found to be
substantially similar.  The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall maintain as a
public record a listing of all uses about which the determination of 
substantial similarity was made and shall consult this record in the process
of issuing future permits.  If the Planning Commission determines that a
proposed use is not substantially similar, remedy may be sought by the
appellant through the submission of an application for amendment as
prescribed in §154.08.01. The following standards shall be considered by the
Planning Commission when making a determination that a use is substantially
similar to a permitted or conditional use within a specific district:





         (a)    The compatibility of the proposed use with the
general use classification system as specified in this Zoning Code.





         (b)    The nature, predominant characteristics, and
intensity of the proposed use in relation to those uses specified by this
Zoning Code as being permitted, or conditionally permitted, in that district.





         (c)    The size, dimensional requirements, parking
requirements, traffic generation potential, and other regulatory
considerations normally associated with uses as specified in this Zoning Code.





         (d)    The site development plan proposed by an
applicant, while not strictly in accord with the regulations applying within
the District, meets public purposes, provides public protection, and conforms
with the objectives and principles of the comprehensive plan and Zoning Code.





         (e)    In the particular circumstances of the case,
strict application of a particular regulation or regulations is not necessary
for the accomplishment of the public purposes or the provision of public
protection, at the time or in the future. 





HISTORY: (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.36.5;  Ord.  3105.  Passed
11-10-98.)





      (4)    Supplementary Conditions and Safeguards.  When
considering an application for a conditional use permit, the Board shall
impose such other conditions and limitations as may be deemed necessary to
carry out the purpose and intent of the Zoning Code, and to preserve and
protect the general public health, safety, and welfare.





      (5)    Joint Variance Application.  If an application for a
variance has been filed in conjunction with an application for a conditional
use, the Planning Commission may make its decision on the application for a
conditional use pending upon a decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals to
grant a variance for such conditional use in accordance with §154.06.01, or
the Planning Commission may make a decision upon both applications for the
variance and the conditional use, serving in the capacity of the Board of
Zoning Appeals for administrative expedience in accordance with R.C. 713.11
(A) and in accordance with §154.05.04.





      (6)    Public Hearing.  A public hearing must be held by the
Planning Commission in considering an application for a conditional use
permit.  Notice thereof shall be given not less than 20 days prior to the
date of public hearing by posting notice on or near the parcel of land
involved at places which will be conspicuous to the neighboring properties
and to the public, or by publishing notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city.  Notice may also be given by any other means as the
granting authority deems appropriate.  Failure of any person, other than the
applicant, to receive notice of any hearing or public hearing shall in no way
affect the validity of the action taken.





      (7)    Action by the Planning Commission.  Within thirty (30)
days after the date of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall take
one of the following actions:





         (a)    Approve issuance of the conditional use permit by
making an affirmative finding in writing that the proposed conditional use is
to be located in a district wherein such use may be conditionally permitted,
that all conditions for approval of such use in such district have been met,
and that such use will neither result in significant negative impacts upon
nor conflict with surrounding uses.  Such written finding may also prescribe
supplementary conditions and safeguards.  Upon making an affirmative
finding, the Planning Commission shall direct the Zoning Enforcement Officer
to issue a conditional use permit for such use which shall list all
conditions and safeguards specified by the Planning Commission for approval.





         (b)    Make a written finding that the application is
deficient in information or is in need of modification and is being returned
to the applicant.  Such finding shall specify the information and/or
modifications which are deemed necessary.





         (c)    If an application is disapproved by the Planning
Commission, the applicant may seek relief through the Court of Common
Pleas.  Appeals from the Planning Commission shall be made in the manner
specified by the state statutes.





      (8)    Expiration of Conditional Use Permit.  Approval of a
conditional use permit shall expire if the applicant or owner fails to obtain
the required zoning certificate or building permits within 180 days from the
date of approval by the Planning Commission.  The Planning Commission may
grant a maximum of two extensions not exceeding 180 days each, upon written
application.  The Board shall not consider or grant any extension when a
zoning map or text amendment has been enacted, subsequent to the approval of
the original conditional use permit, which would affect the property subject
to the conditional use permit.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly  §154.181)











AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING CODE










154.08.01  PROCEDURE FOR AMENDMENTS.




   The City Council may by ordinance, after receipt of a recommendation
thereon from the Planning Commission, and following the required public
hearing held by City Council, amend, supplement, change, or repeal the
regulations, restrictions, or zoning district boundaries or classifications
of property whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare,
provisions of the comprehensive plan, or good zoning practices require.











   (A)    A request to amend this Zoning Code may be initiated as
follows:





      (1)    By adoption of a motion by the Planning Commission;





      (2)    By adoption of a resolution by the City Council
requesting the Planning Commission to make a review and recommendation;





      (3)    By the filing of an application by the owner of the
property to be changed or affected by the proposed amendment.











   (B)    Applications by property owners for amendments shall contain
such information as may be required by the Planning Commission, City Council,
and City Manager for thorough review of each proposed amendment.











   (C)    Following the adoption and transfer of a resolution to the
Planning Commission by the City Council, the adoption of a motion by the
Planning Commission, or the filing of an application by the property owner,
the Planning Commission may advertise and hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment, or supplement.  If so:





      (1)    Notice shall be advertised by at least one publication
in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, at least 20 days prior
to the date of the public hearing.  The notice shall state the date, place,
and time of the hearing, and shall include the places and times that the
proposed amendment and supporting documentation may be examined.  Notice may
also be given not less than ten days prior to the date of the public hearing
by posting notice on or near the parcel of land involved at places which will
be conspicuous to the neighboring properties and to the public, or by such
other means as the granting authority deems appropriate.





      (2)    If the proposed amendment or supplement intends to
rezone or redistrict ten or less parcels of land, as listed on the tax
duplicate, written notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by the
Planning Commission by first class mail at least 20 days before the date of
the public hearing to the owners of the property within 200 feet from the
parcel, to the addresses of the owners appearing on the County Auditor's
current tax list or the treasurer's mailing list and to such other list or
lists that may be specified by the city.  The failure of delivery of the
notice shall not invalidate the public hearing.











   (D)    The Planning Commission shall, by resolution, recommend the
approval, approval  with modification, or disapproval of the application,
and the secretary of the Planning Commission shall transmit the resolution to
the City Council. On receipt of the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall advertise and hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment or supplement.





      (1)    Notice shall be advertised by at least one publication
in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, at least 30 days prior
to the date of the public hearing. The notice shall state the date, place,
and time of the hearing. Notice may also be given not less than 20 days prior
to the date of the public hearing by posting notice on or near the parcel of
land involved at places which will be conspicuous to the neighboring
properties and to the public, or by such other means as the granting
authority deems appropriate,





      (2)    If the proposed amendment or supplement intends to
rezone or redistrict ten or less parcels of land, as listed on the tax
duplicate, written notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by the Clerk
of Council, by first class mail at least 20 days before the date of the
public hearing to the owners of the property within and contiguous to and
directly across the street from the parcel, to the addresses of the owners
appearing on the County Auditor's current tax list or the treasurer's mailing
list and to such other list or lists that may be specified by the city. The
failure of delivery of the notice shall not invalidate the public hearing.





      (3)    During the 30-day period prior to the public hearing,
the text describing the proposed amendment, together with the plans and
supporting documentation, shall be on file and available for review by the
public, in the office of the City Manager.





      (4)    At or following the public hearing, the City Council
shall act on the proposed amendment.











   (E)    When the recommendation of the Planning Commission is for
disapproval of the proposed change or amendment, an affirmative vote of at
least a majority plus one member of the City Council present shall be
required for approval of the ordinance authorizing the change or amendment.











   (F)    Following disapproval by City Council of  an application 
to amend  the Zoning Code or map, no subsequent application requesting the
same amendment shall be filed by any applicant, whether the same person,
firm, or corporation, until the expiration of 12 months after the original or
subsequent disapproval.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.13(A);  Ord. 2306, passed
2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2940, passed 4-26-94; Am. Ord. 2962, passed 11-22-94; Am.
Res. 29-97, passed 8-12-97)










154.08.02  ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS.




   Within fifteen (15) days of the effective date of any change of a
zoning district classification or boundary, the Zoning Enforcement Officer
shall amend the Official Zoning Map to reflect such change, and shall note
the effective date of such change, together with appropriate reference to the
ordinance authorizing such change.  The Official Zoning Map shall then be
signed by the Mayor and attested to by the Clerk.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed)











ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS





AND OFFICIAL ZONING MAP










154.09.01  PURPOSE.




   The purpose of this Article is to establish zoning districts in order
to realize the general purposes set forth in  §154.03.01(B), to provide for
orderly growth and development, and to protect the property rights of all
individuals by assuring the compatibility of uses and practices within
districts.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.09.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.




   (A)    The following zoning districts are hereby established for the
City of West Carrollton, Ohio:





      (1)    LD Limited Development District;





      (2)   A Agricultural District





      (3)    RE Residential Estate District;





      (4)    R-1 Single-Family Residential District;





      (5)    R-2  Single-Family Residential District;





      (6)    R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District;





      (7)    R-5 Multiple-Family Residential District;





      (8)    R-PUD Residential Planned Unit Development District;





      (9)    R-MHP  Manufactured/Mobile Home Park District;





      (10)    O-R Office-Residential District;





      (11)    O Office District;





      (12)    B-1 Convenience Commercial District;





      (13)    B-2 General Commercial District;





      (14)    Olde Downtown District;





      (15)    CC Alexander Square City Center District





      (16)   M-1 Business Park District;





      (17)    M-2 Manufacturing District;





      (18)    PUD Planned Unit Development District





      (19)    H Heritage Overlay District











   (B)    Nothing in this Article shall be construed to require the
actual location of any district on the Official Zoning Map, as it is the
intent of this Zoning Code to provide the flexibility in its administration
to allow future expansion and emendation.











   (C)    The districts designated on the official zoning district map
and described in this Code are established, and no buildings or structures
shall be erected or altered, nor any land within the corporate limits used in
a manner prohibited by the regulations herein prescribed, except the
following which are not subject to zoning districts:





      (1)   Federal, state, or municipal governmental buildings or
functions.





      (2)   Public schools.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.04;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82;
Am. Ord. 2522, passed 8-27-85; Am. Ord. 2695, passed 6-13-89)










154.09.03  ZONING DISTRICT MAP.




   The districts established in §154.09.02, as shown on the Official
Zoning Map, which, together with all data, references, explanatory material
and notations thereon, are an integral part of the Zoning Code and are hereby
officially adopted as part of this Zoning Code and hereby incorporated by
reference herein, thereby having the same force and effect as if herein fully
described in writing.  The Official Zoning Map shall control whenever there
is an apparent conflict between the district boundaries as shown on the Map
and the description(s) as found in the text of this Zoning Code or any other
ordinance.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.03;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.09.04  ZONING MAP LEGEND.




   There shall be provided on the Official Zoning Map a legend which shall
list the name of each zoning district and indicate the symbol for that
district.  A color, combination of colors, or black and white patterns may
be used in place of symbols to identify the respective zoning districts in
such legend.  In addition to such legend, the Official Zoning Map shall
provide sufficient space for compliance with §154.08.02 and §154.09.05.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.09.05  IDENTIFICATION OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.




   The Official Zoning map shall be properly identified by the signature
of the Mayor, as attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the official seal. 
The Map shall be maintained by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and shall
remain on file in the office of the Director of the Planning and Economic
Development Department.  The Official Zoning map shall be a reproducible
document, and copies shall be made available to the public upon request and
upon payment of a fee as established by ordinance.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.09.06  INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICTS; MAP AND TEXT.




   The following rules shall be used to determine the precise location of
any zoning district boundary unless such boundary is specifically indicated
on the Official Zoning Map:





   (A)    Where zoning district boundaries are delineated to follow, or
follow approximately property lines, the property lines shall be considered
as the district boundaries.











   (B)    Where zoning district boundaries are shown to follow, or
approximately follow the centerline or right-of-way lines of highways,
streets, or alleys, these centerlines or right-of-way lines shall be
considered as the district boundaries.











   (C)    Where zoning district boundaries are shown to follow a
railroad line, the middle of the main tracks of such railroad line shall be
considered as the district boundaries.











   (D)    Where zoning district boundaries are shown to follow or
approximately follow the limits of any municipal corporation, the corporation
limits shall be considered the district boundaries.











   (E)    Whenever any highway, street, alley, railroad, or other
public right-of-way is officially abandoned by the city, the adjoining zoning
district boundary shall be automatically extended to the centerline of the
abandoned right-of-way, and the area shall become subject to the regulations
of the zoning district in which it is located.  In the event that only a
portion of a right-of-way is abandoned, the adjoining





zoning district boundary, or the district boundary nearest the abandoned area
shall be extended.











   (F)    Where zoning district boundaries are delineated to be
parallel, or parallel approximately to centerlines or right-of-way lines, the
district boundary shall be considered as being parallel and at such distance
as shall be indicated on the Official Zoning Map. When no dimension is shown
on the map, the distance shall be determined in accordance with the scale
shown on the official zoning district map.











   (G)    In interpreting the text, the particular shall control the
general.











   (H)    The phrase used for includes arranged for, designed for,
intended for, maintained for, or occupied for.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.05; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.09.07  ZONING UPON ANNEXATION.




   The following regulations shall apply to any areas annexed to the City:





   (A)    If any lots, tracts, or lands are not subject to zoning at
the time of their annexation, they shall be classified into whichever
districts established by this Zoning Code most closely resembles the existing
uses at the time of the annexation.  Such classification shall be
recommended to Council by the Planning Commission and shall be approved by
Council resolution.











   (B)    Whenever lands which are subject to zoning at the time of
their annexation into the City, the zoning regulations then in effect in
these annexed areas shall remain in full force and shall be enforced by the
appropriate county or township officials having jurisdiction, until the city
shall officially determine and adopt new zoning for the territory upon
recommendation by the Planning Commission. 





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.10;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)











   (C)    With respect to any annexation, the Planning Commission shall
within 90 days conduct a public hearing on the matter of permanent zoning
classification following the Zoning Code amendment process outlined in
§154.08.01.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed)











L-D LIMITED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT










154.10.001  L-D LIMITED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the Limited Development District is:





   (A)    To protect storm water channels so that they will be able to
carry abnormal flows of water in time of high water and flooding;











   (B)    To designate areas which are not suitable for intensive
community development due to flooding by preventing the encroachment into
these areas by uses, buildings, and structures which will materially obstruct
the flow of water, thereby increasing the magnitude of flooding;











   (C)    To preserve from development areas that will be needed for
expansion and improvement of groundwater drainage; and











   (D)    To prevent the loss of life and excessive property damage.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.159; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.002  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.




   Provided that no principal building or structure is located in an area
subject to flooding in such a way as to materially obstruct the flow of water
as determined by the Miami Conservancy District, the following uses are
permitted in this district:





   (A)    Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (C)    Dwelling – Expansion of residential dwellings constructed
prior to September 27, 1988 to an extent not exceeding 50% of the market
value of the principal structure before the expansion is started.











   (D)    Farming and agricultural production, and related farm uses.











   (E)    Parking, On-site.











   (F)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.











   (G)    Recreation – River-related





recreational uses such as boat livery, boat rentals, and other such similar
nature uses.











   (H)    Recreation – Private, noncommercial areas and facilities.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.160)










154.10.003  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.



   Provided that no principal building or structure is located in an area
subject to flooding in such a way as to materially obstruct the flow of water
as determined by the Miami Conservancy District, and the general conditions
and supplemental requirements in this Chapter, the following uses are
conditionally permitted in this district:



 



   (A)   Contractor office



 



   (B)   Contractor shop



 



   (C)   Contractor storage yard



 



   (D)    Parking, Commercial.



 



   (E)    Parking, Shared.



 



   (F)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.



 



   (G)    Resource and mineral extractions.



 



   (H)    Wireless telecommunications facility.



 



   (I)   New dwellings, provided they are not located in the Special
Flood Hazard Area as indicated on the FEMA Flood Rate Insurance Maps for
Montgomery County, Ohio. 




(Ord. 3309.  Passed 11-8-05; Ord. 3592.  Passed 10-11-16.)










154.10.004  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.161.1; Ord. 2909, passed 10-5-93; Am. Ord. 3063,
passed 9-23-97)










154.10.005  MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE.




   Regulations concerning minimum lot size are not applicable in this
district.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.162; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.006  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.




   Regulations concerning minimum frontage are not applicable in this
district.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.163; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.007  MAXIMUM HEIGHT.




   Regulations concerning maximum height are not applicable in this
district.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.164; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.008  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.




   Regulations concerning minimum yard requirements are not applicable in
this district.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.165; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.009  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.




   Off-street parking or loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.166; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.010  SIGNS.




   Refer to Chapter 153.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.167; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.011  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   Refer to Sections 154.11.01 through 154.16.09.




HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.168; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)











A AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT










154.10.012  A AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the A Agricultural District is to provide for low
density residential development compatible with certain farm uses





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.169; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.013  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.




   (A)   Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (C)    Day care facility – Type B family day care home.











   (C)    Dwelling – Single-family, detached











   (D)    Farming and agricultural production, and related farm uses.











   (H)    Home occupations subject to the conditions of §154.16.03.











   (I)    Parking, On-site.











   (J)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.











   (K)    Subdivision, Conventional residential.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.170)










154.10.014  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.




   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.





   (A)    Cemeteries











   (B)    Churches and other similar places of religious worship.











   (C)    Lodging – Bed and breakfast establishment.











   (D)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.










   (E)    Recreation – Golf course.










   (F)    Recreation – Private, noncommercial areas and facilities.











   (G)    School – Private school/Primary school/Intermediate
school/Secondary school.











   (H)    Subdivision, Cluster residential.











   (I)    Wireless telecommunications facility.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.151)










154.10.015  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.171.1; Ord. 2909, passed 10-5-93)










154.10.016  MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE.




   Single-family housing and other permitted uses, two acres.











Other permitted uses:  none





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.172)










154.10.017  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.




   Single-family housing and other permitted uses, 150 feet.











Other permitted uses:  none





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.173)










154.10.018  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Minimum Front Yard. 





      (1)    Residential Uses: 50 feet.





      (2)    Other Permitted Uses: none.





      (3)    Corner Lots.





         (a)    On all corner lots, all yards which front on
streets shall be considered front yards, and as such shall meet the minimum
front yard requirements specified in §154.10.027(A)(1) or (2).





         (b)    On all lots having frontage on two streets which
do not intersect, the minimum front yard setback specified in
§154.10.027(A)(1) or (2) shall apply to each yard with street frontage.











   (B)    Minimum for Each Side Yard.  Residential and other permitted
uses, 25 feet.











   (C)    Minimum Rear Yard.





      (1)    Residential uses:  50 feet.





      (2)    Other Permitted Uses:  none.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.175)










154.10.019  MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Maximum Height:  35 feet or 2-1/2 stories.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.174;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.020  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.




   Off-street parking or loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.176;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.020.01 SIGNS.



   Refer to Chapter 153 .




HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.177; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.020.02 OTHER REGULATIONS.



   Refer to Sections 154.11.01 through 154.16.09.




HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.178;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)











RE RESIDENTIAL ESTATE DISTRICT










154.10.021  RE RESIDENTIAL ESTATE DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the RE Residential Estate District is to maintain
existing development patterns, and reserve certain land areas for
single-family detached dwellings at low densities.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.149; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.022  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.




   (A)    Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (C)    Day care facility – Type B family day care home.











   (D)    Dwelling – Single-family, detached











   (E)    Group home – Adult family home.











   (F)    Group home – Community alternative home.











   (G)    Group home – Foster care facility/Certified family foster
home.











   (H)    Group home – MR/DD family care facility.











   (I)    Home occupations subject to the conditions of §154.16.03.











   (J)    Parking, On-site.











   (K)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.











   (L)    Subdivision, Conventional residential.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.150)










154.10.023  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.




   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.





   (A)    Churches and other similar places of religious worship.











   (B)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.











   (C)    Recreation – Private, noncommercial areas and facilities.











   (D)    School – Private school/Primary school/Intermediate
school/Secondary school.











   (E)    Wireless telecommunications facility.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.151)










154.10.024  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.151.1; Ord. 2909, passed 10-5-93)










154.10.025  MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE.




   Single-family housing and other permitted uses, one acre.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.152)










154.10.026  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.




   Single-family housing and other permitted uses, 150 feet.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.153)










154.10.027  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Minimum Front Yard. 





      (1)    Residential and Other Permitted Uses: 50 feet.





      (2)    Residential uses in which the average existing front
yard setback on two or more lots located within 100 feet and in the same
block as the lot in question is either less or greater than the minimum front
yard requirements specified in §154.10.027(A)(1), the front yard requirement
shall be modified as follows:





         (a)    The modified front yard shall not be less than
the average setback of the existing front yards of the two lots immediately
adjacent to the lot in question, or if a corner lot, then the same as the
setback on the immediately adjacent lot.





         (b)    In no case shall any front yard be modified to
require less than ten feet.





      (3)   Corner Lots.





         (a)    On all corner lots, all yards which front on
streets shall be considered front yards, and as such shall meet the minimum
front yard requirements specified in §154.10.027(A)(1) or (2).





         (b)    On all lots having frontage on two streets which
do not intersect, the minimum front yard setback specified in
§154.10.027(A)(1) or (2) shall apply to each yard with street frontage.











   (B)    Minimum for Each Side Yard.  Residential and other permitted
uses, 25 feet.











   (C)   Minimum Rear Yard.  Residential and other permitted uses, 50
feet.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.155)










154.10.028  MAXIMUM HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Maximum Height:  35 feet or 2-1/2 stories.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.154;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.029  REQUIRED MINIMUM DWELLING SIZE.




   The minimum dwelling size shall be governed by the West Carrollton
Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 158), which seeks to prevent overcrowding
through minimum space requirements based on occupancy limitations.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed; Formerly  §154.06)










154.10.030  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.




   Off-street parking or loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.156;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.031  SIGNS.



   Refer to Chapter 153 .




HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.157; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.032  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   Refer to Sections 154.11.01 through 154.16.09.




HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.158;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)











R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL





DISTRICT










154.10.041  R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the R-1 Residential District is to designate and reserve
certain land areas for single-family detached dwellings at low densities.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.139;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.042  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.




   (A)   Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (C)    Day care facility – Type B family day care home.











   (D)    Dwelling – Single-family, detached.











   (E)    Group home – Adult family home.











   (F)    Group home – Community alternative home.











   (G)    Group home – Foster care facility/Certified family foster
home.











   (H)    Group home – MR/DD family care facility.











   (I)    Home occupations subject to the conditions of §154.16.03.











   (J)    Parking, On-site.











   (K)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.











   (L)    Subdivision, Conventional residential.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.140)










154.10.043  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.




   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.





   (A)    Cemeteries.











   (B)   Churches and other similar places of religious worship.











   (C)    Lodging – Bed and breakfast establishment.











   (D)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.











   (E)    Recreation – Golf course.











   (F)    Recreation – Private, noncommercial areas and facilities.











   (G)    School – Private school/Primary school/Intermediate
school/Secondary school.











   (H)    Subdivision, Cluster residential.











   (I)    Wireless telecommunications facility.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.141)










154.10.044  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.141.1;  Ord. 2909, passed 10-5-93)










154.10.045  MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE.




   (A)    Single-family Dwellings: 10,000 square feet where public
water and sanitary sewers are available and 20,000 square feet where they are
not available.











   (B)    Schools: 12 acres.











   (C)    Other Permitted Uses: one (1) acre.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.142; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.046  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.




   (A)   Single-family Dwellings: 80 feet where public water and
sanitary sewers are available and 100 feet where they are not available.











   (B)    Schools: 150 feet.











   (C)    Other Permitted Uses: 150 feet.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.143; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.047  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Minimum Front Yard.





      (1)    Residential Uses: 35 feet.





      (2)    Residential uses in which the average existing front
yard setback on two or more lots located within 100 feet and in the same
block as the lot in question is either less or greater than the minimum front
yard requirements specified in §154.10.047(A)(1), the front yard requirement
shall be modified as follows:





         1.    The modified front yard shall not be less than the
average setback of the existing front yards of the two lots immediately
adjacent to the lot in question, or if a corner lot, then the same as the
setback on the immediately adjacent lot.





         2.    In no case shall any front yard be modified to
require less than ten feet.





      (3)    Schools: 150 feet.





      (4)   Other Permitted Uses: 40 feet.





      (5)   Corner Lots.





         (a)    On all corner lots, all yards which front on
streets shall be considered front yards, and as such shall meet the minimum
front yard requirements specified in §154.10.047(A)(1) to (4).





         (b)    On all lots having frontage on two streets which
do not intersect, the minimum front yard setback specified in
§154.10.047(A)(1) to (4) shall apply to each yard with street frontage.











   (B)   Minimum for Each Side Yard.





      (1)   Residential Uses: 8 feet.





      (2)   Schools: 75 feet.





      (3)   Other Permitted Uses: 20 feet.











   (C)   Minimum Rear yard.





      (1)    Residential Uses: 40 feet.  Any one-story section of a
single-family residence may project not more than ten feet into the required
rear yard.





      (2)   Schools: 200 feet.





      (3)   Other Permitted Uses: 50 feet. 
HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.145 (A) to (D))










154.10.048  MAXIMUM HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.




   Maximum Height:  35 feet or 2-1/2 stories.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.144; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.049  REQUIRED MINIMUM DWELLING SIZE.




   The minimum dwelling size shall be governed by the West Carrollton
Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 158), which seeks to prevent overcrowding
through minimum space requirements based on occupancy limitations.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.06)










154.10.050  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.




   Off-street parking or loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.146; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.051  SIGNS.



   Refer to Chapter 153.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.147; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.052  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   Refer to Sections 154.11.01 through 154.16.09.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.148; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)











R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY





RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT










154.10.061  R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the R-2 Residential District is to designate and reserve
certain land areas for single-family detached dwellings at low-medium
densities.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.129;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.062  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.




   (A)    Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (C)    Day care facility – Type B family day care home.











   (D)    Dwelling – Single-family, detached.











   (E)    Group home – Adult family home.











   (F)    Group home – Community alternative home.











   (G)    Group home – Foster care facility/Certified family foster
home.











   (H)    Group home – MR/DD family care facility.











   (I)    Home occupations subject to the conditions of §154.16.03.











   (J)    Parking, On-site.











   (K)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.











   (L)    Subdivision, Conventional residential.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.130)










154.10.063  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.




   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.





   (A)    Cemeteries.











   (B)    Churches and other similar places of religious worship.











   (C)    Dwelling – Single-family, zero-lot line.











   (D)    Lodging – Bed and breakfast establishment.











   (E)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.











   (F)    Recreation – Golf course.











   (G)    Recreation – Private, noncommercial areas and facilities.











   (H)    School – Nursery school.











   (I)    School – Private school/Primary school/Intermediate
school/Secondary school.











   (J)    Subdivision, Cluster residential.











   (K)    Wireless telecommunications facility.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.131)










154.10.064  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.131.1; Ord. 2909, passed 10-5-93)










154.10.065  MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE.




   (A)    Single-family Dwellings: 7,500 square feet where public water
and sanitary sewers are available and 20,000 square feet where they are not
available.











   (B)    Other Permitted Uses: one acre.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.132;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.066  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.




   (A)    Single-family Dwellings: 60 feet.











   (B)    Other Permitted Uses: 150 feet.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.133;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.067  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Minimum front yard.





      (1)    Residential Uses: 25 feet.





      (2)    Residential Uses Fronting on a Major Street: 35 feet.





      (3)    Residential uses in which the average existing front
yard setback on two or more lots located within 100 feet and in the same
block as the lot in question is either less or greater than the minimum front
yard requirements specified in §154.10.067(A)(1) or (2), the front yard
requirement shall be modified as follows:





         (a)    The modified front yard shall not be less than
the average setback of the existing front yards of the two lots immediately
adjacent to the lot in question, or if a corner lot, then the same as the
setback on the immediately adjacent lot.





         (b)    In no case shall any front yard be modified to
require less than ten feet.





      (4)    Other Permitted Uses: 40 feet.





      (5)   Corner Lots.





         (a)    On all corner lots, all yards which front on
streets shall be considered front yards, and as such shall meet the minimum
front yard requirements specified in §154.10.067(A)(1) to (4).





         (b)    On all lots having frontage on two streets which
do not intersect, the minimum front yard setback specified in
§154.10.067(A)(1) to (4) shall apply to each yard with street frontage.











   (B)    Minimum for each side yard.





      (1)    Residential Uses: 8 feet.





      (2)    Residential uses in which the average existing side
yard setback on two or more lots located within 100 feet and in the same
block as the lot in question is less than 8 feet, then the side yard setback
requirement shall be modified as follows:





         (a)   The modified side yard shall not be less than the
average setback of the existing side yards of the two lots immediately
adjacent to the lot in question, or if a corner lot, then the same as the
setback on the immediately adjacent lot.





         (b)    In no case shall any side yard be modified to
require less than four (4) feet.





      (3)    Other Permitted Uses: 20 feet.











   (C)    Minimum rear yard.





      (1)    Residential Uses, 40 feet.  Any one-story section of a
single-family residence may project not more than ten feet into the required
rear yard.





      (2)    Other Permitted Uses: 50 feet.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.135 (A) to (D))










154.10.068  MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.




   Maximum Height:  35 feet or 2-1/2 stories.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.134;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.069  REQUIRED MINIMUM DWELLING SIZE.




   The minimum dwelling size shall be governed by the West Carrollton
Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 158), which seeks to prevent overcrowding
through minimum space requirements based on occupancy limitations.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.06)










154.10.070  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.




   Off-street parking or loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.136;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.071  SIGNS.



   Refer to Chapter 153.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.137;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.072  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   Refer to Sections 154.11.01 through 154.16.09.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.138;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)











R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY





RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT











(intentionally left blank)











R-4 MULTIPLE-FAMILY





RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT










154.10.081  R-4 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District is to
designate and reserve certain land areas for medium-high density residential
development, where both public water and sanitary sewer service are
available, consisting primarily of multiple-family residential units.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.109;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.082  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.




   (A)    Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (C)    Day care facility – Type B family day care home.











   (D)    Dwelling – Multiple-family.










   (E)    Dwelling – Row.










   (F)    Dwelling – Single-family, detached.











   (G)    Dwelling – Two-family.











   (H)    Group home – Adult family home.











   (I)    Group home – Community alternative home.











   (J)    Group home – Foster care facility/Certified family foster
home.











   (K)    Group home – MR/DD family care facility.











-   (L)    Home occupations subject to the conditions of §154.16.03.











   (M)    Parking, On-site.











   (N)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.











   (O)    Subdivision, Conventional residential.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.110)










154.10.083  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.




   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.





   (A)    Cemeteries.











   (B)    Churches and other similar places of religious worship.











   (C)    Day care facility – Child day care center.











   (D)    Day care facility – Type A family day care home.











   (E)    Dwelling – Single-family, zero-lot line.











   (F)    Group home – Adult group home.











   (G)    Group home – Congregate housing.











   (H)    Group home – Home for the aging.











   (I)    Group home – Life care facility.











   (J)    Group home – MR/DD group care facility.











   (K)    Group home – Nursing home.











   (L)    Group home – Nursing homes for convalescent patients.











   (M)    Group home – Rest home.











   (N)    Lodging – Bed and breakfast establishment.











   (O)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.











   (P)    Recreation – Golf course.











   (Q)    Recreation – Private, noncommercial areas and facilities.











   (R)    School – Nursery school.











   (S)    School – Private school/Primary school/Intermediate
school/Secondary school.











   (T)    Subdivision, Cluster residential.











   (U)    Wireless telecommunications facility.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.111)










154.10.084  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.111.1;  Ord. 2909, passed 10-5-93)










154.10.085  MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE.




   No lot in the R-4 District shall have a size less than the following:





   (A)    Single-family Dwellings:  7,500 square feet where public
water and sanitary sewers are available and 20,000 square feet where sanitary
sewers are not available.











   (B)    Two-family Dwellings: 6,000 square feet per dwelling unit
where public water and sanitary sewers are available.  No two-family
dwellings shall be permitted where public water and sanitary sewers are not
available.











   (C)    Multiple-family dwellings: 4,000 square feet per dwelling
unit where public water and sanitary sewers are available.  No
multiple-family dwellings shall be permitted where public water and sanitary
sewers are not available.











   (D)    Other Permitted Uses:  one acre.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.112;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.086  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.




   (A)    Single-family Dwellings:  60 feet.











   (B)    Two-family Dwellings:  85 feet.











   (C)    Multiple-family Housing:  90 feet.











   (D)    Other Permitted Uses: 150 feet.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.113;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.087  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Minimum Front Yard.





      (1)    Residential uses:  25 feet.





      (2)    Residential Uses Fronting on a Major Street:  35 feet.





      (3)    Residential uses in which the average existing front
yard setback on two or more lots located within 100 feet and in the same
block as the lot in question is either less or greater than the minimum front
yard requirements specified in §154.10.087(A)(1) or (2), the front yard
requirement shall be modified as follows:





         1.    The modified front yard shall not be less than the
average setback of the existing front yards of the two lots immediately
adjacent to the lot in question, or if a corner lot, then the same as the
setback on the immediately adjacent lot.





         2.    In no case shall any front yard be modified to
require less than ten feet.





      (4)    Other permitted uses, 40 feet.





      (5)   Corner Lots.





         (a)    On all corner lots, all yards which front on
streets shall be considered front yards, and as such shall meet the minimum
front yard requirements specified in §154.10.087(A)(1) to (4).





         (b)    On all lots having frontage on two streets which
do not intersect, the minimum front yard setback specified in
§154.10.087(A)(1) to (4) shall apply to each yard with street frontage.











   (B)    Minimum for Each Side Yard.





      (1)    Residential Uses:  8 feet or ½ the height of the
structure, whichever is greater.





      (2)    Other Permitted Uses:  20 feet.











   (C)    Minimum Rear Yard.





      (1)    Residential Uses:  40 feet.  Any one-story section of
a single-family residence may project not more than ten feet into the
required rear yard.





      (2)    Other permitted uses:  50 feet. 





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.115)










154.10.088  MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Maximum Height:  45 feet or 4 stories.











   (B)    Minimum Height: one (1) story, unless a home is to be
constructed on a vacant lot and there are dwellings on either side with 2 or
more stories, then construction on the infill lot shall be a minimum of two
(2) stories.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.114;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.089  REQUIRED MINIMUM DWELLING SIZE.




   The minimum dwelling size shall be governed by the West Carrollton
Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 158), which seeks to prevent overcrowding
through minimum space requirements based on occupancy limitations.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.06)










154.10.090  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.




   Off-street parking or loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.116;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.091  SIGNS.




   Refer to Sign Ordinance - Chapter 153 of the Code of Ordinances.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.117;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.092  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   Refer to Sections 154.11.01 through 154.16.09.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.118;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.093   ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.










   New buildings and major facade alterations shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications of Section 154.17.01, Architectural Design
Standards.  (Ord. 3419.  Passed 4-28-09.)

















R-5 MULTIPLE-FAMILY





RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT










154.10.101  R-5 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   The purpose of the R-5 Multiple-Family Residential District is to
designate and reserve certain land areas for medium-high density residential
development.



HISTORY: (Formerly §154.99;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2491,
passed 2-26-85)









154.10.102  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   (A)    Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.



 



   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.



 



   (C)    Day care facility – Type B family day care home.



 



   (D)    Dwelling – Multiple-family.



 



   (E)    Dwelling – Row.



 



   (F)    Dwelling – Single-family, detached.



 



   (G)    Dwelling – Two-family.



 



   (H)    Group home – Adult family home.



 



   (I)    Group home – Community alternative home.



 



   (J)    Group home – Foster care facility/Certified family foster
home.



 



   (K)    Group home – MR/DD family care facility.



 



   (L)    Home occupations subject to the conditions of §154.16.03.



 



   (M)    Parking, On-site.



 



   (N)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.



 



   (P)    Subdivision, Conventional residential.



HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.100)









154.10.103  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.



   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.



   (A)    Churches and other similar places of religious worship.



 



   (B)    Day care facility – Child day care center.



 



   (C)    Day care facility – Type A family day care home.



 



   (D)    Dwelling – Single-family, zero-lot line.



 



   (E)    Dwelling – Two-family.



 



   (F)    Group home – Adult group home.



 



   (G)    Group home – Congregate housing.



 



   (H)    Group home – Home for the aging.



 



   (I)    Group home – Life care facility.



 



   (J)    Group home – MR/DD group care facility.



 



   (K)    Group home – Nursing home.



 



   (L)    Group home – Nursing homes for convalescent patients.



 



   (M)    Group home – Rest home.



 



   (N)    Lodging – Bed and breakfast establishment.



 



   (O)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.



 



   (P)    Recreation – Golf course.



 



   (Q)    Recreation – Private, noncommercial areas and facilities.



 



   (R)    School – Nursery school.



 



   (S)    School – Private school/Primary school/Intermediate
school/Secondary school.



 



   (T)    Subdivision, Cluster residential.



 



   (U)    Wireless telecommunications facility.



HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.101)









154.10.104  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.



   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.



HISTORY: (Formerly §154.101.1;  Ord. 2909, passed 10-5-93)









154.10.105  MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE.



   (A)    Single-family Dwellings:  7,500 square feet where public
water and sanitary sewers are available and 20,000 square feet where sanitary
sewers are not available.



 



   (B)    Two-family Dwellings: 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit
where public water and sanitary sewers are available.  No multiple-family
dwellings shall be permitted where public water and sanitary sewers are not
available.



 



   (C)    Multiple-family Dwellings:  3,000 square feet per dwelling
unit where public water and sanitary sewers are available.  No
multiple-family dwellings shall be permitted where public water and sanitary
sewers are not available.



 



   (D)    Other Permitted Uses: one acre.



HISTORY: (Formerly §154.102;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)









154.10.106  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.



   (A)    Single-family Dwellings:  60 feet.



 



   (B)    Two-family Dwellings:  80 feet.



 



   (C)    Multiple-family Housing:  80 feet.



 



   (D)    Other Principal Permitted Uses:  100 feet.



HISTORY: (Formerly §154.103;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)









154.10.107  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)    Minimum Front yard.




      (1)    Residential Uses:  25 feet.





      (2)    Residential Uses Fronting on a Major Street: 35 feet.





      (3)    Residential uses in which the average existing front
yard setback on two or more lots located within 100 feet and in the same
block as the lot in question is either less or greater than the minimum front
yard requirements specified in §154.10.107(A)(1) or (2), the front yard
requirement shall be modified as follows:





         1.    The modified front yard shall not be less than the
average setback of the existing front yards of the two lots immediately
adjacent to the lot in question, or if a corner lot, then the same as the
setback on the immediately adjacent lot.





         2.    In no case shall any front yard be modified to
require less than ten feet.





      (4)    Other Permitted Uses:  40 feet.





      (3)   Corner Lots.





         (a)    On all corner lots, all yards which front on
streets shall be considered front yards, and as such shall meet the minimum
front yard requirements specified in §154.10.107(A)(1) to (4).





         (b)    On all lots having frontage on two streets which
do not intersect, the minimum front yard setback specified in
§154.10.107(A)(1) to (4) shall apply to each yard with street frontage.




 



   (B)    Minimum for Each Side Yard.




      (1)    Residential Uses:  8 feet, or ½ height of the
building, whichever is greater.





      (2)    Other Permitted Uses:  20 feet.




 



   (C)    Minimum Rear Yard.




      (1)    Residential Uses:  35 feet.





      (2)    Other permitted uses:  50 feet.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.105;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.108  MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)    Maximum Height:  45 feet or 4 stories.



 



   (B)    Minimum Height: one (1) story, unless a home is to be
constructed on a vacant lot and there are dwellings on either side with 2 or
more stories, then construction on the infill lot shall be a minimum of two
(2) stories.



HISTORY: (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.114;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)









154.10.109  REQUIRED MINIMUM DWELLING SIZE.



   The minimum dwelling size shall be governed by the West Carrollton
Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 158), which seeks to prevent overcrowding
through minimum space requirements based on occupancy limitations.



HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.06)









154.10.110  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.



   Off-street parking or loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.



HISTORY: (Formerly §154.106;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)









154.10.111  SIGNS.



   Refer to Chapter 153.



HISTORY: (Formerly §154.107;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)









154.10.112  OTHER REGULATIONS.



Refer to Sections 154.11.01 through 154.16.09.



HISTORY: (Formerly §154.108;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)









154.10.113   ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.




   New buildings and major facade alterations shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications of Section 154.17.01, Architectural Design
Standards.  (Ord. 3419.  Passed 4-28-09.)











R-PUD RESIDENTIAL PLANNED





DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT










154.10.121  R-PUD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the R-PUD District is to provide a permissive voluntary
alternative zoning procedure for residential development and housing.  Under
this procedure, a tract of land under unified ownership may be planned and
developed as a unit in accordance with an approved preliminary PUD plan and
subsequent detailed final PUD plans.  A mixture of housing types, densities
and architectural design is encouraged.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.88;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.122  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.




   (A)    Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (C)    Churches and other similar places of religious worship.











   (D)    Day care facility – Type B family day care home.











   (E)    Dwelling – Multiple-family.











   (F)    Dwelling – Row.










   (G)    Dwelling – Single-family, detached.










   (H)    Dwelling – Single-family, zero-lot line.











   (I)    Dwelling – Two-family.











   (J)    Group home – Adult family home.











   (K)    Group home – Adult group home.











   (L)    Group home – Community alternative home.











   (M)    Group home – Congregate housing.











   (N)    Group home – Foster care facility/Certified family foster
home.











   (O)    Group home – MR/DD family care facility.











   (P)    Group home – MR/DD group care facility.











   (Q)    Home occupations subject to the conditions of §154.16.03.











   (R)    Lodging – Bed and breakfast establishment.











   (S)    Parking, On-site.











   (T)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.











   (U)    Recreation – Golf course.











   (V)    Recreation – Private, noncommercial areas and facilities.











   (W)    School – Nursery school.











   (X)    School – Private school/Primary school/Intermediate
school/Secondary school.











   (Y)    Subdivision, Cluster residential.











   (Z)    Subdivision, Conventional residential.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.89)










154.10.123  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.




   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.





   (A)    Group home – Home for the aging.











   (B)    Group home – Life care facility.











   (C)    Group home – Nursing home.











   (D)    Group home – Nursing homes for convalescent patients.











   (E)    Group home – Rest home.











   (F)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.











   (G)    Wireless telecommunications facility.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.90)










154.10.124  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.90.1;  Ord. 2909, passed 10-5-93)










154.10.125  MINIMUM LAND AREA, MAXIMUM  DENSITY.




   (A)    Minimum Land Area.  A minimum land area of five (5) acres
shall be required for a Planned Unit Development, the area being served by
both public water and sanitary sewer.











   (B)    Maximum Density.  The maximum density for the following
types of R-PUD's shall not exceed:





      (1)    Single-family:  4.5 dwelling units per acre.





      (2)    Single-family, Two-family:  six (6) dwelling units per
acre.





      (3)    Two-family:  seven (7) dwelling units per acre.





      (4)    Single-family, Two-family, and Multiple-family:  ten
dwelling units per acre, (where the total number of multiple-family dwellings
is not less than 30% of the total units).





      (5)    Multiple-family: 14 dwelling units per acre.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.91;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.126  MINIMUM FRONTAGE AND LOT SIZE.




   Minimum  frontage and lot size may be varied as established by the
owner/developer subject to the approval of the preliminary and detailed final
PUD plans in accordance with the provisions and conditions for approval as
specified in §154.10.133.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.92;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.127  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.




   Front, side, and rear yard requirements are to be established by the
owner/developer, subject to the approval of the preliminary and final PUD
plans, in accordance with the provisions and conditions for approval as
specified in §154.10.133.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.94;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.128  MAXIMUM HEIGHT.




   Maximum height in this district is 35 feet or 2-1/2 stories for
single-family and two-family dwellings and 45 feet or four stories for
multiple-family dwellings.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.93;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.129  REQUIRED MINIMUM DWELLING SIZE.




   The minimum dwelling size shall be governed by the West Carrollton
Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 158), which seeks to prevent overcrowding
through minimum space requirements based on occupancy limitations.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.06;  newly proposed on 7/19/01)










154.10.130  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.




   Off-street parking or loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.95;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.131  SIGNS.



   Refer to Chapter 153.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.96;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.132  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   Refer to Sections 154.11.01 through 154.16.09.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.97;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.133  PROCEDURES AND PROVISIONS FOR APPROVAL OF R-PUD PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENTS.




   (A)    Design Standards.  Unless otherwise specified herein, the
design standards for lot area, coverage, density, yard requirements, the
R-PUD District shall be governed by  the  standards  of  the zoning
district most similar in nature and function to the proposed R-PUD District
use, as determined by the Planning Commission.  Exceptions to these
standards may be granted by the Planning Commission  when this body  finds
that the exceptions encourage a desirable living environment and are shown to
be necessary to provide the required amount of common open space.  Standards
for public improvements shall be governed by all applicable ordinances and
laws of the city.











   (B)    Minimum Yard Requirements.  Subsequent to receiving the
approval for an R-PUD Planned Unit Development District from the City
Council, the owner or developer shall establish all lot sizes and front,
side, and rear yard setbacks in the detailed final PUD plan for the proposed
Planned Unit Development.  These setbacks may vary from the regulations of
the city, relating to the platting and subdividing of land pursuant to ORC
§§ 771.01 through 735.26 subject to the review and approval of the Planning
Commission.











   (C)    Required Common Open Space.  There shall be reserved, within
the tract to be developed on a planned unit basis, a minimum land area of 20%
of the entire tract for use as common open space.  This common open space
shall not consist of isolated or fragmented pieces of land which would serve
limited purposes.  Included in this common open space may be such uses as
pedestrian walkways, parkland, open areas, drainageways, swimming pools,
clubhouses, tennis courts, and other lands of essentially open character,
exclusive of off-street parking areas.  Ownership of this common open space
either shall be transferred to a legally established home-owner's association
or be dedicated to the city, and proper legal documents necessary for the
transfer or dedication shall be prepared by the owner or developer of the
tract of land, and approved by the City Council.  At the option of the city,
this common open space may become a part of the park and open space system of
the city.











   (D)    Required Contents of the Preliminary PUD Plan.  The owner or
developer is encouraged to engage in informal consultation with the Zoning
Inspector and Planning Commission prior to preparing his preliminary PUD
plan, it being understood that no statement or representation by the Zoning
Inspector or Planning Commission shall be binding on the City Council.  The
owner or developer of the tract of land to be developed on a planned unit
basis shall prepare a preliminary  PUD plan and shall submit eight copies of
the preliminary PUD plan along with application for a change of zoning
district to the Planning Commission for its consideration.  The preliminary
PUD plan shall include the following items:





      (1)    Boundaries of the tract to be developed on a planned
unit basis.





      (2)    Base mapping of the property showing the physical
features; general topography, drainageways, water bodies, and tree cover; and
existing land uses.





      (3)    Highways and streets in the vicinity of the tract, and
the ingress and egress to the tract.





      (4)    Location of different general land use areas proposed
to be developed.





      (5)    Proposed density levels of each residential use.





      (6)    Proposed treatment of existing topography,
drainageways, and tree cover.





      (7)    Proposed general location of major vehicular
circulation, showing how this circulation pattern relates to the official
thoroughfare plan of the city.





      (8)    Location of schools, parks, and other community
facility sites, if any.





      (9)    Time schedule of projected development, if the total
landholding is to be developed in stages, or if construction is to extend
beyond a two-year time period.











   (E)    Conditions for the Approval of the Preliminary PUD Plans. 
Upon receipt of the report of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall
study and review the proposed R-PUD application and preliminary PUD plan on
the basis of:





      (1)    All requirements have been satisfied, and





      (2)    A finding that the following specific conditions are
fully met:





         (a)    The R-PUD District is in conformance with the
comprehensive plan for the city.





         (b)    Each individual stage of development shall not
exceed the maximum density allowed for the planned unit development
landholding as a whole.





         (c)    The use proposed will not be detrimental to
present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a beneficial effect
which could not be achieved under other zoning districts.





         (d)    The areas proposed shall be used only for
residential purposes and the usual accessory uses such as garages, storage
space, parks, recreation sites, open spaces, and community purposes including
churches and schools.





         (e)    The internal streets and major and minor streets
that are proposed shall properly interconnect with the surrounding existing
major and minor streets as designated in the official thoroughfare plan of
the city.





         (f)    The minimum common open space area has been
designated and shall be duly transferred to a legally established homeowner's
association, or has been dedicated to, and accepted by the city as herein
provided.





         (g)    The preliminary PUD plan is consistent with the
intent and purpose of this zoning code, to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare of the residents of the city.











   (F)    City Council Action.  Approval of the preliminary PUD plan
shall require a favorable vote of the majority of the membership of the City
Council.  Approval of the preliminary PUD plan shall be limited to the
general acceptability of the land uses proposed, proposed general density
levels and their interrelationship, and shall not be construed to endorse
precise location of uses, configuration of parcels, or engineering
feasibility which are to be determined in the subsequent preparation of the
detailed final PUD plan.  Approval of the preliminary PUD plan shall
constitute the creation of the separate R-PUD Planned Unit Development Zoning
District.  In taking action, City Council may deny the preliminary PUD plan
or may recommend approval of the plan subject to specified modifications.











   (G)    At the time of adopting any ordinance establishing an R-PUD
District, the City Council shall make appropriate arrangements with the owner
or developer which will ensure the accomplishment of the public improvements
and reservation of common open space as shown on the approved preliminary PUD
plan.











   (H)    Time Limits and Extensions.





      (1)    The approval of the preliminary PUD plan shall become
null and void and the land shall revert to its former zoning classification,
unless the final PUD plan for the first section of the planned unit
landholding has been formally approved by the Planning Commission within two
years of the date of approval, in accordance with the conditions for approval
specified in divisions (I) through (K) of this section, and unless the final
subdivision plan, where applicable, shall have been recorded in the office of
the County Recorder.





      (2)    An extension of time limit or the minor modification of
the preliminary PUD plan may be approved by the City Council.  The approval
shall be given on a finding of the purpose and necessity for the extension or
minor modifications; the evidence of reasonable effort toward the
accomplishment of the preliminary PUD plan; and the recommendation of the
Planning Commission.











   (I)    Required Contents of the Detailed Final PUD Plan.  Once the
R-PUD Zoning District and the preliminary PUD plan have been approved by the
City Council, the owner or developer shall proceed with the preparation of
the detailed final PUD plan.  The detailed final PUD plan must be reviewed
and approved by the Planning Commission prior to the issuance of any zoning
certificate by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.  The detailed final PUD plan
shall be prepared for the owner or developer, and shall bear the original
signature or original seal of a professional competent urban planner,
professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect, and shall be in
accordance with the approved preliminary PUD plan, and shall include the
following:





      (1)    Survey of the tract to be developed showing existing
physical features; general topography, drainageways, tree cover and streets,
easements, and utility lines.





      (2)    Detailed site plans showing lot lines, building 
outlines,  off-street  parking  spaces,  pedestrian walkways, vehicular
circulation.





      (3)    Preliminary building plans, including floor plans and
exterior elevations.





      (4)    Landscaping plans including quantity, size, and
varieties of landscaping.





      (5)    Specific detailed engineering plans, including site
grading, street improvements, drainage and utility improvements, and
extensions as necessary.





      (6)    All necessary legal documentation relating to the
incorporation of a homeowner's association for the purpose of maintaining the
required common open space included within the Planned Unit Development.





      (7)    Copies of any restrictive covenants that are to be
recorded.











   (J)    Major Changes.  Should the formulation of the detailed final
PUD plan for any section of the total Planned Unit Development landholding
necessitate a major change in the approved preliminary PUD plan,
reconsideration and approval by the City Council shall be required in
accordance with the procedures specified in §154.10.133.  Major changes
shall include, but not be limited to:





      (1)    An increase in density.





      (2)    Changes in the outside boundaries of the Planned Unit
Development landholding.





      (3)    Major changes in the location or amount of land
designated for specific land uses, including open space.





      (4)    Major changes in the internal street and thoroughfare
locations or alignments.











   (K)    Conditions for the Approval of the Detailed Final PUD Plan.
On receipt of the detailed final PUD plan for each section of the Planned
Unit Development landholding, the Planning Commission shall study and review
the detailed final PUD plan and shall approve, modify, or disapprove the plan
on the basis:





      (1)    That all requirements have been satisfied, and





      (2)    That a finding that the following specific conditions
are fully met:





         (a)    The proposed detailed final PUD plan for the
individual section of the overall R-PUD District are in conformance with the
approved preliminary PUD plan, and the comprehensive plan map and text of the
city.





         (b)    Each individual stage of the Planned Unit
Development can exist as an independent planned unit which is capable of
creating an environment of sustained desirability and stability, or that
adequate assurance will be provided that the objective can be obtained.





         (c)    Any part of the Planned Unit Development not used
for structures, parking, and loading areas, or streets, shall be landscaped
or otherwise improved, or if approved by the Planning Commission, left in its
natural state.





         (d)    Any exception from the standard requirements of
this zoning code are warranted by the design and amenities incorporated in
the detailed final PUD plan, in accordance with the adopted policy of the
Planning Commission and the City Council.





         (e)    The internal streets and thoroughfares proposed
are suitable and adequate to accommodate the anticipated traffic within and
through the development.





         (f)    The detailed final PUD plan is consistent with
the intent and purpose of this zoning code to promote public health, safety,
and general welfare of the residents of the city.





      (3)    The approval of the detailed final PUD plan for any
section of the total Planned Unit Development landholding shall expire if the
zoning certificate or building permits required to implement the plan are not
obtained within two years of the date of approval. The Planning Commission
may extend the time limit of approval for a detailed final PUD plan if it
finds the detailed final PUD plan still meets the original conditions for
approval and there has been evidence that reasonable efforts have been made
to accomplish the plan. The Planning Commission shall not consider or grant
any extension when a zoning map change or text amendment has been enacted
subsequent to the approval of the original of the final PUD plan which would
effect the property subject to the plan.











   (L)    Subdivision of a Completed Planned Unit Development. All
future subdivisions of a completed Planned Unit Development shall be first
reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission to assure that each
subdivided area of the development includes the parking, open space, density,
and other similar necessary requirements.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.98;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2833,
passed 12-30-91; Am. Ord. 3079, passed 1-27-98)











   (M)   Guarantee for Installation of Public Improvements.





      (1)   All site improvements shall conform to the approved site
plan and construction plans. 





      (2)   To provide assurance to the City that public
improvements will be completed once construction has begun, the developer
shall furnish a bond executed by a surety company, letter of credit, or
certified check equal to the cost of construction of such public improvements
as shown on the approved plans, and based on an estimate approved by the City
Manager as advised by the Service Director and in a form approved by the Law
Director.  Such surety shall be provided prior to issuance of a building
permit for the project.  Letters of credit shall not permit draws by the
developer without the express approval of the City. 





         (a)   For the purposes of this section, construction
shall be defined as any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate
related to one or more of the following public improvements: 
earth-disturbing activities including clearing, excavating, filling, and
grading of property; driveway approaches; sidewalks; street surfacing; curbs,
gutters, and public sanitary sewers; public water supply; stormwater
detention facilities; stormwater best management practices for runoff
quality; and street signs.





      (3)   The performance bond, letter of credit, or certified
check shall run to the City and shall provide that the developer, his heirs,
successors and assigns, their agent or servants, upon commencement of
construction, will comply with all applicable terms, conditions, provisions
and requirements of these regulations; will faithfully perform and complete
the work of constructing and installing all public improvements in accordance
with such laws and regulations; will complete all public improvements prior
to issuance of a final occupancy permit for the project; and will complete
all public improvements within one (1) year from the date of final approval
of the building permit, but the bond or letter of credit will run
indefinitely until released by the City.  In no case shall the work be
completed after one (1) year from the date of final approval of the building
permit, unless an extension is granted by the City as specified below. 





      (4)   Upon commencement of construction, if the installation
of any public improvement, for which guarantee has been made by the developer
in the form of bond, letter of credit, or certified check, is not completed
within one (1) year from the date of final approval of the building permit,
the developer may request the City to grant an extension of six (6) months,
provided (s)he can show reasonable cause for inability to complete said
public improvement(s) within the required one (1) year.  A maximum of two
six-month extensions may be granted.  At the expiration of the extension(s),
the City will use as much of the bond, letter of credit, or certified check
as necessary to complete the construction of the public improvements.





      (5)   All public improvements located within the public
right-of-way shall be completed within 14 days of initial excavation, unless
an extension is granted for reasonable cause by the City Manager as advised
by the Service Director and Director of City Planning.





      (6)   As required public improvements are completed, approved,
and accepted, the City Manager, as advised by the Service Director and
Director of City Planning, may reduce the amount of the performance bond,
letter of credit, or certified check.





      (7)   Periodic inspections during the installation of public
improvements shall be made by the City to ensure conformity with the approved
plans and specifications as required by these regulations.





      (8)   The developer shall schedule required inspections at
least forty-eight (48) hours in advance with proper administrative officials.





      (9)   The absence of an inspector from a project during
construction shall not relieve the developer from full responsibility under
this agreement.  Upon acceptable completion of installation of the required
public improvements, the City Manager as advised by the Service Director and
Director of City Planning shall issue a letter to the developer or his/her
agent and such letter shall be sufficient evidence for the release by the
City.





      (10)   When the Service Director and Director of City
Planning, following final inspection of a project, certify to the City
Manager that all public improvements have been constructed in accordance with
City specifications, the City Manager may proceed to accept the facilities
for which bond, letter of credit, or certified check has been posted.





      (11)   Whenever public improvements have not been constructed
in accordance with the agreement and with specifications as established, the
City Manager  as advised by the Service Director and Director of City
Planning may exercise his/her rights of foreclosure under the bond, letter of
credit, or certified check.





      (12)   Should construction not commence prior to expiration of
the building permit and any extensions granted in accordance with this
section, the performance bond, letter of credit, or certified check shall be
released in its entirety by the City. 
(Ord. 3477.  Passed 4-12-11.)










154.10.134  ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.




   New buildings and major facade alterations shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications of Section 154.17.01, Architectural Design
Standards.  (Ord. 3419.  Passed 4-28-09.)











R-MHP MANUFACTURED-MOBILE





HOME PARK DISTRICT










154.10.201  R-MHP MANUFACTURED-MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the R-MHP Manufactured- Mobile Home Park District is to
provide appropriate locations for manufactured homes and mobile homes in a
designated district within the city.  Manufactured home parks shall be
located only in the MHP-District and shall be developed according to the
standards and regulations referenced herein.  Manufactured homes and mobile
homes not located within an approved Manufactured-Mobile Home Park District
shall not be permitted unless the dwelling is a permanently-sited
manufactured home as defined herein. 





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.10.202  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES. 




   Permitted uses shall be limited to manufactured homes, mobile homes and
other uses characteristic of a residential area.





   (A)    Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (C)    Dwelling – Manufactured home- mobile home.











   (D)    Parking, On-site.











   (E)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.78)










154.10.203  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.




   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.





   (A)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.











   (B)    Wireless telecommunications facility.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.79)










154.10.204  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.10.205  GENERAL STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.




   All manufactured home parks shall comply with the requirements of the
Ohio Administrative Code  Chapter 3701 promulgated by the Ohio Public Health
Council in accordance with Chapter 3733 of the Ohio Revised Code and any
other applicable local or state codes and regulations.





   The Planning Commission and City Council shall review the particular
facts and circumstances of each proposed manufactured home park development
in terms of the following standards and shall find adequate evidence that
such development meets these standards before amending the City Zoning Map
and establishing an MHP-District:





   (A)    The proposed park will be served adequately by essential
public facilities and services such as highways, streets, drainage, refuse
disposal, schools, police, and fire protection; or persons or agencies
involved in the establishment of the proposed park will provide such services
adequately.











   (B)    The vehicular approaches to the proposed park property will
be so designed as not to create traffic interference or congestion on the
surrounding public streets or roads.











   (C)    The establishment of the proposed park will not result in the
damage, destruction, or loss of any natural, scenic, or historic features of
major importance.











   (D)    The establishment of the proposed park will not be
demonstrably detrimental to the value of the surrounding properties or the
character of the adjacent neighborhood.











   (E)    The establishment of the proposed park will not be hazardous
or detrimental to existing or future neighboring uses.











   (F)    The establishment of the proposed park will not create
excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and
services and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community.











   (G)    The establishment of the proposed park is in general
conformance with the Zoning Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)











O-R OFFICE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT










154.10.301  O-R OFFICE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the O-R Office-Residential District is to designate and
reserve certain land areas for office and medium density residential
development to provide a district designed to accommodate such uses along
major thoroughfares and in areas between commercial and lower density
residential land uses, thereby minimizing strip commercial development while
allowing for the orderly transition between the commercial and residential
areas of the city.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.67;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 3030,
passed 10-22-96)










154.10.302  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.




   (A)    Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (C)    Churches and other similar places of religious worship.











   (D)    Day care facility – Child day care center.











   (E)    Day care facility – Type B family day care home.











   (F)    Dwelling – Row.










   (G)    Dwelling – Single-family, detached.










   (H)    Dwelling – Single-family, zero-lot line.











   (I)    Dwelling – Two-family.











   (J)    Group home – Adult family home.











   (K)    Group home – Foster care facility/Certified family foster
home.











   (L)    Financial institution without drive-in.











   (M)    Funeral homes and mortuaries.











   (N)   Home occupations subject to the conditions of §154.16.03.











   (O)    Office – Professional office/Business office.











   (P)    Parking, On-site.











   (Q)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.











   (R)    School – Nursery school.











   (S)    Studio – Instructional studio/Commercial studio.











   (T)    Subdivision, Conventional residential.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.68)










154.10.303  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.




   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.





   (A)    Group home – Adult group home.











   (B)    Group home – Community alternative home.










   (C)    Group home – Congregate housing.










   (D)    Group home – Home for the aging.











   (E)    Group home – Life care facility.











   (F)    Group home – MR/DD family care facility.











   (G)    Group home – MR/DD group care facility.











   (H)    Group home – Nursing home.











   (I)    Group home – Nursing homes for convalescent patients.











   (J)    Group home – Rest home.











   (K)    Lodging – Bed and breakfast establishment.











   (L)    Parking, Commercial.











   (M)    Parking, Shared.











   (N)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.











   (O)    Subdivision, Cluster residential.











   (P)    Wireless telecommunications facility.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.69))










154.10.304  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.10.305  MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE.




   (A)    Single-family Dwelling:  7,500 square feet.











   (B)    Two-family Dwellings: 12,000 square feet (6,000 square feet
per dwelling unit).











   (C)    Business and Professional Offices, Funeral Homes, Mortuaries,
and Studios:  10,000 square feet.











   (D)    Churches and other similar places of worship:  one acre.










   (E)    Other permitted uses:  one acre.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.70;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 3030,
passed 10-22-96)










154.10.306  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.




   (A)    Single-family Dwellings:  60 feet.











   (B)    Two-family Dwellings:  85 feet.











   (C)    Business and Professional Offices, Funeral Homes, Mortuaries,
and Studios:  90 feet.











   (D)    Churches and other similar places of worship: 150 feet.










   (E)    Other permitted uses:  150 feet.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.71;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 3030,
passed 10-22-96)










154.10.307  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Minimum Front Yard Requirement.





      (1)    Residential Single-family and Two-family Dwellings: 
25 feet.





      (2)    Residential Uses Fronting on a Major Street:  35 feet.





      (3)    Residential uses in which the average existing front
yard setback on two or more lots located within 100 feet and in the same
block as the lot in question is either less or greater than the minimum front
yard requirements specified in §154.10.307(A)(1) or (2), the front yard
requirement shall be modified as follows:





         (a)    The modified front yard shall not be less than
the average setback of the existing front yards of the two lots immediately
adjacent to the lot in question, or if a corner lot, then the same as the
setback on the immediately adjacent lot.





         (b)    In no case shall any front yard be modified to
require less than ten feet.





      (4)    Business and Professional Offices, Funeral Homes,
Mortuaries, and Studios:  35 feet.





      (5)    Churches and other similar places of worship:  40 feet.





      (6)   Corner Lots.





         (a)    On all corner lots, all yards which front on
streets shall be considered front yards, and as such shall meet the minimum
front yard requirements specified in §154.10.307(A)(1) to (5).





         (b)    On all lots having frontage on two streets which
do not intersect, the minimum front yard setback specified in
§154.10.307(A)(1) to (5) shall apply to each yard with street frontage.











   (B)    Minimum for Each Side Yard.





      (1)    Residential Single-family and Two-family Dwellings: 
ten (10) feet.





      (2)    Business and Professional Offices, Funeral Homes,
Mortuaries, and Studios: ten (10) feet, except when adjoining a R or O-R
District, and then 20 feet.





      (3)    Churches and other similar places of worship:  20 feet.











   (C)    Minimum Rear Yard Requirement.





      (1)    Residential Single-family and Two-family Dwellings: 
40 feet.





      (2)    Business and Professional Offices, Funeral Homes,
Mortuaries, and Studios:  40 feet.





      (3)    Churches and other similar places of worship: 50 feet.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.73;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 3030,
passed 10-22-96)










154.10.308  MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Maximum Height: 35 feet or 2-1/2-stories.











   (B)    Minimum Height: one (1) story, unless a home is to be
constructed on a vacant lot and there are dwellings within 50 feet on either
side with 2 or more stories, then construction on the infill lot shall be a
minimum of two (2) stories.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.72;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am.
Ord. 3030, passed 10-22-96)










154.10.309  REQUIRED MINIMUM DWELLING SIZE.




   The minimum dwelling size shall be governed by the West Carrollton
Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 158), which seeks to prevent overcrowding
through minimum space requirements based on occupancy limitations.





HISTORY: (newly proposed on 7/19/01; Formerly §154.06)










154.10.310  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.




   Off-street parking or loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.74;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 3030,
passed 10-22-96)










154.10.311  SIGNS.



   Refer to Chapter 153.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.75;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 3030,
passed 10-22-96










154.10.312  ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.










   New buildings and major facade alterations shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications of Section 154.17.01, Architectural Design
Standards.  (Ord. 3419.  Passed 4-28-09.)











O OFFICE DISTRICT










154.10.351  O- OFFICE DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the O Office District is to designate and reserve
certain land areas for office development to provide a district designed to
accommodate such uses along major thoroughfares and in areas between
commercial and residential land uses, thereby minimizing strip commercial
development while allowing for the orderly transition between the commercial
and residential areas of the city.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.57;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.352  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.




   (A)    Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (C)    Churches and other similar places of religious worship.











   (D)    Day care facility – Child day care center.











   (E)    Financial institution without drive-in.











   (F)    Funeral homes and mortuaries.











   (G)    Office – Professional office/Business office.











   (H)    Parking, On-site.











   (I)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.











   (J)    School – Business trades and technical schools











   (K)    School – Nursery school.











   (L)    School – Private school/Primary school/Intermediate
school/Secondary school.











   (M)   Studio – Instructional studio/Commercial studio.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.58;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)











   (N)   Mobile food vendors as provided in Section 154.16.11.  (Ord.
3475.  Passed 4-12- 11.)










154.10.353  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.




   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.











   (A)    Group home – Nursing home.











   (B)    Financial institution with drive-in.











   (C)    Fraternal lodges and private clubs.











   (D)    Hospitals/Urgent Care Centers.










   (E)    Parking, Commercial.










   (F)    Parking, Shared.











   (G)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.











   (H)    Recreation – Golf course.











   (I)    Wireless telecommunications facility.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.59;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82;
Am. Ord. 3063, passed 9-23-97)










154.10.354  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.59.1;  Ord. 2909, passed 10-5-93)










154.10.355  MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE.




   (A)    Business and Professional Offices; Funeral Homes, Mortuaries,
and Studios:  10,000 square feet.











   (B)    Churches and other similar places of worship:  one acre.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.60;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.356  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.




   (A)    Business and Professional Offices, Funeral Homes, Mortuaries,
and Studios:  90 feet.











   (B)    Churches and other similar places of worship:  150 feet.





HISTORY: (Formerly ;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.357  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Minimum Front Yard Requirements.





      (1)    Churches and other similar places of worship:  40 feet.





      (2)    All Other Uses: 35 feet, unless the height of the front
wall of the building is greater than 35 feet, then the height of the front
wall.





      (3)   Corner Lots.





         (a)    On all corner lots, all yards which front on
streets shall be considered front yards, and as such shall meet the minimum
front yard requirements specified in §154.10.357(A)(1) or (2).





         (b)    On all lots having frontage on two streets which
do not intersect, the minimum front yard setback specified in
§154.10.357(A)(1) or (2) shall apply to each yard with street frontage.











   (B)    Minimum Requirements for Each Side Yard.





      (1)    Churches and other similar places of worship: 20 feet.





      (2)    All Other Uses:  10 feet, unless the greater
requirement of the following applies:





         (a)    The height of the wall of the building along the
side yard is greater than 10 feet, then the height of the side wall.





         (b)    The side yard adjoins a R or O-R District, then
20 feet for the side yard(s) adjacent to the R or O-R District.











   (D)    Minimum Rear Yard.





      (1)    Churches and other similar places of worship:  50 feet.





      (2)    All Other Uses:  40 feet, unless the height of the
rear wall of the building is greater than 40 feet, then the height of the
rear wall.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.63;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.358  MAXIMUM HEIGHT.




   Maximum height in this district is 45 feet or four stories.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.62)










154.10.359  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.




   Off-street parking or loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.64;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.360  SIGNS.



   Refer to Chapter 153.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.65)










154.10.361  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   Refer to Sections 154.11.01 through 154.16.09.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.66;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.362  ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.




   New buildings and major facade alterations shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications of Section 154.17.01, Architectural Design
Standards.  (Ord. 3419.  Passed 4-28-09.)











B-1 CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL





DISTRICT










154.10.401  B-1 CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the B-1 Convenience Commercial District is to designate
and reserve certain land areas for convenience, commercial, personal
services, and certain types of business and professional uses located in
convenient and close relationship to nearby areas of surrounding development.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.47;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.402  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.




   (A)    Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (C)    Day care facility, Adult.











   (D)    Day care facility – Child day care center.











   (E)    Dwelling – Above commercial structure











   (F)    Financial institution without drive-in.











   (G)    Home occupations subject to the conditions of §154.16.03.











   (H)    Office – Professional office/Business office.











   (I)    Parking, On-site.











   (J)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.











   (K)    Recreation – Community center/senior center.











   (L)    Restaurant – Fast food restaurant without drive-in.











   (M)    Restaurant, Sit-down.











   (N)    Retail – Sales and services in structures less than or
equal to 10,000 s.f. in gross floor area.











   (O)   Retail Tobacco Store.











   (P)    School – Business trade school/Technical school.











   (Q)    School – Nursery school.











   (R)   Smoking Establishment.











   (S)    Studio – Instructional studio/Commercial studio.











   (T)    Tavern.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.48)











   (U)   Mobile food vendors as provided in Section 154.16.11.  (Ord.
3475.  Passed 4-12-11; Ord. 3567.  Passed 8-25-15.)










154.10.403  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.




   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.





   (A)    Financial institution with drive-in.











   (B)    Fraternal lodges and private clubs.










   (C)    Parking, Commercial.










   (D)    Parking, Shared.











   (E)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.











   (F)    Retail – Sales and services in structures greater than
10,000 s.f. in gross floor area.











   (G)    Wireless telecommunications facility.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.49)










154.10.404  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.49.1;  Ord. 2909, passed 10-5-93)










154.10.405  MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE.




   Minimum zoning lot size in this district is 10,000 square feet.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.50;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.406  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.




Minimum frontage in this district is 90 feet.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.51;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.407  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Minimum Front Yard Requirements.





      (1)    All Uses: 35 feet.





      (2)    Where the average existing front yard setback on two or
more lots located within 100 feet and in the same block as the lot in
question is either less or greater than the minimum front yard requirements
specified in §154.10.407(A)(1), the front yard requirement shall be modified
as follows:





         1.    The modified front yard shall not be less than the
average setback of the existing front yards of the two lots immediately
adjacent to the lot in question, or if a corner lot, then the same as the
setback on the immediately adjacent lot.





         2.    In no case shall any front yard be modified to
require less than ten feet.





      (3)   Corner Lots.





         (a)    On all corner lots, all yards which front on
streets shall be considered front yards, and as such shall meet the minimum
front yard requirements specified in §154.10.407(A)(1) or (2).





         (b)    On all lots having frontage on two streets which
do not intersect, the minimum front yard setback specified in
§154.10.407(A)(1) or (2) shall apply to each yard with street frontage.











   (B)    Minimum Side Yard Requirements:  10 feet, unless the greater
requirement of the following applies:





         (a)    The height of the wall of the building along the
side yard is greater than 10 feet, then the height of the side wall.











         (b)    The side yard adjoins a R or O-R District, then
20 feet for the side yard(s) adjacent to the R or O-R District.











   (C)    Minimum Rear Yard Requirements: 30 feet, unless the height of
the rear wall is greater than 30 feet, then the height of the rear wall.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.53;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.408  MAXIMUM HEIGHT.




   Maximum height in this district is 35 feet or 2-1/2 stories.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.52;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.409  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.




   Off-street parking or loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.54;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.410  SIGNS.



   Refer to Chapter 153.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.55;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.411  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   Refer to Sections 154.11.01 through 154.16.09.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.56;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.412  ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.




   New buildings and major facade alterations shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications of Section 154.17.01, Architectural Design
Standards.  (Ord. 3419.  Passed 4-28-09.)











B-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL





DISTRICT










154.10.421  B-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the B-2 General Commercial District is to designate and
reserve certain land area for central commercial, community, and highway uses
and services which serve the general commercial needs of the residents of the
city and surrounding areas.  These locations shall accommodate the most
intensive commercial and office uses and shall reflect areas of sound
organized development.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.37;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.422  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   (A)    Accessory building and structures as regulated by



 



   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.



 



   (C)    Animal hospital or veterinary clinic with indoor kennels or
no kennels.



 



   (D)    Animal kennels, indoor.



 



   (E)    Automobile – Convenience drive-through.



 



   (F)   Contractor office



 



   (G)   Contractor shop



 



   (H)    Day care facility – Child day care center.



 



   (I)    Dwelling – Above commercial structure.



 



   (J)    Financial institution with drive-in.



 



   (K)    Financial institution without drive-in.



 



   (L)    Fraternal lodges and private clubs.



 



   (M)    Funeral homes and mortuaries.



 



   (N)    Home Improvement Center.



 



   (O)    Home occupations subject to the conditions of §154.16.03.



 



   (P)    Hospitals/Urgent care centers.



 



   (Q)    Lodging – Hotels and motels.



 



   (R)    Office – Professional office/Business office.



 



   (S)    Parking, On-site.



 



   (T)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.



 



   (U)    Recreation – Commercial recreation facilities.



 



   (V)    Recreation – Community center/senior center.



 



   (W)    Recreation – Health Clubs with indoor facilities
only/Athletic training facilities.



 



   (X)    Recreation – Health Clubs with outdoor facilities.



 



   (Y)    Recreation – Theater  with less than 50,000 s.f. gross
floor area.



 



   (Z)    Restaurant – Fast food restaurant with drive-in.



 



   (AA)    Restaurant – Fast food restaurant without drive-in.



 



   (BB)    Restaurant, Sit-down.



 



   (CC)    Retail – Nursery/Garden Center.



 



   (DD)    Retail – Sales and services in structures greater than
10,000 s.f. in gross floor area.



 



   (EE)    Retail – Sales and services in structures less than or
equal to 10,000 s.f. in gross floor area.



 



   (FF)   Retail Tobacco Store.



 



   (GG)    School – Business trade school/Technical school.



 



   (HH)    School – Nursery school.



 



   (II)   Sexually oriented businesses



 



   (JJ)   Smoking Establishment.



 



   (KK)    Tavern.



HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.38)



 



   (LL)   Mobile food vendors as provided in Section 154.16.11.  (Ord.
3475.  Passed 4-12-11; Ord. 3567.  Passed 8-25-15; Ord. 3592.  Passed
10-11-16.)









154.10.423  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.



   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.



 



   (A)    Animal hospital or veterinary clinic with outdoor kennels.



 



   (B)    Animal kennels, indoor.



 



   (C)   Automobile detailing shop.



 



   (D)    Automobile fueling station.



 



   (E)    Automobile washing facility, Full service.



 



   (F)    Automobile washing facility, Self service.



 



   (G)    Automobile – Convenience market/Gas station mini-mart



 



   (H)    Automobile – Service station/Repair garage.



 



   (I)   Hookah Bar, meeting the requirements of Section 154.16.12,
Hookah Bars.



 



   (J)    Manufacturing – Light manufacturing.



 



   (K)    Parking, Commercial.



 



   (L)    Parking, Shared.



 



   (M)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.



 



   (N)    Recreation – Theater, drive-in.



 



   (O)    Recreation – Theater  with 50,000 s.f. or more gross floor
area.



 



   (P)    Vehicle sales and service – Agricultural Implements/Marine
equipment/Manufactured homes/Industrialized units/Travel trailers/Heavy
trucks.



 



   (Q)    Vehicle sales and service, Automobile and motorcycle.



 



   (R)    Warehousing – Mini-warehouses/Self-service storage
facilities.



 



   (S)    Wireless telecommunications facility.



HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.39)



(A.O.; Ord. 3567.  Passed 8-25-15; Ord. 3591.  Passed 10-11-16; Ord.
3592.  Passed 10-11-16.)









154.10.424  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.39.1;  Ord. 2909, passed 10-5-93)










154.10.425  MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE.



   None required in this district.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.40;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.426  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.



   None required in this district.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.41;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.427  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Minimum Front Yard Requirement. 





      (1)    All Uses: 30 feet.





      (2)    Where the average existing front yard setback on two or
more lots located within 100 feet and in the same block as the lot in
question is either less or greater than the minimum front yard requirements
specified in §154.10.427(A)(1), the front yard requirement shall be modified
as follows:





         1.    The modified front yard shall not be less than the
average setback of the existing front yards of the two lots immediately
adjacent to the lot in question, or if a corner lot, then the same as the
setback on the immediately adjacent lot.





         2.    In no case shall any front yard be modified to
require less than ten feet.





      (3)   Corner Lots.





         (a)    On all corner lots, all yards which front on
streets shall be considered front yards, and as such shall meet the minimum
front yard requirements specified in §154.10.427(A)(1) or (2).





         (b)    On all lots having frontage on two streets which
do not intersect, the minimum front yard setback specified in
§154.10.427(A)(1) or (2) shall apply to each yard with street frontage.











   (B)    Minimum Requirement for Each Side Yard:  10 feet, unless the
greater requirement of the following applies:





      (1)    The height of the wall of the building along the side
yard is greater than 10 feet, then the height of the side wall.





      (2)    The side yard adjoins a R or O-R District, then 20 feet
for the side yard(s) adjacent to the R or O-R District.











   (C)    Minimum Rear Yard Requirements: 20 feet, unless the greater
requirement of the following applies:





      (1)    The height of the rear wall of the building is greater
than 20 feet, then the height of the rear wall.





      (2)    The lot adjoins a R or O-R District, then 40 feet.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  formerly §154.43; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.428  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.



   The maximum lot coverage limitation is 50%.




HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.10.429  MAXIMUM HEIGHT.




   Maximum height in this district is 45 feet or four stories except as
hereinafter provided.  Buildings may be erected in excess of four stories
provided that prior to issuance of a building permit for any structure which
is planned to exceed 45 feet or four stories, the Planning Commission shall
make a finding that any such excessive height will not be detrimental to the
public safety, to the light, privacy, or air of any other structure or use
currently existing or approved for construction.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.42;  Ord. 2132, passed 5-22-79; Am. Ord. 2306,
passed 2-23-82)










154.10.430  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.




   Off-street parking or loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.





HISTORY: (formerly §154.44; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.431  SIGNS.



   Refer to Chapter 153.




HISTORY: (formerly §154.45; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.432  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   Refer to Sections 154.11.01 through 154.16.09.




HISTORY: (formerly §154.46; Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.433  ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.




   New buildings and major facade alterations shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications of Section 154.17.01, Architectural Design
Standards.  (Ord. 3419.  Passed 4-28-09.)

















OD OLDE DOWNTOWN DISTRICT










154.10.451  OLDE DOWNTOWN DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the Olde Downtown District is to designate and reserve
the historic downtown area of West Carrollton and tailor this area toward a
more urban downtown environment.  The unique aspects of Downtown will be
reflected in the uses permitted, the way parking is addressed, and in terms
of other development standards.  A limitation on building size will be
included to help guard against new construction of an inappropriate scale
(should the existing structures somehow be removed).





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.10.452  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.




   (A)   Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (C)    Day care facility – Child day care center.











   (D)    Dwelling – Above or to the rear of commercial structure.











   (E)   Dwelling – Single-family, detached.  Single-family
dwellings shall be permitted only on lots fronting on Main Street











   (F)    Financial institution without drive-in.











   (G)    Fraternal lodges and private clubs.











   (H)    Home occupations subject to the conditions of §154.16.03.











   (I)    Office – Professional office/Business office.











   (J)    Parking, On-site.











   (K)    Parking, Shared.











   (L)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.











   (M)    Restaurant – Fast food restaurant without drive-in.











   (N)    Restaurant, Sit-down.











   (O)    Retail – Sales and services in structures less than or
equal to 10,000 s.f. in gross floor area.











   (P)   Retail Tobacco Store.











   (Q)    School – Nursery school.











   (R)   Smoking Establishment.











   (S)    Studio – Instructional studio/Commercial studio.











   (T)    Tavern.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed) (A.O.; Ord. 3567.  Passed 8-25-15.)











   (U)    Mobile food vendors, as provided in Section 154.16.11. 
(Ord. 3475.  Passed 4-12-11; Ord. 3567.  Passed 8-25-15.)










154.10.453  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.




   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.





   (A)    Parking, Commercial.











   (B)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.











   (C)    Retail – Sales and services in structures greater than
10,000 s.f. in gross floor area.











   (D)    (EDITOR’S NOTE: Former subsection (D) was repealed by
Ordinance 3475, passed April 12, 2011.)











   (E)    Wireless telecommunications facility.





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed)










154.10.454  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.10.455  MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE.




   None required in this district.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.10.456  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.




Minimum frontage in this district is 90 feet.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.10.457  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Minimum Front Yard Requirement: None.











   (B)    Minimum Requirements for Each Side Yard: None.











   (C)    Minimum Rear Yard Requirements: 10 feet.





HISTORY: (newly proposed)










154.10.458  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.



   The maximum lot coverage limitation is 80%.




HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.10.459  MAXIMUM HEIGHT.




   Maximum height in this district is 35 feet or 2-1/2 stories.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.10.460  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.




   (A)    The Old Downtown District does not have a requirement for
off-street parking.











   (B)   Off-street loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.10.461  SIGNS.



   Refer to Chapter 153.




HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.10.462  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   Refer to Sections 154.11.01 through 154.16.09.




HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.10.463  ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.




   New buildings and major facade alterations shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications of Section 154.17.01, Architectural Design
Standards.  (Ord. 3419.  Passed 4-28-09.)

















CC CITY CENTER DISTRICT










154.10.471  CC CITY CENTER DISTRICT.




   (A)   General Purpose.





      (1)    It is the intent of the CC City Center District to
provide the necessary regulations and standards pertaining to the specific
land uses and development character that are consistent with the goals and
policies of the City’s Urban Design Plan, Comprehensive Plan and proposed
improvement of Exit 47.





      (2)   The purpose of the CC District is to assist the
development and redevelopment of land uses in order to achieve higher
efficiency, function, and compatibility with the character of the District;
to protect private property and investment; to provide for flexibility in
land use controls; and to protect or improve the quality of the environment
in those locations where the characteristics of the environment are of
significant public value and are vulnerable to change by the cumulative
effect of development permitted under conventional zoning regulations.





      (3)   These regulations establish requirements and procedures
for approval of development and redevelopment projects within this District,
which are planned and designed in a manner which promotes and encourages
revitalization and business development, and helps establish the subject area
into a viable and attractive City Center.





      (4)   Whenever there is a conflict between regulations and/or
requirements of other sections of this Zoning Code as they may apply in the
CC District, the regulations of the CC District shall control.





      (5)   Contrary to conventional development control strictly by
type of use, the CC District provides a more flexible instrument which
governs development by the urban design criteria of building placement,
building form and character, access and parking placement, and the
availability of substantial pedestrian amenities.











   (B)   Objectives.  The CC City Center District is specifically
designed to:





      (1)   Provide for increased opportunities and land use
efficiency for redevelopment new development, and business development
expansion.





      (2)   Protect property and private investment.





      (3)   Encourage a viable and compatible mix of commercial,
business, office, and residential uses in the district.





      (4)   Encourage creative planning and design in the
arrangement and siting of buildings, parking areas, circulation and access,
shared parking facilities and ingress/egress arrangements, and elimination of
multiple curb cuts.





      (5)   Promote a pedestrian- friendly City Center environment
through the establishment of a safe, convenient and attractive pedestrian
network.





      (6)   Allow the application of performance standards to
development and redevelopment so as to mitigate any adverse impacts on
adjacent areas and the overall district.





      (7)   Promote public health, safety and welfare. 





(Ord. 3298.  Passed 6-14-05.)










154.10.472  APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES OF SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS.




   (A)    Site Development Plan.  A Site Development Plan as used
herein, shall mean a plan for the development and/or redevelopment of a
specified parcel or tract of real estate in the CC District.  Development
and/or redevelopment activities subject to review and approval under this
section shall include the following:





      (1)    New construction.





      (2)    Additions to buildings or structures.





      (3)    Site improvements, including parking lots, driveways,
curb cuts and vehicular access.





      (4)    Signage in accordance with these regulations and the
Sign Code, Chapter 153.





      (5)    Screening landscaping in accordance with these
regulations and the Landscape Regulations,  §154.13.01.











   (B)    Site Development Plan Review and Approval.





      (1)    Before a permit is issued for the construction,
reconstruction or alteration of any building and/or development and
redevelopment of property in the CC District, detailed site plans, building
plans, and elevations and such other information necessary to determine
compliance with the standards of the District shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission for approval.





      (2)    No such permit shall be issued without such approval. 
Approval may be granted for the plans as submitted, or conditionally, subject
to stated modifications, or may be denied.











   (C)    Application Process.  The application for a development
under the City Center District shall be made by the property owner, developer
or his authorized agent and shall be processed as follows:





      (1)    A pre-application meeting is encouraged to take place
at the Department of Planning and Economic Development between the applicant
and the Department Director in order to discuss the proposed development, the
City’s concerns, the submittal, review requirements, and application fees.





      (2)    Following the pre- application meeting, all applicants
who wish to obtain a permit for new construction, reconstruction or
alterations, and demolition of any buildings in the  District may apply to
the Department of Planning and Economic Development for approval of a Site
Development Plan and submit the necessary copies of the Site Development Plan
which shall include the requirements for such plans set forth in these
regulations.











   (D)    Application Review.  The Planning and Economic Development
Director shall review the Site Development Plan and shall place the
application along with his report and recommendations and the other reviews
and recommendations, to the City Planning Commission’s agenda for its
consideration.











   (E)    Planning Commission Action.  The City Planning Commission
shall approve, approve with conditions the application, or disapprove the
application and shall state the reasons for doing so.











   (F)    Permit.  Following the approval by the City Planning
Commission, the Department of Community Development shall issue the zoning
certificate and building permit after a valid application has been filed.











   (G)    Site Development Plan Submittal Requirements.  The applicant
for a project within the CC District shall submit to the City’s Department
of Planning and Economic Development the necessary number of copies of all
required review material for the proposed project.  The following
information, where applicable, shall be required to be submitted with the
Site Development Plan:





      (1)    Description of project and work involved.





      (2)   Applicant’s name (if different than the owner’s),
address, and telephone number.





      (3)    Application site location (street and street number).





      (4)   A legal description, dimensions and acreage of the
subject property for the proposed development, including property lines,
easements, and features existing thereon.





      (5)   A site plan at an appropriate scale, representing with
exactitude all existing and proposed buildings, structures, site engineering,
pedestrian amenities, signage, landscaping lighting, fencing, decks, patios,
and other features of the proposed development, and including the gross area
of the development in acres and square feet, and number of units and density
in the case of residential development.





      (6)    The location and dimension of all parking facilities,
loading facilities, vehicular and pedestrian ways; the vehicular and
pedestrian traffic patterns, including the proposed location and design of
public and private streets; the directional flow and location of existing and
proposed storm and sanitary sewers, and sewers connecting with existing or
proposed municipal interceptor, outlet, or trunk sewers outside the
development area; the location and design of parking service areas; and an
estimate of traffic volumes to be generated, including the assignment of
traffic to proposed entrances and exits.





      (7)   The forms of covenants or declarations of covenants
running with the land, deed restrictions; covenants, restrictions or
easements proposed to be recorded; and covenants proposed for maintenance.





      (8)   Proposed grading, including first floor elevations,
curbs, sidewalk, retaining walls, (show height), gutters, walks, etc.





      (9)    Front, side, rear elevations at no less than 1/4" =
1'0" showing exterior appearances, including exterior materials to be used
including walls, glass, railings, detailing, fencing, etc., and proposed
color scheme, foundation, and finish grade lines at the building.





      (10)    Building floor plans at no less than 1/4" = 1'0" scale
showing doors, windows, room sizes, proposed room uses, exterior decks and
porches.





      (11)   Roof plan footprint showing basic elements, direction
and slope of drainage, and drainage system.





      (12)   A landscape plan, showing the location, type, and
quantities of landscaping and screening of the development including trees,
flowers, shrubs and grass, and open spaces.





      (13)   Proposed signs, including location, dimensions, size
and character.





      (14)   A schedule for construction and for the completion of
the development, including all public and private improvements in the
development area.





      (15)    Any other information, plans or studies as required by
Planning Commission.





(Ord. 3298.  Passed 6-14-05.)










154.10.473  USE REGULATIONS.



   Principal and accessory buildings, structures or premises shall be used
and buildings and structures shall be erected, altered or enlarged only for
the uses listed below.



   (A)   Principal Permitted Uses.




      (1)    Accessory buildings, structures and uses as regulated
by Section 154.16.01.





      (2)   Animal hospital or veterinary clinic with indoor kennels
or no kennels.





      (3)   Animal training school, domestic, indoor, so  long as
the applicant can demonstrate that animal waste will be accommodated to meet
all requirements of the Montgomery County Health District and the City of
West Carrollton Property Maintenance Code and Building Code.





      (4)   Auction house, defined as a place where objects of art,
furniture, and other goods and merchandise are offered for sale to persons
who bid on the object in competition with each other, and that take place
entirely within a building.  Outdoor auctions, as well as auctions of
livestock, motor vehicles, or items which are inconsistent with the purpose
and objectives of the City Center District, are expressly prohibited.





      (5)   Building and related trades, not involving any exterior
storage areas.





      (6)   Call center, defined as a company phone center that
offers operator-supported voice services such as a help desk, customer
support, lead generation, emergency response, telephone answering service,
inbound response and outbound telemarketing.





      (7)   Conference center, defined as a facility used for
conferences and seminars, with accommodations for sleeping, food preparation
and eating, recreation, entertainment, resource facilities, and meeting
rooms.  Conference centers shall not be utilized by the general public only
for overnight purposes.  This use shall not include institutions meeting the
definition of "churches and other similar places of religious worship" as
defined in Section 154.02.01, Definitions, and as prohibited in Section
154.10.473(B).





      (8)   Day care facility - child care center.





      (9)   Dwelling - above commercial structure.





      (10)   Dwelling - attached, detached, zero lot line homes and
other residential uses planned and designed along the "New Urbanism"
principles of compact form and architectural significance, with the density
to be determined by the Planning Commission.  Such residential developments
shall be in close adherence and conformance to the requirements of Section
154.10.476(D), of these regulations.  Residential developments planned and
designed along conventional subdivision standards shall not be permitted.





      (11)   Financial institution with or without drive-up.





      (12)   Fraternal lodges and private clubs.





      (13)   Home occupations subject to the conditions of Section
154.16.03.





      (14)   Home improvement centers, not involving any exterior
storage areas.





      (15)   Hospitals/urgent care centers.





      (16)   Lodging - bed and breakfast establishments.





      (17)   Lodging - hotels and motels.





      (18)   Manufacturing - light manufacturing, only on the
following properties:  Carrollton Plaza, parcels K48 00509 0002 (1000 E.
Central Avenue) and K48 00509 0037 (1100 E. Central Avenue); and the old
Woody's warehouse, parcel K48 00111 0032 (61 Alexandersville-Bellbrook Road).





      (19)   Office - professional office/ business office.





      (20)   Parking, on-site.





      (21)   Parking, shared.





      (22)   Parkland - community parkland and public open space.





      (23)   Recreation - commercial recreation facilities.





      (24)   Recreation - community center/senior center.





      (25)   Recreation - health clubs with indoor facilities
only/athletic training facilities.





      (26)   Recreation - health clubs with outdoor facilities.





      (27)   Recreation - river-related recreational uses such as
boat livery, boat rentals, and other such similar nature uses.





      (28)   Recreation - theater.





      (29)   Restaurant - fast food restaurant with or without
drive-up.





      (30)   Restaurant, sit-down.





      (31)   Retail - sales and services.





      (32)   School - business trade school/technical school.





      (33)   School - nursery school.





      (34)   Smoking establishment.





      (35)   Tavern.





      (36)   Warehousing - warehousing facility/wholesaling
facility/distribution facility, only on the following properties: 
Carrollton Plaza, parcels K48 00509 0002 (1000 E. Central Avenue) and K48
00509 0037 (1100 E. Central Avenue); and the old Woody's warehouse, parcel
K48 00111 0032 (61 Alexandersville-Bellbrook Road).  This use shall not
involve overnight parking of trucks, storage of materials that present
hazards or offensive conditions, external storage of material, or other
external nuisances such as dust, noise and odors.





      (37)   Mobile food vendors as provided in Section 154.16.11. 





(A.O.; Ord. 3475.  Passed 4-12-11; Ord. 3567.  Passed 8-25-15.)




 



   (B)    Prohibited Uses.



   All uses not specifically listed as a permitted use in Section
154.10.473(A) are prohibited within this District, unless determined by the
Planning Commission to be a Substantially Similar use to any use listed in
Section 154.10.473(A) as provided by Section 154.05.04(B)(2) and Section
154.07.01(B)(3).  The following uses are expressly prohibited within this
District:



      (1)   Animal hospital or veterinary clinic with outdoor
kennels.



      (2)   Animal kennels, outdoor.



      (3)   Automobile - convenience drive-thru.



      (4)   Automobile - convenience market/gas station mini-mart.



      (5)   Automobile fueling station.



      (6)   Automobile washing facility, full service.



      (7)   Automobile washing facility, self service.



      (8)   Automobile - service station/repair garage.



      (9)   Automobile - painting and  body shop.



      (10)   Automotive wrecking yards.




      (11)   Building and related trades, not meeting the
requirements of Section 154.10.473(A)(4).




      (12)   Building materials - comtractor storage yard.



      (13)   Building materials - sales and storage yards.



      (14)   Churches and other similar places of religious worship.



      (15)   Farming and agricultural production, and related farm
uses.



      (16)   Funeral homes and mortuaries.



      (17)   Junk yards.



      (18)   Lumber yards.



      (19)   Manufacturing - heavy manufacturing.



      (20)   Parking, commercial.



      (21)   Recreation - theater, drive-in.



      (22)   Resource and mineral extraction.



      (23)   Retail - nursery/garden center.



      (24)   Truck stop.




      (25)   Vehicle sales and service - agricultural
implements/marine equipment/ manufacturd homes/ industrialized units/ travel
trailers/ heavy trucks/ recreational vehicles.





      (26)   Vehicle sales and service, automobile and motorcycle.





      (27)   Warehousing -  mini warehouses/self-service storage
facilities.





      (28)   Warehousing - warehousing facility/wholesaling
facility/distribution facility not meeting the requirements of Section
154.10.473(A)(35).





      (29)   Any other uses which are not compatible with the
purpose and objectives of these regulations as determined by the Planning
Commission. 





         (Ord. 3400.  Passed 12-9-08.)










154.10.474  NON-CONFORMING USES.




   Lawfully pre-existing lots, structures, and uses of land that do not
conform to the CC District regulations after the effective date of these
regulations, are considered non-conforming uses and shall be regulated in
accordance with the provisions of §154.04.01.





(Ord. 3298.  Passed 6-14-05.)










154.10.475  CONDITIONS FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL.




   (A)   Site Development Plan Review Findings.  The use of the
property in the CC District shall be in accordance with these regulations and
the Site Development Plan, and a permit shall be issued when the review has
determined that the proposed development by its nature, or by reason of the
controls imposed by the Planning Commission:





      (1)    Is not an adverse influence on any abutting or
surrounding properties;





      (2)    Serves to create a well- planned, visually appealing
development which will create a positive image for the City’s Center;





      (3)    Relates effectively ingress/egress to the development
and to the existing street system in terms of safety and ease of access;





      (4)    Is in full compliance with the purposes of this Zoning
Code and with the City Center District;











   (B)    Exceptions.  The Planning Commission may authorize
exceptions from these regulations upon making findings that:





      (1)   A Site Development Plan proposed by an applicant, while
not strictly in accord with the regulations applying within the District,
meets public purposes, provides public protection, and conforms with the
objectives and principles of the CC District, or Comprehensive Plan; or





      (2)    In the particular circumstances of the case, strict
application of a particular regulation or regulations is not necessary for
the accomplishment of the public purposes or the provision of public
protection, at the time or in the future. 





(Ord. 3298.  Passed 6-14-05.)










154.10.476  STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES.




   Every application for a permit for the construction, reconstruction or
alteration of any building in the CC District shall be reviewed under these
guidelines, the Urban Design Plan, and the Comprehensive Plan.  Applications
shall be approved if the Planning Commission finds that the guidelines and
recommendations of these plans have substantially been met.  It is the
responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate compliance with these
Standards and Guidelines and the Conditions for Review and Approval,
§154.10.475.





   (A)    Building Placement.





      (1)    All buildings are encouraged to be be placed at or very
close to the street right-of-way line, their facades running parallel with
the street, except in cases where:





         (a)    The distance between the right of way and the
street curb is less than twelve feet, the building shall be moved back from
the right of way enough to establish the required twelve-foot distance for
street sidewalk space; and





         (b)    A utility easement running parallel with the
street right of way requires that no building can be constructed over it;





         (c)   The Service or Safety Director determines such a
location will be a hazard to traffic.





      (2)    Buildings at corner lots are encouraged to extend along
both lot frontages to the extent possible.





      (3)    Storefronts should be oriented towards the street,
shall be integrated with the sidewalk space, and shall afford direct
pedestrian access from the street sidewalk.





      (4)    Businesses should be designed to reinforce the pattern
of small storefront divisions facing the street.





         (Ord. 3298.  Passed 6-14-05.)





      (5)   Drive-up facilities shall be designed and located on the
site so as to be screened as much as possible from public view.  Drive-in
facilities are permitted so long as the Planning Commission is satisfied that
the general purpose, objectives, and design standards and guidelines of the
City Center District are substantially met.  Drive-thru facilites are
prohibited.





         (Ord. 3384.  Passed 4-22-08.)











   (B)    Building Character.





      (1)    Ensure visual compatibility by discouraging the
construction of new buildings and the renovation and/or expansion of existing
buildings





which calls attention to itself and significantly disrupts the establishment
of unity and form envisioned in the Plan.





      (2)    Discourage the construction of “big-box” type
buildings which are incompatible with the desired small scale and mass of
retail structures.  If this type of building is proposed, it should modify
its form in order to be articulated and subdivided into massing that is
proportional to the mass and scale of other small scale structures in the
district.











   (C)    Building Height.





      (1)    Building height shall be 35 feet.





      (2)    Buildings in excess of 35 feet may be permitted
depending on their location in relation to the overall district, the
predominant building form and character, and visual compatibility with
adjacent buildings.











   (D)    Housing Units Development and Site Planning.





      (1)    Housing units shall front along the street and public
space shown in the Alexandersville Square Redevelopment Plan in order to
extend the urban form and visual corridor connecting the business and
commercial areas with the riverfront.





      (2)    Housing development shall take place on the basis of a
unified plan in adherence with the urban design concepts shown in the
Alexandersville Square Redevelopment Plan.





      (3)    In the case where housing may be developed by more than
one developer, the plans shall be coordinated and their implementation shall
result in establishing the desired form, architectural character, visual
corridor, public open spaces and parking as recommended and as shown in the
Alexandersville Square Redevelopment Plan.





      (4)    Housing units shall only include attached, detached,
zero-lot line, and other similar-type units as described in Section
154.10.473(A)(7).





      (5)    Ground level commercial space is highly encouraged in a
mixed vertical arrangement with the housing units.











   (E)    Sidewalks and Pedestrian Amenity.





      (1)    Barrier-free pathways to accommodate the handicapped
should be provided from parking areas to various building destinations.





      (2)    The design and construction of all sidewalks shall aim
at establishing a uniform pedestrian network.  Improvements to sidewalks and
pedestrian space by property owners shall conform to the standards and design
specifications established by the City.











   (F)    Parking and Loading.





      (1)    Parking within the District shall be computed on the
basis of four parking spaces required for 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area of office and commercial mixed uses, applied throughout the entire
area.  Reciprocal shared off-site parking arrangements are highly encouraged
and may, in certain cases, be required as a condition of project approval.





      (2)    In the case of commercial/residential mixed use
development, parking shall be computed for each use and there shall be a
separation between the residential parking areas and those devoted to
commercial users.  Driveways and access lanes may be combined and shall be
clearly demarcated with proper signage.





      (3)    Existing parking lots should be shared and made more
efficient through improved access and more efficient layout.





      (4)    Existing small, under- utilized lots should be combined
to create larger more efficient parking areas.





      (5)    Parking lots should be located and should be designed
so they do not detract from the appearance of a site from streets or other
public areas.





      (6)    Large, uninterrupted expanses of pavement should be
avoided or substantially mitigated by the careful location of green space and
plant materials within the parking lot.





      (7)    Loading areas should be visually unobtrusive and should
be located properly in order to minimize conflicts with vehicles or
pedestrians.











   (G)   Vehicular Circulation, Joint and Cross Access.





      (1)    The location and design of driveway entrances to the
property should minimize conflict with off-site traffic, and should provide
for a safe transition into the parking lot.





      (2)    Creative site planning in building siting, circulation
and access, shared ingress/egress arrangements, and elimination of curb cuts
should be encouraged.





      (3)    Wherever possible, adjacent properties shall provide
cross-access to allow circulation between them.





      (4)    A system of joint-use driveways and cross-access
easements should be established wherever feasible.  Property owners shall
record an easement with the deed allowing cross access to and from other
properties served by the joint use driveway and cross-access.  The agreement
will be recorded with the deed specifying that the remaining access right
along the thoroughfare will be dedicated to the State or the City and
pre-existing driveways will be closed and eliminated after construction of
the joint- use driveway.











   (H)    Lighting.





      (1)    Lighting should be used to illuminate important on-site
elements such as entrances, pedestrian pathways, and pedestrian spaces.





      (2)    The luminosity, orientation, and location of exterior
light fixtures should foster user safety and minimize vehicle/pedestrian
conflicts.





      (3)    All outdoor lighting shall be designed, located, and
mounted at heights no greater than sixteen feet above grade for non-cutoff
lights and thirty-two feet above grade for cutoff lights.





      (4)    All outdoor lighting shall be located, screened or
shielded so that adjacent uses are not directly illuminated, especially in
cases where commercial uses abut or are in close proximity to residential
uses.





      (5)    No outdoor lighting shall be of such an intensity or
color distortion as to cause glare or to impair the vision of pedestrians
and/or drivers.











   (I)    Screening and Landscaping.





      (1)    All landscape improvements within the right of way,
parking areas, screening, and selected private spaces shall be undertaken in
accordance with the City’s streetscape standards and Landscape Regulations
of the Zoning Code, Section 154.13.01.





      (2)    Green areas designed for the use and enjoyment of
pedestrians should consider visibility, accessibility, safety, location of
seating, and microclimate.





      (3)    Where appropriate, green areas should link major site
destinations such as buildings and parking areas.











   (J)    Signs.





      (1)    All signs within the district shall be reviewed and
approved according to the requirements of the City’s Sign Code, Chapter
153, and as provided in these regulations.





      (2)    Signs should be designed to communicate with
pedestrians or persons in slow moving vehicles, and located to be visible
under the street tree canopy.





      (3)    Signs for the identification of tenants occupying the
upper floors of a building and/or for occupants of the building having no
street frontage should be permitted, if they comply with the following:





         (a)    One identifying plaque for each occupant having
access to premises at point of attachment.  Height of plaque is optional. 
Width of plaque may not exceed width of surface of attachment.  Maximum area
is three square feet.  Plaque shall be placed flat on the building’s wall.





         (b)    All plaques shall be placed adjacent to building
entrance.  Where more than one plaque is placed at an entrance, the total
group is to be related in an orderly and integrated manner in one or more
vertical columns but no more than two columns, with common vertical
centerlines.  The horizontal centerline of each group must be 5'0" above the
average grade level.





         (c)    Plaques may be of any cast metal, of any natural
stone or wood, or other appropriate material.





         (d)    Letters or characters shall not exceed two and
one-half inches in height; symbols may not exceed eight inches in height; all
letters and symbols shall be integral with the base material or painted on
the base (in the case of wood).  No more than three lines of letters should
be used.  No internally illuminated plaques shall be used.











   (K)    Dumpsters. 





      (1)    Dumpsters shall be located at the rear side of
buildings away from pedestrian pathways, shall be screened from public view,
and shall be easily accessible for service.





      (2)    Dumpster enclosures shall be constructed in direct
coordination with the principal structures with regard to materials and
color. 





(Ord. 3298.  Passed 6-14-05.)










154.10.477  REVISIONS OF FINAL SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN AFTER APPROVAL.




   No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made to any
Site Development Plan after final approval has been given unless said
changes, erasures, modifications or revisions are first submitted to and
approved by the City’s Planning and Economic Development Director.  In
determining whether to permit revision(s) of a Site Development Plan after
approval, the Planning and Economic Development Director shall proceed as
follows:











   (A)   Minor Modifications.  For minor modifications, which are
defined as being of a non- substantive nature in one or more of the
project’s elements as shown in the plan, the Planning and Economic
Development Director may permit these minor modifications upon determination
that the changes do not adversely impact upon adjacent properties, and they
do not violate the purposes, objectives, standards and guidelines of CC
District, and the goals and objectives of the City’s Comprehensive and
Urban Design Plans.











   (B)    Major Modifications.  For major modifications which call for
substantive changes to one or more of the project’s elements as shown in
the plan, the applicant shall submit a new Site Development Plan which shall
require approval by the Planning Commission and shall be reviewed according
to the requirements and procedures of this District.  Major modifications
shall include, but not be limited to:





      (1)    An increase in gross floor area.





      (2)    An increase in density.





      (3)    Additions and major modifications to the approved
buildings.





      (4)    Major changes to the buildings’ character and form.





      (5)    Major changes to the vehicular and/or pedestrian
circulation systems, ingress/egress, and parking.





      (6)    Major changes to the screening and landscaping
improvements.





      (7)    Any other major changes to the project elements as
approved and are part of the record of the Site Development Plan.





(Ord. 3298.  Passed 6-14-05.)










154.10.478  ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.




   New buildings and major facade alterations shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications of Section 154.17.01, Architectural Design
Standards.  (Ord. 3419.  Passed 4-28-09.)










154.10.479 GUARANTEE FOR INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   All site improvements shall conform to the approved site plan
and construction plans. 



 



   (B)   To provide assurance to the City that public improvements will
be completed once construction has begun, the developer shall furnish a bond
executed by a surety company, letter of credit, or certified check equal to
the cost of construction of such public improvements as shown on the approved
plans, and based on an estimate approved by the City Manager as advised by
the Service Director and in a form approved by the Law Director.  Such
surety shall be provided prior to issuance of a building permit for the
project.  Letters of credit shall not permit draws by the developer without
the express approval of the City. 



      (1)   For the purposes of this section, construction shall be
defined as any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate related
to one or more of the following public improvements:  earth-disturbing
activities including clearing, excavating, filling, and grading of property;
driveway approaches; sidewalks; street surfacing; curbs, gutters, and public
sanitary sewers; public water supply; stormwater detention facilities;
stormwater best management practices for runoff quality; and street signs.



 



   (C)   The performance bond, letter of credit, or certified check
shall run to the City and shall provide that the developer, his heirs,
successors and assigns, their agent or servants, upon commencement of
construction, will comply with all applicable terms, conditions, provisions
and requirements of these regulations; will faithfully perform and complete
the work of constructing and installing all public improvements in accordance
with such laws and regulations; will complete all public improvements prior
to issuance of a final occupancy permit for the project; and will complete
all public improvements within one (1) year from the date of final approval
of the building permit, but the bond or letter of credit will run
indefinitely until released by the City.  In no case shall the work be
completed after one (1) year from the date of final approval of the building
permit, unless an extension is granted by the City as specified below. 



 



   (D)   Upon commencement of construction, if the installation of any
public improvement, for which guarantee has been made by the developer in the
form of bond, letter of credit, or certified check, is not completed within
one (1) year from the date of final approval of the building permit, the
developer may request the City to grant an extension of six (6) months,
provided (s)he can show reasonable cause for inability to complete said
public improvement(s) within the required one (1) year.  A maximum of two
six-month extensions may be granted.  At the expiration of the extension(s),
the City will use as much of the bond, letter of credit, or certified check
as necessary to complete the construction of the public improvements.









   (E)   All public improvements located within the public right-of-way
shall be completed within 14 days of initial excavation, unless an extension
is granted for reasonable cause by the City Manager as advised by the Service
Director and Director of City Planning.



 



   (F)   As required public improvements are completed, approved, and
accepted, the City Manager, as advised by the Service Director and Director
of City Planning, may reduce the amount of the performance bond, letter of
credit, or certified check.



 



   (G)   Periodic inspections during the installation of public
improvements shall be made by the City to ensure conformity with the approved
plans and specifications as required by these regulations.









   (H)   The developer shall schedule required inspections at least
forty-eight (48) hours in advance with proper administrative officials.



 



   (I)   The absence of an inspector from a project during construction
shall not relieve the developer from full responsibility under this
agreement.  Upon acceptable completion of installation of the required
public improvements, the City Manager as advised by the Service Director and
Director of City Planning shall issue a letter to the developer or his/her
agent and such letter shall be sufficient evidence for the release by the
City.



 



   (J)   When the Service Director and Director of City Planning,
following final inspection of a project, certify to the City Manager that all
public improvements have been constructed in accordance with City
specifications, the City Manager may proceed to accept the facilities for
which bond, letter of credit, or certified check has been posted.










   (K)   Whenever public improvements have not been constructed in
accordance with the agreement and with specifications as established, the
City Manager  as advised by the Service Director and Director of City
Planning may exercise his/her rights of foreclosure under the bond, letter of
credit, or certified check.











   (L)   Should construction not commence prior to expiration of the
building permit and any extensions granted in accordance with this section,
the performance bond, letter of credit, or certified check shall be released
in its entirety by the City.





(Ord. 3477.  Passed 4-12-11.)

















H HERITAGE DISTRICT










154.10.481  H HERITAGE SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the H District is to designate and reserve certain land
areas for single-family detached dwellings at low-medium densities, while
maintaining the architectural heritage of the City's Queen Anne Historic
District.










154.10.482  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.




   (A)    Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.











   (C)    Day care facility - Type B family day care home.











   (D)    Dwelling - Single-family, detached.











   (E)    Group home - Adult family home.











   (F)   Group home - Community alternative home.











   (G)    Group home - Foster care facility/Certified family foster
home.











   (H)    Group home - MR/DD family care facility.











   (I)    Home occupations subject to the conditions of §154.16.03.











   (J)    Parking, On-site.











   (K)    Parkland - Community parkland and public open space.











   (L)    Subdivision, Conventional residential.










154.10.483  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.




   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.





   (A)    Funeral Homes and Mortuaries











   (B)    Lodging - Bed and breakfast establishment.











   (C)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.











   (D)    School - Nursery school.











   (E)    School - Private school/Primary school/Intermediate
school/Secondary school.










154.10.484  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.










154.10.485  MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE.




   (A)    Single-family Dwellings: 7,500 square feet.











   (B)    Other Permitted Uses: one acre.










154.10.486  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.




   (A)    Single-family Dwellings: 60 feet.











   (B)    Other Permitted Uses: 150 feet.










154.10.487  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Minimum front yard.





      (1)    Residential Uses: 35 feet.





      (2)    Residential uses in which the average existing front
yard setback on two or more lots located within 100 feet and in the same
block as the lot in question is either less or greater than the minimum front
yard requirements specified in §154.10.067(A)(1) or (2), the front yard
requirement shall be modified as follows:





         (a)    The modified front yard shall not be less than
the average setback of the existing front yards of the two lots immediately
adjacent to the lot in question, or if a corner lot, then the same as the
setback on the immediately adjacent lot.





         (b)    In no case shall any front yard be modified to
require less than ten feet.





      (4)    Other Permitted Uses: 40 feet.





      (5)   Corner Lots.





         (a)    On all corner lots, all yards which front on
streets shall be considered front yards, and as such shall meet the minimum
front yard requirements specified in §154.10.067(A)(1) to (4).





         (b)   On all lots having frontage on two streets which
do not intersect, the minimum front yard setback specified in
§154.10.067(A)(1) to (4) shall apply to each yard with street frontage.











   (B)    Minimum for each side yard.





      (1)    Residential Uses: 8 feet.





      (2)    Residential uses in which the average existing side
yard setback on two or more lots located within 100 feet and in the same
block as the lot in question is less than 8 feet, then the side yard setback
requirement shall be modified as follows:





         (a)     The modified side yard shall not be less than
the average setback of the existing side yards of the two lots immediately
adjacent to the lot in question, or if a corner lot, then the same as the
setback on the immediately adjacent lot.





         (b)    In no case shall any side yard be modified to
require less than four (4) feet.





      (3)    Other Permitted Uses: 20 feet.











   (C)    Minimum rear yard.





      (1)    Residential Uses, 40 feet.  Any one-story section of a
single-family residence may project not more than ten feet into the required
rear yard.





      (2)    Other Permitted Uses: 50 feet.










154.10.488  MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Maximum Height:  35 feet or 2-1/2 stories.











   (B)    Minimum Height:  two (2) stories.










154.10.489  REQUIRED MINIMUM DWELLING SIZE.




   The minimum dwelling size shall be governed by the West Carrollton
Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 158), which seeks to prevent overcrowding
through minimum space requirements based on occupancy limitations.










154.10.490  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.




   Off-street parking or loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.










154.10.491  SIGNS.




   Refer to Chapter 153.










154.10.492  DESIGN REVIEW REGULATIONS.




   The purpose of these West Carrollton Heritage District Design Review
Regulations are:





   (A)    To safeguard the architectural integrity and cohesiveness of
the oldest buildings and parts of the community important to the City's
history in order to contribute to the economic, recreational, cultural, and
educational development of the City of West Carrollton;











   (B)    To maintain and enhance property values to promote the use
of, facilitate reinvestment in, and stimulate revitalization of buildings and
areas found to have historic architectural significance; and











   (C)    To provide controls and procedural standards for the
appropriate rehabilitation and preservation of older homes in historically
significant areas and to encourage the development of vacant properties in
accordance with the character of these areas.










154.10.493  DEFINITIONS.




   The following definitions shall apply only to the provisions of the
West Carrollton Heritage District Design Review Regulations of the City of
West Carrollton Zoning Code:











   ALTER or ALTERATION.  Any material change in an external architectural
feature of any property which lies within the West Carrollton Heritage
District, including demolition, removal, construction, modification to roofs,
windows, siding, awnings/canopies, additions, doors, entrances, but not
including the landscaping of real property and painting.











   APPLICANT.  Any owner, owners, person(s), association, partnership, or
corporation who applies for a Certificate of Appropriateness in order to
undertake any change on property subject to these West Carrollton Heritage
District Design Review Regulations.











   EXTERNAL ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE.  The architectural style, general
design and arrangement of the exterior of a structure including, but not
limited to the type of building material, doors, windows, roof, porches and
other appurtenant fixtures.











   WEST CARROLLTON HERITAGE DISTRICT.  Any area within the corporate
limits of the City of West Carrollton, Ohio, designated by Council to be
subject to the provisions of these West Carrollton Heritage District Design
Review Regulations.










154.10.494  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DESIGN REVIEW ARCHITECT.




   (A)   In order to carry out the efficient review of applications
subject to the Heritage District Design Regulations, the city shall contract
with an Architect familiar with the style and construction of historic
structures, and  licensed as an Architect by the State of Ohio.











   (B)   Within the boundaries of the West Carrollton Heritage District
subject to design review, the Design Review Architect shall review any
proposed new construction of a new principle structures, an addition to a
principle structure, and all demolition permits











   (C)   After review of the plans for the new construction, addition,
or demolition, the Design Review Architect shall prepare a written report to
the Zoning Enforcement Officer giving his professional opinion about whether
the plans meet the Specific Architectural Design Guidelines contained in
Section §154.15.05.










154.10.495  TRIGGERING MECHANISM FOR DESIGN REVIEW.




   (A)    An application for a Certificate of Appropriateness issued by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be required for all property located
within the West Carrollton Heritage District for the following activities:





      (1)   New construction of a principle structure; or





      (2)   Additions to principle structures; or





      (3)   Demolition of principle structures.











   (B)    Whenever an applicant applies for a Zoning Certificate, the
permit application will be deemed as an application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness.










154.10.496 SPECIFIC ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN GUIDELINES.




   (A)    In reviewing proposed alterations to property, the Design
Review Architect and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall utilize the following
guidelines in their review and deliberation:





      (1)   New construction of a principle structure.





         (a)   The pattern of houses on a street is as
significant as the design and construction of individual houses.  A
building's relationship to its neighbors reflects part of its own identity. 
New structures should borrow elements from the block face to maintain unity





         (b)   Compatible characteristics begin with building
proportion and shape.  New construction should maintain the proportions of
wall height and length, window and door opening sizes, and roof height and
pitch.  New construction which does not maintain the architectural rhythm of
the street scape is prohibited.





         (c)   Detailing on a new principal structure shall be
sympathetic in design, scale and materials, but does not need to replicate
that of the historic architecture of the block.





      (2)   Additions to principle structures.





         (a)   Compatible characteristics begin with building
proportion and shape.  Additions should maintain the proportions of the
original structure in relation to wall height and length, window and door
opening sizes, and roof height and pitch.





         (b)   Contemporary design for alterations and additions
to existing properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and
additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural, or cultural
materials, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color,
material, and character of the property, neighborhood, or environment.





         (c)   Whenever possible, new additions or alterations to
structures shall be done in such a manner that if such additions or
alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and
integrity of the structure would be unimpaired.





         (d)   The distinguishing original qualities or character
of a building or structure shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration
of historic material or distinctive architectural features should be avoided
when possible.





         (e)   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of
skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure, or site shall
be treated with sensitivity.





         (f)   Construction materials should be compatible with
the original structure's materials.  The original structure's architectural
fabric should dictate the materials to be used for the addition.





         (g)   No additions shall be made to the front of a
structure.





      (3)   Demolition of principle structures.  A demolition
permit shall not be issued by the Building Inspector unless accompanied by an
approved Certificate of Appropriateness.  Such a Certificate of
appropriateness shall be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, after
review and comment by the Design Review Architect, only if the applicant has
given clear evidence that one of the following conditions exist:





         (a)   The structure has incurred extensive damage to its
basic structural elements such as the roof, walls, and foundation requiring
substantial reconstruction and presents an immediate danger to the public
safety as declared by the Chief Building Inspector; or





         (b)   The structure has been declared a public nuisance
under Section 150.70 of the West Carrollton Code of Ordinances; or





         (c)   The structure is not consistent with other
structures in the district in terms of historic character, architectural
style, construction material, height, setback, mass or use; or





         (d)   The square foot cost of meeting the minimum
building code would exceed the square foot market value of similarly used and
improved structures in the district.  If the applicant applies for the
removal of a structure in accordance with this section, the following
evidence shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer:





            1)   An itemized cost estimate provided by a
qualified architect, engineer, or contractor indicating those items required
to meet the minimum building code; and





            2)   A market analysis by an appraiser or
qualified real estate professional indicating the square foot value of
similarly used and improved structures in the district; and





            3)   A demolition cost estimate.










154.10.497  LIMITATION ON ISSUANCE OF ZONING & DEMOLITION PERMITS




   No Zoning Certificate shall be issued by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, nor a Demolition Permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector,
for new construction or demolition of any principle structure within the West
Carrollton Heritage District prior to obtaining a Certificate of
Appropriateness.  No Zoning Certificate may be issued by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer unless the requirements outlined below are met in full. 










154.10.498  CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.




   (A)    When the owner of a property within the West Carrollton
Heritage District proposes new construction to, or demolition of, any portion
of a principle structure within the Heritage District, they shall first apply
for and secure a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Zoning Enforcement
Officer in accordance with the triggering requirements of §154.15.04. The
application for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be made through the
Building Inspector, together with such plans, specifications, and other
material as the Design Review Architect and Zoning Enforcement Officer may
need to adequate review the application for compliance with these regulations.











   (B)    If the proposed new construction or demolition is determined
by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, after review and comment by the Design
Review Architect, to have no adverse effect on the West Carrollton Heritage
District and does not violate the spirit and purpose of these regulations,
then the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall issue the Certificate of
Appropriateness.











   (D)    If the Zoning Enforcement Officer, after review and comment
by the Design Review Architect, determines that the proposed new construction
or demolition will have an adverse effect on the West Carrollton Heritage
District, and does violate the spirit and purposes of these regulations, then
the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall deny issuance of the Certificate of
Appropriateness.











   (E)    In the event that the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines
that a Certificate of Appropriateness shall not be issued, they shall notify
the applicant and the Building Inspector in writing of the reasons for such
determination.










154.10.499  PENALTIES.




   Whoever constructs, reconstructs, alters, changes, or demolishes any
exterior feature of any structure, work of art, object, or area in violation
of these West Carrollton Heritage District Design Review Regulations shall be
deemed in violation of the Municipal Code and such violation shall be
punishable under §154.05.09 of the Municipal Code.










154.10.500  MINIMUM MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENT.




   The owner of an historic structure or any structure within the West
Carrollton Heritage District shall provide sufficient maintenance and upkeep
for such structure to ensure its perpetuation and to prevent its destruction
by deterioration, whether the building is vacant or inhabited.










154.10.501  SEVERABILITY.




   If any provision of these West Carrollton Heritage District Design
Review Regulations or the application thereof is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of these
regulations which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application and to this end the provisions of these West Carrollton Heritage
District Design Review Regulations are hereby declared severable.










154.10.502  OTHER REGULATIONS.




   Refer to Sections 154.11.01 through 154.16.09.





HISTORY: (Newly Proposed)











M-1 BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT










154.10.601  M-1 BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the M-1 Business Park District is:





   (A)    To designate and reserve certain land areas exclusively for
the development of industrial parks, certain light manufacturing uses,
warehousing, wholesaling and distribution facilities, and their related
accessory buildings, and uses, which will not adversely affect their
surroundings;











   (B)    To insure that these areas have adequate access, and can be
served with necessary utilities, and that these areas will constitute areas
of sound development which are free from objectionable influences in both
operation and appearance.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.27;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.602  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   (A)    Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.



 



   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.



 



   (C)    Contractor office.



   



   (D)   Contractor shop.



 



   (E)   Contractor storage yard.



 



   (F)    Farming and agricultural production, and related farm uses.



 



   (G)    Financial institution with drive-in.



 



   (H)    Financial institution without drive-in.



 



   (I)    Hospitals/Urgent care centers.



 



   (J)    Manufacturing – Light manufacturing



 



   (K)    Office – Professional office/Business office.



 



   (L)    Parking, On-site.



 



   (M)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.



 



   (N)    Recreation – Health Clubs with indoor facilities
only/Athletic training facilities.



 



   (O)    Recreation – Industrial recreation sites.



 



   (P)   Recreation – Private, noncommercial areas and facilities.



 



   (Q)    School – Business trade school/Technical school.



 



   (R)    Wireless telecommunications facility.



 



   (S)   Mobile food vendors, as provided in Section 154.16.11.  (Ord.
3475.  Passed 4-12-11; Ord. 3592.  Passed 10- 11-16.)









154.10.603  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.



   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.



   



   (A)   Automobile detailing shop.



 



   (B)   Contractor sales and storage yard.



 



   (C)   Day care facility – Child day care center.



 



   (D)   Other permitted uses listed in the O or B-1 Districts, when
these uses are compatible or supplementary to existing industrial or office
development within the zoning district, subject to the following conditions:



 



      (1)   Conditionally permitted uses listed in the O or B-1
Districts are not permitted in the M-1 District.



 



      (2)   The amount of the M-1 District that can be used in this
manner is limited to the 10% of the M-1 District in which the proposed use
would be located.



 



      (3)   The amount of the M-1 District that can be used in this
manner is limited to no mor than 25% of permitted M-1 District uses already
constructed.



 



   (E)   Parking, Commercial



 



   (F)   Parking, Shared.



 



   (G)   Public utility substation and transmission facilities.



 



   (H)   School – Nursery school.



 



   (I)   Truck stop.



 



   (J)   Warehousing – Mini-warehouses/Self-service storage
facilities.



 



   (K)   Warehousing – Warehousing facility/Wholesaling
facility/Distribution facility.



HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.29)




(Ord. 3591.  Passed 10-11-16; Ord. 3592.  Passed 10-11-16.)










154.10.604  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.29.1;  Ord. 2909, passed 10-5-93)










154.10.605  MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE.




   (A)    Industrial Parks:  five acres.











   (B)    Individual Sites Within the Industrial Park: 15,000 square
feet.











   (C)    Industrial Recreation Sites:  one acre.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.30)










154.10.606  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.




   (A)    Industrial Parks, 350 feet.











   (B)    Individual Sites Within the Industrial Park:  75 feet.











   (C)    Industrial recreation sites, 150 feet.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.31)










154.10.607  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Minimum Front Yard.











      Twenty-five (25) feet.











      On all corner lots, all yards which front on streets shall be
considered front yards, and as such shall meet the minimum front yard
requirement.











      On all lots having frontage on two streets which do not
intersect, the minimum front yard requirement shall apply to each yard with
street frontage.











   (B)    Minimum Side Yard.











      Fifteen (15) feet.











   (C)    Minimum Rear Yard.










      Twenty-five (25) feet, except where the rear yard abuts a
residential zoning district in which case the rear yard shall be not less
than forty (40) feet.  (Ord. 3615.  Passed 9-12-17.)









154.10.608  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.



   The maximum lot coverage limitation is 60%.




HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.10.609  MAXIMUM HEIGHT.




   Maximum height in this district is 45 feet or four stories.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.32)










154.10.610  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.




   Off-street parking or loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.34;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.611  SIGNS.



   Refer to Chapter 153.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.35;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82)










154.10.612  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   Refer to Sections 154.11.01 through 154.16.09.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.36;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 3082,
passed 2-24-98)










154.10.613  ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.




   New buildings and major facade alterations shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications of Section 154.17.01, Architectural Design
Standards.  (Ord. 3419.  Passed 4-28-09.)











M-2 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT










154.10.621  M-2 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the M-2 Manufacturing District is:





   (A)    To reflect the existing pattern of industrial and related
development within the community; and











   (B)    To designate and reserve certain land areas exclusively for
industrial development, manufacturing, warehousing, wholesaling, and related
activities which will not adversely affect their surroundings;











   (C)    To insure that these areas have adequate access, and can be
served with necessary utilities.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.17-2;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2327,
passed 7-13-82)










154.10.622  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   (A)    Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.



 



   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.



 



   (C)   Contractor office



 



   (D)   Contractor shop



 



   (E)   Contractor storage yard



 



   (F)   Contractor sales and storage yard



 



   (G)    Dwelling – Expansion of single-family residential dwellings
constructed prior to July 13, 1982 to an extent not exceeding 50% of the
gross floor area of the existing principal structure.



 



   (H)    Farming and agricultural production, and related farm uses.



 



   (I)    Manufacturing – Heavy manufacturing.



 



   (J)    Parking, On-site.



 



   (K)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.



 



   (L)    Recreation – Industrial recreation sites.



 



   (M)    Recreation – Private, noncommercial areas and facilities.



 



   (N)    School – Business trade school/Technical school.



 



   (O)    Truck stop.



 



   (P)    Warehousing – Mini-warehouses/Self-service storage
facilities.



 



   (Q)    Warehousing – Warehousing facility/Wholesaling
facility/Distribution facility.



 



   (R)    Wireless telecommunications facility.



(Ord. 3309.  Passed 11-8-05.)



 



   (S)   Mobile food vendors, as provided in Section 154.16.11.  (Ord.
3475.  Passed 4-12-11; Ord. 3592.  Passed 10-11-16.)









154.10.623  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.




   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.





   (A)    Automotive wrecking yards.











   (B)    Junk yards.











   (C)    Office – Professional office/Business office in conjunction
with mini-warehouses.











   (D)    Parking, Commercial.










   (E)    Parking, Shared.










   (F)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.











   (G)    (EDITOR’S NOTE: Former subsection (G) was repealed by
Ordinance 3475, passed April 12, 2011.)





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.19-2)










154.10.624  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.19-2.1 ;  Ord. 2909, passed 10-5-93)










154.10.625  MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE.




   Industrial and Manufacturing Uses; Industrial Recreation Sites; 
Warehousing, Wholesaling Facilities; Building Materials Sales and Storage
Yards:  43,560 square feet (one acre).





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.20-2;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82;
Am. Ord. 2327, passed 7-13-82)










154.10.626  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.




   Industrial and Manufacturing Uses; Industrial Recreation Sites; 
Warehousing, Wholesaling Facilities; Building Materials Sales and Storage
Yards:  150 feet.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.21-2;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82;
Am. Ord. 2327, passed 7-13-82)










154.10.627  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Minimum Front Yard.











      Forty (40) feet.











      On all corner lots, all yards which front on streets shall be
considered front yards, and as such shall meet the minimum front yard
requirements.











      On all lots having frontage on two streets which do not
intersect, the minimum front yard requirement shall apply to each yard with
street frontage.











   (B)   Minimum Side Yard.











      Fifteen (15) feet.











   (C)   Minimum Rear Yard. 











      Ten (10) feet, except where the rear yard abuts a residential
zoning district in which case the rear yard shall be not less than forty (40)
feet.




(Ord. 3615.  Passed 9-12-17.)









154.10.628  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.



   The maximum lot coverage limitation is 40%.




HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.10.629  MAXIMUM HEIGHT.




   Maximum height in this district is 65 feet or four stories.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.22-2;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2327,
passed 7-13-82; Am. Ord. 3438, passed 1-26-10.)










154.10.630  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.




   Off-street parking or loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.24-2;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2327,
passed 7-13-82)










154.10.631  SIGNS.




   Refer to Chapter 153.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.25-2;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2327,
passed 7-13-82)










154.10.632  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   Refer to Sections 154.11.01 through 154.16.09.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.26-2;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2327,
passed 7-13-82; Am. Ord. 3082, passed 2-24-98)










154.10.633   ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.




   New buildings and major facade alterations shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications of Section 154.17.01, Architectural Design
Standards.





(Ord. 3616.  Passed 9-12-17.)











M-3 RURAL MANUFACTURING





DISTRICT










154.10.651  M-3 RURAL MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the M-3 Manufacturing District is:





   (A)    To reflect the existing pattern of industrial and related
development within the community; and











   (B)    To designate and reserve certain land areas exclusively for
industrial development, manufacturing, warehousing, wholesaling, and related
activities which will not adversely affect their surroundings;











   (C)    To insure that these areas have adequate access, and can be
served with necessary utilities.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.17-2;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2327,
passed 7-13-82)










154.10.652  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   (A)    Accessory building and structures as regulated by §154.16.01.



 



   (B)    Accessory uses as regulated by §154.16.01.



 



   (C)    Contractor office.



 



   (D)    Contractor shop.



 



   (E)    Contractor storage yard.



 



   (F)   Contractor sales and storage yard.



 



   (G)    Dwelling – Expansion of single-family residential dwellings
constructed prior to July 13, 1982 to an extent not exceeding 50% of the
gross floor area of the existing principal structure.



 



   (H)    Farming and agricultural production, and related farm uses.



 



   (I)    Manufacturing – Heavy manufacturing.



 



   (J)    Parking, On-site.



 



   (K)    Parkland – Community parkland and public open space.



 



   (L)    Recreation – Industrial recreation sites.



 



   (M)    Recreation – Private, noncommercial areas and facilities.



 



   (N)    School – Business trade school/Technical school.



 



   (O)    Truck stop.



 



   (P)    Warehousing – Mini-warehouses/Self-service storage
facilities.



 



   (Q)    Warehousing – Warehousing facility/Wholesaling
facility/Distribution facility.



 



   (R)    Wireless telecommunications facility.



(Ord. 3309.  Passed 11-8-05.)



 



   (S)   Mobile food vendors, as provided in Section 154.16.11.  (Ord.
3475.  Passed 4-12-11; Ord. 3592.  Passed 10-11-16.)









154.10.653  CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.




   Subject to general conditions and supplemental requirements in this
Chapter.





   (A)    Automotive wrecking yards.











   (B)    Junk yards.











   (C)    Office – Professional office/Business office in conjunction
with mini-warehouses.











   (D)    Parking, Commercial.










   (E)    Parking, Shared.










   (F)    Public utility substation and transmission facilities.











   (G)    Resource and mineral extraction.











   (H)    (EDITOR’S NOTE: Former subsection (h) was repealed by
Ordinance 3475, passed April 12, 2011.)





HISTORY:  (Newly proposed; Formerly §154.19-2)










154.10.654  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.




   The provisions of §154.16.01 and other regulations in this Chapter
shall apply to the location and maintenance of accessory uses, buildings, and
related structures.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.19-2.1 ;  Ord. 2909, passed 10-5-93)










154.10.655  MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE.




   Industrial and Manufacturing Uses; Industrial Recreation Sites; 
Warehousing, Wholesaling Facilities; Building Materials Sales and Storage
Yards:  43,560 square feet (one acre).





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.20-2;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82;
Am. Ord. 2327, passed 7-13-82)










154.10.656  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.




   Industrial and Manufacturing Uses; Industrial Recreation Sites; 
Warehousing, Wholesaling Facilities; Building Materials Sales and Storage
Yards:  150 feet.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed;  Formerly §154.21-2;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82;
Am. Ord. 2327, passed 7-13-82)










154.10.657  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Minimum Front Yard.











      Forty (40) feet.







      On all corner lots, all yards which front on streets shall be
considered front yards, and as such shall meet the minimum front yard
requirements.











      On all lots having frontage on two streets which do not
intersect, the minimum front yard requirement shall apply to each yard with
street frontage.











   (B)   Minimum Side Yard.











      Twenty (20) feet.











   (C)   Minimum Rear Yard.











      Ten (10) feet, except where the rear yard abuts a residential
zoning district in which case the rear yard shall be not less than forty (40)
feet.




(Ord. 3615.  Passed 9-12-17.)









154.10.658  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.




   The maximum lot coverage limitation is 40%.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)










154.10.659  MAXIMUM HEIGHT.




   Maximum height in this district is 45 feet or four stories.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.22-2;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2327,
passed 7-13-82)










154.10.660  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.




   Off-street parking or loading shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions specified in §154.12.01.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.24-2;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2327,
passed 7-13-82)










154.10.661  SIGNS.



   Refer to Chapter 153.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.25-2;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2327,
passed 7-13-82)










154.10.662  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   Refer to Sections 154.11.01 through 154.16.09.




HISTORY: (Formerly §154.26-2;  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2327,
passed 7-13-82; Am. Ord. 3082, passed 2-24-98)










154.10.663 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.




   New buildings and major facade alterations shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications of Section 154.17.01, Architectural Design
Standards.  (Ord. 3419.  Passed 4-28-09.)











PUD PLANNED UNIT





DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT










154.10.701  PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.




   The purpose of the PUD Planned Unit Development District is to
encourage imaginative and creative urban design that might not otherwise be
possible with conventional zoning districts.  The PUD should be a
well-integrated development in terms of major design elements such as land
uses, building mass, circulation, utilities, and open space.  PUD’s are
specifically applicable in the following circumstances; 





   (A)   In areas having substantial or special public interest towards
protecting the existing or proposed character of development, or of major
scenic views of, for, or through the area;











   (B)    Surrounding individual public or private buildings or grounds
whose uniqueness or aesthetic appeal creates a substantial or special public
interest. Such districts and the regulations established therein shall be in
accord and promote the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan and
other officially adopted plans of the city.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.178-1;  Ord. 2695, passed 6-13-89)










154.10.702  PUD REZONING AND CONCURRENT PLAN APPROVAL




   The PUD District may be applied to any property in the City of West
Carrollton.  Upon the approval of the final development plan, according to
this section, Official Municipal Zoning Map shall be amended to designate the
property “PUD”. 





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.178-2;  Ord. 2695, passed 6-13-89)










154.10.703  REQUEST FOR PUD DISTRICT.




   (A)    Requests for PUD zoning may be initiated by Council, the City
Planning Commission, or by all owners of the property requested to be rezoned.











   (B)    The minimum land area which shall be included in an original
petition for a PUD shall be two acres.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.178-3;  Ord. 2695, passed 6-13-89)










154.10.704  PERMITTED USES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.




   An applicant may propose to include any mixture of residential and
nonresidential land uses in a proposed PUD district, provided that proposed
land uses around the perimeter of the proposed PUD are permitted in the same
zoning district that applies to the adjacent property.  Development
standards for property around the perimeter of the proposed PUD (such as yard
setbacks and similar requirements) shall also closely mirror standards
required for adjacent property. 










154.10.705  PROCEDURES AND PROVISIONS FOR APPROVAL OF PUD DISTRICT.




   A request for the establishment of a PUD District shall include a
preliminary plan, which shall





contain the following information:





   (A)   Statement of intent. The application shall contain a statement
of intent specifying the nature of the special or substantial public
interest: its relationship to the Comprehensive Plan and objectives to be
promoted;











   (B)    Proposed district boundaries. The recommendation shall
include a map or maps indicating the boundaries of the PUD District.











   (C)   Proposed regulations. The preliminary plan shall include
regulations, designed to promote the special purposes of the district, as set
forward in the statement of intent. These regulations at a minimum shall
establish specific requirements for the following design standards: lot size
and frontage; maximum building height; minimum front, side, and rear yard
setbacks. In addition, such regulations may require submission of detailed
site plans, building plans and elevations, and maps indicating the
relationship of proposed development to surrounding or otherwise affected
property in terms of location, amount, character, and continuity of open
space; protection of desirable principal views; convenience of access through
and between buildings or in other locations where appropriate for public
purposes and where such access will reduce pedestrian congestion on public
streets; separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; signs; lighting;
mixtures of proposed uses; general location and nature of screening and
landscaping; off-street parking and loading; and other matters as appropriate
to determinations related to the special public interest of the district and
the objectives to be promoted.











   (D)    Council may authorize exceptions from regulations generally
applying in an PUD District upon making findings that:





      (1)    A plan proposed by an applicant, while not strictly in
accord with regulations applying generally within the district, meets public
purposes and provides public protection to an equivalent or greater degree; or





      (2)    In the particular circumstances of the case, strict
application of a particular regulation or regulations is not necessary for
the accomplishment of public purposes or the provision of public protection,
at the time or in the future. Such exceptions may include, but are not
limited to, relocation or increase in yards or other open space generally
required, reduction in height generally permitted, additional limitations on
uses, and buffering and screening.











   (E)   Conditions for the approval of the preliminary PUD plans. On
receipt of the report of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall
study and review the preliminary PUD to determine:





      (1)    That all requirements have been satisfied; and





      (2)    That a finding can be made that the following specific
conditions are fully met:





         (a)    The PUD District is in conformance with the
Comprehensive Plan for the city.





         (b)    The uses proposed will not be detrimental to
present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a beneficial effect
which could not be achieved under the other zoning districts.





         (c)    The internal streets and major and minor streets
that are proposed shall properly interconnect with the surrounding existing
major and minor streets as designated in the official thoroughfare plan of
the city.





         (d)    The preliminary PUD plan is consistent with the
intent and purpose of this zoning code, to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare of the residents of the city.











   (F)    City Council action.  Approval of the preliminary PUD plan
shall require a favorable vote of the majority of the membership of the City
Council. Approval of the preliminary PUD plan shall be limited to the general
acceptability of the land uses proposed, proposed general density levels and
their interrelationship, and shall not be construed to endorse precise
location of uses, configuration of parcels, or engineering feasibility which
are to be determined in the subsequent preparation of the detailed final PUD
plan. Approval of the preliminary PUD plan shall constitute rezoning of the
parcel to PUD. In taking action, City Council may deny the preliminary PUD
plan or may recommend approval of the plan subject to specified modification.











   (G)    Amendments to PUD regulations.  After a PUD District has
been approved by City Council, it may be amended only by the use of the same
procedures as are applicable for the original adoption of a PUD District.
However, minor adjustments in the final plan, resulting from field
conditions, detailed engineering data, topography, or critical design
criteria pertaining to drives, curb data, retaining walls, swimming pools,
tennis courts, fences, building locations, building configuration, parking
area locations, or other similar project particulars, may be approved by the
Planning Commission. These minor adjustments may be permitted provided they
do not:





      (1)    Increase the density and/or approved building size or
intensity of land use.





      (2)    Change the location or amount of land designated for
specific land use, including open space.





      (3)    Change the internal street and thoroughfare locations
or alignments.





      (4)    Change the mixture of proposed land uses approved for
the PUD District.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.178-4;  Ord. 2695, passed 6-13-89)










154.10.706  PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL.




   (A)    Before a permit is issued for the construction,
reconstruction or alteration of any building in a PUD District, detailed site
plans, building plans and elevations and such other information necessary to
determine compliance with the standards of the PUD District shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for approval.











   (B)    No such permit shall be issued without such approval.
Approval may be granted for the plans as submitted, or conditionally, subject
to stated modifications, or may be denied, with written reasons for the
denial supplied to the applicant.











   (C)    Public hearings may be held in connection with such plan
review process, with such public or other notice as is deemed appropriate,
but shall not be required.











   (D)    Conditions for approval of development in the PUD District.
The Planning Commission shall review all such permits and shall approve,
modify or disapprove them after determining:





      (1)    That all requirements of the zoning district have been
satisfied; and





      (2)    That a finding can be made that the following
conditions are fully met.





         (a)    That the proposed PUD District plan for each
individual portion of the development will serve to create a well-planned,
visually appealing development which will create a positive image for the
community and the neighborhood.





         (b)    That the internal streets, circulation areas and
parking areas are suitable and adequate to accommodate anticipated traffic
within the development: and that ingress/egress to the development will
properly relate to the existing street system in terms of safety and ease of
access.





         (c)    That proposed landscaping, lighting, and signage
be coordinated within the site and create a visually appealing image for this
major entrance to the city and for the surrounding neighborhood.





         (d)    That any exception from the standard requirements
of the zoning code or PUD District are warranted by the design and amenities
incorporated in the PUD District plan and in accordance with the adopted
policy of the Planning Commission and City Council.





         (e)    That any part of the development not used for
structures, parking and loading areas, circulation areas, shall be landscaped.





         (f)    That the PUD District plan is consistent with the
intent of this district to create a visually appealing focal point for the
community and the neighborhood and which is properly planned so as to
minimize negative impacts on the surrounding transportation network.





      (3)    The approval of the detailed final PUD plan for any
section of the total PUD District landholding shall expire if the zoning
certificate or building permits required to implement the plan are not
obtained within two years of the date of approval. The Planning Commission
may extend the time limit of approval for a detailed final PUD plan if it
finds the detailed final PUD plan still meets the original conditions for
approval and there has been evidence that reasonable efforts have been made
to accomplish the plan. The Planning Commission shall not consider or grant
any extension when a zoning map change or text amendment has been enacted
subsequent to the approval of the original of the final PUD plan which would
effect the property subject to the plan.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.178-5 ;  Ord. 2695, passed 6-13-89; Am. Ord. 3079,
passed 1-27-98)











SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS FOR





ZONING DISTRICTS










154.11.01  CONVERSION OF DWELLINGS.




   The conversion of any building into a dwelling, or the conversion of
any dwelling so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or
families, shall be permitted only within the zoning district in which the new
use is permitted under this zoning code. The conversion shall be permitted
only after obtaining a certificate of zoning and otherwise complying with the
other provisions of this zoning code, and only when the resulting occupancy
will comply with the requirements governing new residential construction in
the district with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per dwelling unit,
dimensions of yards and other open spaces, and off-street parking. Each
conversion shall be subject also to the further requirements as may be
specified hereinafter within the chapter applying to the district.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.179 (L))










154.11.02  FENCING AND WALL REGULATIONS.




   All fences and walls shall be in conformance with the following
provisions, except as otherwise required for screening under the provisions
of this chapter.











HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.179(K))











   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them
respectively:





      (1)   Corner side yard.  On a corner lot, the area between
the principal building and the side lot line which abuts a public street,
extending from the front line of the building to the rear line of the
building, is considered to be the corner side yard.





      (2)   Fence.  A barrier erected to enclose, screen or
separate any premises or part of any premises from adjoining premises.  For
the purposes of this section, walls, hedges, shrubbery or other natural
vegetation, and trellises or other similar structures when installed in such
a manner shall be included within this definition.





      (3)   Fence height.  The vertical distance from the lowest
adjoining finished grade, either natural or filled, to the topmost portion of
the fence.  Fence posts or ornamental projections may exceed the maximum
permitted fence height by up to six (6) inches.





      (4)   Ornamental fence.  A fence which is more than fifty
percent (50%) open that is intended to decorate, accent, or frame a feature
of the landscape primarily for aesthetic appeal, and does not serve the
purpose of enclosing, screening, or separating premises or part of any
premises from adjoining premises.





      (5)   Required front yards.  The minimum area of open space
extending along the full frontage of a lot measured from the street
right-of-way line to the closest permitted point of a building or structure,
as required within each zoning district.  This area is also referred to as
the required building setback. 
('70 Code §1319.01; amend. Ord. 2170, passed 12-11-79; amend. Ord. 2890,
passed 2-9-93)











   (B)   Classification of Fences.  Fences are classified as follows
for the purposes of this section:











   Class 1:  Masonry walls.





   Class 2:  Iron, wood pickets and wood split rail (more than 50% open).





   Class 3:  Wood or other materials (more than 80% open).





   Class 4:  Wood or other materials (less than 80% open).





   Class 5:  Woven wire, excluding chicken wire (more than 80% open).





   Class 6:  Barbed wire or sharp-pointed fences.





   Class 7:  Hedges, shrubbery, or similar natural vegetation.  (Ord.
2890, passed 2-9-93;  amend. Ord. 2952, passed 9-27-94)











   (C)   Permit, Plan and Inspection.





      (1)   In any district, no fence shall be installed unless and
until a permit for that purpose shall have been issued by the Building 
Inspection Division.  Application for such permit shall be made in writing
and shall be accompanied by plans or drawings showing the actual shape and
dimension of the lot on which the fence is to be installed; the exact
location, height, type of material and length of the proposed fence; and the
location of all buildings on the lot.  The permit fees for fence permits
shall be as set forth in Section 37.27 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule,
of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton.





      (2)   It shall be the duty of each property owner to determine
property lines and to ascertain that the fence thus constructed does not
deviate from the plans as approved by the Building Inspector and the fence
does not encroach on another lot or parcel of land.  The city shall conduct
an inspection to determine that the fence is constructed in accordance with
the plans submitted for a permit as outlined in subsection (C)(1) hereof;
provided, however, that the issuance of the permit by the city shall not be
construed to mean the city has determined the fence is not encroaching on
another lot, nor shall it relieve the property owner of the duty imnposed on
him herein. 
(Ord. 3346, passed 7-10-07; amend. Ord. 3436, passed 12-22-09.)





      (3)   Ornamental fences not exceeding 42 inches in height
shall not require a permit or inspection.











   (D)   Location and Height.





      (1)   Subsection (E), Intersection Visibility, applies to all
fences.





      (2)   Ornamental fences up to 42 inches in height may be
located in any yard.





      (3)   Residential and Agricultural Districts.  Fences and
walls within any Residential (R), Office Residential (O-R), Office (O),
Limited Development (L-D), Heritage (H), Residential Planned Unit Development
(R-PUD), or Agricultural (A) Zoning District shall conform to the following
requirements:





         (a)   Required front yards.  Class 2 fences may be
erected up to a maximum height of 42 inches and Class 7 fences may be planted
and maintained up to 30 inches, except on corner lots, where approval must be
obtained by the Service Director based on the relation of the fence to the
intersection.  These fences may be located up to and on the front property
line, subject to the requirements of subsection (E).





         (b)   Side, corner side, or rear yards.  Class 1, 2, 3,
4, 5 or 7 fences may be erected up to a maximum height of 72 inches.  Fences
in side or rear yards may be located up to and on the side or rear lot line,
subject to the requirements of Subsection (E).  Fences in corner side yards
may not be located closer than three (3) feet to the corner side lot line,
except where the lot does not meet minimum lot frontage requirements, in
which case the fence may be located up to and on the corner side lot line,
subject to the requirements of Subsection (E).





      (4)   Commercial Districts.  Fences and walls within
Commercial (B), City Center (CC), Olde Downtown (OD), and Planned Unit
Development (PUD) Zoning Districts including those associated with all
conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the following requirements.





         (a)   Required front yards.  No fences shall be
permitted in the required front yard.





         (b)   Side, corner side, or rear yards.  Class 1, 2, 3,
4, 5 or 7 fences may be erected up to a maximum height of 72 inches.  Fences
in side or rear yards may be located up to and on the side or rear lot line,
subject to the requirements of Subsection (E).  Fences in corner side yards
may not be located closer than three (3) feet to the corner side lot line,
except where the lot does not meet minimum lot frontage requirements, in
which case the fence may be located up to and on the corner side lot line,
subject to the requirements of Subsection (E).





      (5)   Industrial Districts.  Fences and walls within Business
Park and Manufacturing (M) Zoning Districts including those associated with
all conditionally permitted uses shall conform to the following requirements:





         (a)   Required front yards.  No fences shall be
permitted in the required front yard.





         (b)   Side, corner side, or rear yards.  Class 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6 or 7 fences may be erected up to a maximum height of 96 inches. 
Fences in side or rear yards in these districts may be located up to and on
the side or rear lot line, subject to the requirements of Subsection (E). 
Fences in corner side yards in these districts may not be located closer than
three (3) feet to the corner side lot line, except where the lot does not
meet minimum lot frontage requirements, in which case the fence may be
located up to and on the corner side lot line subject to the requirements of
Subsection (E).





(Ord. 2170, passed 12-11-79; amend. Ord. 2890, passed 2-9-93)  Penalty, see
§150.99(D))











   (E)   Intersection Visibility.  On corner lots no fence shall be
erected, placed, or maintained within the public right-of-way or within the
triangular yard space formed by the intersecting street lines and a line
joining points on such street lines 50 feet from the point of intersection of
the street lines unless reviewed and approved by the Service Director.





(Ord. 2170, passed 12-11-79; amend. Ord. 2890, passed 2-9-93)  Penalty, see
§150.99(D))











   (F)   Construction Requirements.





      (1)   A fence that is supported by posts on the side of the
fence shall be erected so that exposed posts and supporting cross-elements
face the interior of the property and the finished surface faces outward to
adjoning properties or public rights-of-way.





      (2)   Fences shall be constructed of commonly used fencing
material, such as wood, chain link, masonry walls, or wrought iron, and shall
not consist of discarded materials or other materials such as corrugated
metal, garage doors or drywall, or any materials resembling these.  (Ord.
2890, passed 2-9-93)  Penalty, see §150.99(D))





      (3)   The use of poured concrete, concrete masonry unit, metal
panel, corrugated metal, rebar or other similar product where the surface of
such material is exposed and visible from any direction, shall be prohibited
unless specifically permitted elsewhere in this section.











   (G)   Recreational Facilities.





      (1)   Swimming pools.  Swimming pools shall be surrounded by
a fence not less than five feet in height with the widest opening dimension
not exceeding four inches, and all doorways and entrances into the pool area
shall be equipped with gates of equal height with the fence, and shall be
provided with latches.  This requirement shall not apply to above ground
pools. 
(Ord. 2170, passed 12-11-79; amend Ord. 2890, passed 2-9-93)  Penalty, see
§150.99(D))





      (2)   Tennis courts.  A fence enclosing a tennis court may
have a maximum height of twelve (12) feet, provided any part of such fence
above six (6) feet must be constructed of an open material that minimally
obstructs vision.











   (H)   Barbed Wire Fences.  In districts where permitted, the barbed
wire or sharp-pointed sections of fences shall not be lower than a height of
96 inches.  The barbed wire must face away from the side of the fence that
fronts a sidewalk or public way. 
(Ord. 2170, passed 12-11-79)  Penalty, see §150.99(D))











   (I)   Electrified Fences.  Electrified fences may only be erected
upon approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals.  Authority to erect an
electrified fence may be granted only on proof being shown that no harm to
the public will result and that there is a definite and unusual situation
which requires such a fence. 
(Ord. 2170, passed 12-11-79)  Penalty see §150.99(D))











   (J)   Height of Fences Atop Retaining Walls.  A combination fence
and retaining wall may be erected.  The retaining wall portion may be
erected up to the level of the higher finished grade.  The fence portion
must be of the class and height permitted within the applicable district. 
These measurements shall be made at the point of the finished grade. 
(Ord. 2170, passed 12-11- 79)  Penalty, see §150.99(D))











   (K)   Fences Around Trash Receptacles. 





      (1)   All trash receptacles, including dumpsters and grease
containers, sized two (2) cubic yards or larger which are visible from the
public right-of-way shall be enclosed by a view-obscuring fence with a gate
or gates and both the fence and a gate or gates shall not be less than six
feet in height.





      (2)   A fence shall not be required for trash receptacles
meeting any one of the following conditions:





         (a)   Not visible from the public right-of-way.





         (b)   Located on industrial property which does not abut
residential property.





         (c)   Used solely for and as part of an industrial
manufacturing process.





      (3)   A gate shall not be required if the fence opening is not
visible from the public right-of-way and is not visible from residential
property.





      (4)   All fences and gates shall meet the design standards and
building material specifications of the Planning and Building Department, but
in no case shall chain link fence be permitted. 
(Ord. 3404,  passed 1-27-09)











   (L)   Fences or Walls Required by the Planning Commission or the
Board of Zoning Appeals.  The Planning Commission or the Board of Zoning
Appeals may, when acting within their review procedures, exempt a fence from
the provisions of this section when it is determined that the health, safety,
or general welfare would not be impaired by such an exemption. 
(Ord. 2170, passed 12-11-79)











   (M)   Variances.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear any
request for a variance to the requirements of this section as provided in
§154.06.01.  An administrative setback variance may also be granted as
provided in §154.05.03(C).





(Ord. 3459, passed 11-9-10)










154.11.03  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR  NUISANCE VALUES.




   The following minimum standards shall apply to all uses in the M-1 and
the M-2 Districts.





   (A)    Fire and Explosion Hazards.  All activities, including
storage, involving flammable or explosive materials shall include the
provision of adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and
explosion, such safety devices being standard in the industry. Burning of
waste materials in open fire is prohibited at any point.











   (B)    Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases, and Other Forms of Air
Pollution.  No emission of air pollutants shall be permitted which violate
the minimum federal requirements as enforced by the Montgomery County
Combined General Health District.  Dust and other airborne pollutants shall
be minimized through the paving, oiling, or landscaping of the lot area
around any building.











   (C)    Glare, Heat, and Exterior Light.  Any operation producing
intense light or heat, such as high temperature processes like combustions,
welding, or otherwise, shall be performed within an enclosed building and not
be visible beyond any lot line bounding the property whereon the use is
conducted.  No exterior lighting shall be positioned so as to extend light
or glare onto adjacent properties of rights-of-way.











   (D)    Liquid or Solid Wastes.  No discharge at any point into any
public sewer, private sewage disposal system, or stream, or into the ground,
of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water
supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise
cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements, shall be permitted,
except in accord with standards approved by the State Environmental
Protection Agency or such other governmental agency as shall have
jurisdiction of such activities.











   (E)    Noxious Gases.  Processes and operations of permitted uses
capable of dispersing gases or toxic particulates into the atmosphere shall
be hooded or otherwise suitably enclosed.  The emission of the toxic gases
or particulate matter shall be from a stack.











   (F)   Vibrations.  No uses shall be located and no equipment shall
be installed in such a way to produce intense, earthshaking vibrations which
are discernible without instruments at the property lines of the subject
premises.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.183 (A) through (F);  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82;
Am. Ord. 2760, passed 7-10-90)










154.11.04  PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS.




   There may be projections into required yard areas as follows:





   (A)    Architectural features such as awnings, cornices, eaves, and
other similar features may project not more than four feet.











   (B)    Outside stairs and landings projecting not more than six feet.











   (C)    Fire escapes projecting not more than 4.5 feet.











   (D)    Front porches projecting not more than eight (8) feet, when
open on three sides, except for railings or banisters.











   (E)    Bay windows, balconies, or chimneys may project into a front,
side, or rear yard a distance not exceeding three feet, provided, that the
aggregate width of the projection shall not exceed 1/3 of the length of the
wall on which they are located.











   (F)    Open patios and decks may project into rear yards, provided
that they shall be screened by an evergreen hedge or fence not less than four
feet in height maintained in good condition when located within eight feet of
the adjacent property line.  But in no case shall any patio be located less
than three feet from the adjacent property line, or be constructed over a
public utility easement.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.180 (A)(2))










154.11.05  SUPPLEMENTARY HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS. 




   The maximum heights specified for buildings in the appropriate section
of this zoning code shall not apply to:





   (A)    Public and semipublic buildings, churches, and schools,
provided that these are located on the first floor of the buildings and may
provide that for each three feet by which the height of the building exceeds
the maximum height otherwise permitted in the district, its side and rear
yards shall be increased in width or depth by an additional one foot over the
side and rear yards, required for the highest building otherwise permitted in
the district.











   (B)   Bulkheads, elevator penthouses, water tanks, monitors, scenery
lofts, towers, and monuments, provided no linear dimensions of any such
structure exceed 50% of the corresponding street lot line frontage.  Fire
towers, hose towers, cooling towers, gas holders, or other structures, where
the manufacturing process requires more than 50% of the street lot line
frontage, provided, that all the structures above the heights otherwise
permitted in the district shall not occupy more than 25% of the area of the
lot and shall be distant not less than 25 feet in all parts from every lot
line.











   (C)    Church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water
towers, masts and aerials.











   (D)    Parapet walls which extend not more than four feet above the
limiting height of the building.





HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.180(B);  Ord. 2306, passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord.
2397, passed 7-12-83; Am. Ord. 2810, passed 7-23-91)











OFF-STREET PARKING AND





LOADING REQUIREMENTS










154.12.01  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    General Requirements.





      (1)    All buildings, structures, and uses shall provide
off-street parking and off-street loading facilities in accordance with the
provisions specified in this chapter, and all applicants for a zoning
certificate, plan approval or conditional use permit shall include with their
application a plot plan drawn to scale showing the location and arrangement
of any off-street parking or loading required by this chapter.





      (2)    Parking spaces located within a garage structure or
residential driveway, exclusive of sidewalk, common driving lanes and
driveway apron, may be computed as off-street parking spaces.





      (3)    All required off-street loading areas and facilities
shall be located off the street on the same lot as the building or use being
served, and may occupy all or part of any required side or rear yard area,
except that no loading area shall be located adjacent to any L-D, R, or O-R
District.  No permitted off-street loading space shall be located closer
than 50 feet to any lot in an R District, or any residential lot in an O-R
District, unless wholly enclosed within a building.





      (4)    Off-street Parking and Loading Space Dimensions.





         (a)    Each off-street parking space shall be a minimum
of nine feet wide and 19 feet long. Measurement of this area shall not
include access drives, aisles, ramps, columns, office or work areas, or areas
devoted to the storage of materials or waste receptacles. Each off-street
parking space shall have direct access to driving access aisles. Driving
access aisles between vehicular parking spaces shall be not less than:





            1.   12 feet in width when serving automobiles at
a 45-degree angle in one direction;





            2.   16 feet in width when serving automobiles
parked at a 60-degree angle in one direction; and





            3.   24 feet in width when serving automobiles
parked perpendicularly.





         (b)    Each off-street loading space shall be a minimum
of 12 feet in width, 65 feet in length and have a minimum vertical clearance
of 15 feet. All off-street loading spaces shall have access from a public
street or alley in such a manner that any vehicle leaving the premises shall
be traveling in a forward motion.





      (5)    Utilization. Off-street parking facilities shall be
used solely for the parking of motor vehicles in operating condition of
patrons, guests, occupants or employees of such uses.





         (a)    In any L-D, R, O-R, or O District, off-street
parking areas shall only be used for the storage or parking of the following:





            1.    Passenger automobiles, vans or pickup trucks.





            2.    Trucks or commercial vehicles which have a
maximum manufacturer's payload capacity not greater than 10,000 pounds; or
which have an overall length not greater than 19 feet, or a width not greater
than 8 feet, or a height not greater than 8-1/2 feet.





         (b)    In any L-D, R, O- R, or O District, overnight
parking or storage of the following shall be prohibited:





            1.    Trucks or commercial vehicles which have a
maximum manufacturer's payload capacity of greater than 10,000 pounds; or
which have an overall length of more than 19 feet, or a width of more than 8
feet, or a height of more than 8-1/2 feet.





            2.    Mobile home dwellings.





            3.    Buses, commercial tractors and semi-trailers
as defined in §70.01, Traffic Code.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.179(M)(1)(g))





      (6)    Lighting.  All lighting used to illuminate an
off-street parking or loading area shall be equipped with suitable shielding
or be so arranged as to reflect light away from adjacent lots, and to prevent
a glare at eye level on surrounding public or private property.





      (7)    Landscaping, Separation and Screening.  Landscaping
and screening shall be provided in accordance with Section 154.13.01.





      (8)    Paving.  All off-street parking areas, loading areas,
driving access aisles or other areas used for vehicular circulation shall be
paved with asphalt, Portland cement concrete, or paver brick installed in an
interlocking pattern per the manufacturer specifications.





         (a)    Except as provided for in §154.12.01(A)(10), the
parking or storage of any motor vehicle on an unpaved area shall be
prohibited.





         (b)    All multi-family residential and nonresidential
off-street parking and loading spaces shall be physically delineated on the
parking area surface by striping designated spaces and shall be continuously
maintained so as to be visibly defined at all times.





      (9)    Drainage.  Storm water drainage facilities shall be
installed in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the City
Engineer, in order to ensure that storm water does not flow onto abutting
property or abutting sidewalks in such a way or quantity that adjoining
property owners or users of the sidewalk would be detrimentally affected or
inconvenienced.





      (10)    Parking of Recreational Vehicles.  The off-street
parking or storage of any recreational vehicle shall be permitted in a
residential district under the following conditions:





         (a)    Recreational vehicles may be parked in front of
the principal building line or in a required front yard only if all of the
following conditions are met:





            1.    Parked or stored on a paved driveway.





            2.    On all corner lots, all yards which front on
streets shall be considered as front yards.





            3.    Parking or storage of any recreational
vehicle exceeding 19 feet in length (excluding the tongue of a trailer), or 8
feet in width, or 8.5 feet in height shall be prohibited, except as provided
in §154.12.01(A)(10)(b).





         (b)    One recreational vehicle may be temporarily
parked on a paved front driveway for a period of time not to exceed 72
consecutive hours within any seven (7) day period.





         (c)    Any recreational vehicle, regardless of size, may
be parked on a paved area of the side or rear yard.  A non-motorized
recreational vehicle may be parked on an unpaved area of a side or rear yard,
provided the ground area under and immediately surrounding where such
vehicles are stored is maintained free of noxious weeds or overgrowth and
debris.





         (d)    Parked or stored recreational vehicles shall not
be connected to electricity, gas or sanitary sewer facilities other than for
temporary maintenance purposes.  At no time shall a recreational vehicle be
used for living or housekeeping purposes.





         (e)    Except as provided for in §154.12.01(A)(10)(b)
above, all recreational vehicles parked or stored on a residentially zoned
property shall be owned and titled to a resident of the premises.





         (f)    Beginning on January 1, 2002, all recreational
vehicles which were legally parked or stored prior to January 1, 2002, and
which do not meet the requirements of §154.12.01(A)(10)(a) through (e),
shall be considered legal, non-conforming accessory uses of land.  Such
non-conforming accessory uses shall be permitted to continue in accordance
with the previous regulations for parking or storing such vehicles, provided
that such parking or storage is not discontinued for a period of 12
consecutive months.  Any non-conforming  accessory recreational vehicle use
which is discontinued or made to conform to the parking and storage
requirements of §154.12.01(A)(10)(a) through (e) shall thereafter conform
with the current requirements and the previous non-conforming accessory
recreational vehicle use shall not be reestablished.





HISTORY: (Ord. 3170, passed 3-13-01)





      (11)    Shared Parking:  Where permitted, agreements
regarding shared parking arrangements are subject to the approval of the
City.  Evidence that peak parking demands for either use does not conflict
must be provided along with written documentation of an agreement to share
specific numbers of parking spaces.  This evidence may include documentation
of business hours and data concerning actual parking utilization.











   (B)    Specific Off-street Parking and Loading Space Requirements. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in all zoning districts of the
city in accordance with the schedule outlined below. The off-street parking
and loading requirements for any use not specified in this zoning code shall
be the same as for a similar permitted use in the particular zoning district,
as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. If commercial, industrial,
and manufacturing establishments are such that shipping and receiving goods
are not an integral part of the business, the loading requirements may be
varied or waived by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.




 






 





TYPE OF USES

 

REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING AND LOADING SPACES*




(1)

 

Manufacturing, Industrial, and Warehouse Uses Parking Requirements:






 

(a)

 

Industrial and manufacturing
plants

 

One parking space for every 500 square feet of floor area or four parking
spaces for each five employees employed on the shift of greatest employment,
whichever is greater.






 

(b)

 

Wholesale and warehouse establishments

 

One space for each employee, plus one space for each 2,000 square feet of
gross floor area.






 

(c)    The Zoning Enforcement Officer may permit these uses to provide
less paved parking area if both of the following standards are met:






 



 

1.    In no instance shall the amount of paved parking area provided be
less than one space per employee on the greatest work shift; plus one space
per 5,000 square feet of floor area; plus one space for each company vehicle
stored at the site.






 



 

2.    Sufficient land area is reserved and identified to accommodate
parking for one parking space for every 500 square feet of floor area.  The
storm water control facilities must be able to handle the parking area for
one space for every 500 square feet of floor area, or capable of increased
capacity to do so.




(2)

 

Manufacturing, Industrial, and Warehouse Uses Loading Requirements:






 

(a)

 

Manufacturing and industrial plants

 

One loading space for every 10,000 square feet of floor area






 

(b)

 

Wholesale and warehouse establishments

 

One loading space for every 7,500 square feet of floor area





 



 



 
 

TYPE OF USES
 

REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING AND LOADING SPACES*



(3)
 
Commercial Uses Parking Requirements:


 
 

Agricultural implement sales and service, automobile sales and service,
vehicle sales

 

One parking space for every 1,000 square feet of enclosed floor area and one
for every 3,000 square feet of open lot area



 
 

Air conditioning; heating; plumbing; roofing services

 

One parking space for every business vehicle and one parking space for every
300 square feet of floor area



 
 

Amusement center

 

One space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area



 
 

Auditoriums, assembly halls, sports arenas and stadiums with fixed seats

 

One parking space for every 3.5 seats



 
 

Auditoriums, assembly halls, sports arenas and stadiums without fixed seats,
health clubs and spas

 

One parking space for every 50 square feet of floor area in the auditorium,
assembly, or meeting room plus one parking space for every 200 square feet of
other floor area



 
 

Auto parts store

 

One space for each 350 sq. ft. of gross floor area



 
 

Banks and savings and loan associations with drive-in facility

 

One parking space for every 200 square feet of floor space, plus one parking
space for every employee, plus three stacking spaces are required for each
drive-in window



 
 

Banks and savings and loan associations without drive-in facility

 

One parking space for every 200 square feet of floor space plus one parking
space for every employee



 
 

Barber shops, beauty parlors, or similar personal services

 

Two parking spaces for each service chair



 
 

Bed and Breakfast

 

One space per guest room



 
 

Bowling alleys

 

Four parking spaces for each bowling lane



 
 

Car wash - full service

 

One space per employee on the busiest shift, one space for drying vehicles,
and two spaces for vehicles waiting for entry are required



 
 

Car wash - self service

 

One space per employee on the busiest shift and four stacking spaces for each
washing stall are required



 
 

Convenience store

 

Five spaces for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area



 
 

Day care centers, nursery schools

 

One space for each staff member and one space for each six children



 
 

Equipment rental

 

One parking space for every 1,000 square feet of floor area



 
 
Funeral home
 

One parking space for every 50 square feet of floor area of the parlor or
viewing room, plus one space for each employee



 
 
Furniture stores, appliance sales, carpet sales, contractor's showroom
 

One parking space for every 800 square feet of floor area, including
warehouse area; plus one parking space for each employee; plus business
vehicle parking.  A minimum of five customer parking spaces must be provided



 
 

Home occupation

 

One additional parking space



 
 

Miniature Golf Course

 

One Space per Hole, plus one space per employee



 
 

Motels

 

1.2 parking spaces per one bedroom; plus parking spaces as required for
restaurants, assembly rooms, and related facilities



 
 

Nursery or green house

 

One space for each 1,000 square feet of total inside sales area and one space
for each 2,000 square feet of outside sales area



 
 

Oil change shop

 

One space is required for each employee on the busiest shift, and two
stacking spaces are required for each service bay



 
 

Photography studio

 

One space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area



 
 

Printing and publishing

 

One space for each 1,000 sq. ft of gross floor area, and one space per
employee



 
 

Recreation and amusement facilities

 

One parking space for every five customers based on maximum capacity; plus
one parking space for every two employees



 
 

Restaurants

 





 
 

   Fast-food restaurants

 

One parking space for every two persons of capacity; plus five stacking
parking spaces for drive-thru service



 
 

   Fast-food restaurants with no seating

 

Five stacking parking places; plus one parking space per 50 square feet of
floor area



 
 

   Sit-down restaurants

 

One parking space for each two employees on the shift of greatest employment
plus one parking space per three seats of capacity



 
 

Retail sales and service, grocery stores and supermarkets, and convenience,
discount, and variety stores

 





 
 

   Individual occupancy

 

One parking space for every 250 square feet of floor area



 
 
   Multiple occupancy
 

One parking space for every 300 square feet of floor area, excluding theaters
which require additional parking spaces as required in this chapter



 
 
Self-service laundries
 

One parking space for every three machines



 
 
Self-service storage facility
 
One space for each 100 storage spaces, plus one space for each employee


 
 
Service stations
 

One parking space for each employee; plus two parking spaces for each service
stall, or a minimum of six parking spaces whichever is greater



 
 
Taverns, cocktail lounges
 

One parking space per three persons of capacity



 
 

Theaters

 

One parking space per 3.5 seats





 



 



 
 


TYPE OF USES
 

REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING AND LOADING SPACES*



(4)
 
Commercial Uses Loading Requirements


 
 
All commercial
 

One loading space for first 10,000 square feet of floor area; plus one
loading space for each additional 20,000 square feet of floor area



(5)
 
Business and Professional Offices:


 
 
General offices
 

One parking space for every 300 square feet of floor area



 
 
Medical/dental offices
 

One parking space for every 200 feet of floor area



 
 
Veterinary office/ animal hospital
 

One parking space for every 400 square feet of floor area



(6)
 
Business and Professional Office Loading Requirements


 
 

 
None required


(7)
 

Churches, Schools, and Other Public and Semi-Public Uses Parking Requirements:



 
 

Places of public assembly including churches, synagogues, gymnasiums

 

One parking space for every 4.5 seats



 
 

Elementary and junior high schools

 

One parking space for every 25 classroom seats, or one parking space for
every 3.5 seats in the main auditorium, whichever is greater



 
 

High schools

 

One space for each staff member plus one space for each 8 students, or one
space for each 4.5 seats in



 
 

Hospitals

 

One parking space for every two beds



 
 

Kindergartens, public or private, and preschool

 

Three parking spaces for every ten children



 
 

Nursing homes

 

One parking space for every four beds



(8)
 

Churches, Schools, and Other Publicand Semi-Public Uses Loading Requirements



 
 



 

None required



(9)
 

Residential Uses Parking Requirements:



 
 

Housing for the elderly

 

One parking space per two dwelling units; plus one parking space for each
full-time staff person employed by the facility



 
 

Single-family and two-family dwellings

 

Two parking spaces per dwelling unit



 
 

Multiple-family dwellings

 

1.5 parking spaces for each efficiency or 1 bedroom unit, plus 1.75 parking
spaces for each 2 bedroom unit, plus 2.25 parking spaces for each 3 or more
bedroom unit



(10)
 

Residential Uses Loading Requirements:



 
 



 

None required





 




HISTORY:  (Formerly §154.179; Ord. 2097, passed 9-26-78; Am. Ord. 2306,
passed 2-23-82; Am. Ord. 2399, passed 8-9-83; Am. Ord. 2639, passed 1-26-88;
Am. Ord. 2702, passed 2-28-89; Am. Ord. 2768, passed 1-22-91; Am. Ord. 2854,
passed 4-14-92; Am.Ord. 2909, passed 10-5-93; Am. Ord. 3031, passed 10-22-96;
Am. Ord. 3082, passed 2-24-98)










154.13.01  LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS: SCREENING, BUFFER YARDS AND TREE LAWNS.




   This section provides minimum landscaping, screening and buffer yard
standards for the development of land in order to provide suitable screening
between incompatible land uses; to screen from view visually undesirable
uses; to provide attractive views from roads and adjacent properties; to
protect, preserve and promote the aesthetic appeal, character and value of
the surrounding neighborhoods; and to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the community through the reduction of noise, air and visual pollution,
and artificial light glare.  Nothing in this section shall prevent the
provision of landscaping in excess of the minimums specified.





   (A)   Applicability. This section shall apply to new property
development, and any collective substantial expansion of existing structures;
except for individual single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and the
construction of parking lots of five spaces or less. Substantial expansion of
existing structures shall be defined based on the criteria established below:










 


When existing structure is...

 
A substantial expansion is...


 
 
0-1,000 Sq. Ft.
 
50% or greater


 
 
1,001-10,000 Sq. Ft.
 
40% or greater


 
 
10,001-25,000 Sq. Ft.
 
30% or greater


 
 
25,001-50,000 Sq. Ft.
 
20% or greater


 
 
50,001 Sq. Ft. and larger
 
10% or greater










   (B)    General Requirements for Submission. A landscape plan shall
be submitted for any property to which this section applies.  When new
property development, or the expansion of an existing structure, involves the
construction of more than 50,000 square feet of floor area, the landscape
plan shall be prepared by a Landscape Architect, registered in the State of
Ohio.  All landscape plans shall contain the following information:





      (1)    Plans must be at a reasonable scale to indicate all
types of proposed landscape improvements at a minimum of 1 inch equals 20
feet and shall at least include the following information:





         (a)   North arrow and scale.





         (b)   The name of the applicant/owner.





         (c)    The name, registration number, address and phone
number of the person or firm responsible for the preparation of the landscape
plans (if applicable).





         (d)    The dates on which plans are submitted or revised.





         (e)   All existing and proposed buildings and other
structures, paved areas, planted areas, water outlets, utility poles, fire
hydrants, light standards, underground utilities, signs, fences, dumpster
locations and other permanent features to be added or retained on the site.





         (f)    All existing plant material to be removed or
retained and a schedule of all new landscaping materials to be installed. 
The plant list shall include the common names, specified installation size,
and on center planting dimensions when applicable.  When the list of plant
material to be removed contains existing trees, the landscape plan shall
justify that building location and placement has been developed with due
consideration given to minimizing removal of trees.  Quantities required
shall be referenced on the plan.





         (g)   All existing and proposed streets, sidewalks,
curbs and gutters, railroad tracks, drainage ditches and other public or
semi-public improvements within and immediately adjacent to the site.





         (h)   All property lines and easements.





         (i)    Any other information which is determined
necessary to adequately review the proposal.





      (2)   Typical details shall be shown for the planting of
trees, shrubs and ground cover, and the installation of retaining walls, and
other landscape features within the landscaped areas.











   (C)    Approval. Approval for landscaped areas shall be as follows:





      (1)    No site or development plan or zoning certificate shall
receive final approval unless a landscape plan meeting all of the
requirements of this Section has been submitted and approved.





      (2)    No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued unless the
following criteria are fully satisfied with regard to the approved landscape
plan:





         (a)    Such plan has been fully implemented on the site;
or





         (b)    Such plan, because of seasonal conditions, cannot
be implemented immediately, but has been guaranteed by a postponed
improvement agreement between the applicant and the city.  Such an agreement
may include a bond or irrevocable letter of credit that guarantees that the
approved landscaping plan will be installed within six months after the date
of posting the bond or irrevocable letter of credit.  A one-month extension
of the planting period may be granted by the Planning Division upon
demonstration by the property owner that such an extension is warranted
because of adverse weather conditions or unavailability of required plant
materials.  No more than three such one-month extensions may be granted. 
Foreclosure proceedings shall be brought against the performance bond or
irrevocable letter of credit if the required landscaping plans have not been
complied with by the end of the approved period.











   (D)    Landscape and Buffer Yard Standards.





      (1)    Minimum Plant Material Specifications. All landscaping
materials shall be installed and maintained according to accepted nursery
industry procedures. At installation, plant material shall meet the following
size minimums:





         (a)    Deciduous trees shall be 1-3/4 inch diameter for
canopy shade and shade trees and 1-1/2 inch diameter for small accent and
ornamental trees (as measured six inches above ground).  Refer to
Recommended Master Plant Material List for listing of trees.





         (b)    Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of four feet
tall.





         (c)   Shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches in height
and width at planting.





      (2)   Maintenance and Replacement for Required Landscape Areas
and Buffer Yards.  All landscaping materials shall be installed in
accordance with accepted, good construction and planting procedures. The
owner/lessee or responsible party of the property shall be responsible for
the continued maintenance of all landscaping materials and areas, and shall
keep them in a proper, neat and orderly appearance, free from refuse and
debris at all times. All unhealthy or dead plant material shall be replaced
within one year, or by the next planting period, whichever comes first.
Violation of these installation and maintenance provisions shall be grounds
for the city to refuse a building occupancy permit, require replacement of
the landscape material or institute legal proceedings to enforce the
provisions of this section.  Proper maintenance should be accomplished by
the following standards:





         (a)    All plant growth in landscaped areas shall be
controlled by pruning, trimming, or other suitable methods so that plant
materials do not interfere with public utilities, restrict pedestrian or
vehicular access, or otherwise constitute a hazard.





         (b)    All planted areas shall be maintained in a
weed-free condition, clear of undesirable undergrowth, and free from refuse
and debris.





         (c)   Replacement plants shall conform to the standards
that govern the original installation.  Dead or unhealthy plants shall be
replaced within the next planting season.





         (d)    Representatives of the city may inspect
landscaping and compare observed conditions with the approved landscaping
plan on file.





      (3)    Buffer Yard Establishment. When a continuous physical
screen is required to prevent visual access from one use to another, then a
buffer yard will be required as identified in the "Landscape Requirements
Matrix" in §154.13.01(I). Once a buffer yard has been approved by the city
and established by the owner, it may not be used, disturbed or altered unless
it complies with the regulations of this section.





      (4)    Protection of Landscaping.  All landscaping shall be
protected from damage by vehicles and pedestrians by the use of curbing,
bollards, fencing, or other devices.











   (E)    Screening and Buffering.  To provide protective screening
and buffers for residential areas adjacent to nonresidential areas, a view
obscuring wall, fence or greenbelt shall be provided by the nonresidential
property owner in accordance with the following:





      (1)    Where vegetative and/or topographic conditions that
provide a natural screening and buffer exists prior to development of
properties in question, every effort shall be made to retain such conditions.
In such cases, additional screening may not be required, provided that
provision is made for maintenance of such areas.





      (2)   The requirement for a wall, fence or greenbelt may be
waived if equivalent screening is provided by existing or planned parks,
parkways, recreation areas or by topography or their natural conditions.





      (3)   The space between such fence, wall or planting screen
and the lot line of the adjoining premises in any residential district shall
be landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs, or evergreen ground cover and
maintained in good condition.











   (F)    Right-of-way, Easements, and Setbacks.





      (1)    Required landscaping may be placed wholly or partially
in the right-of-way, utility or other easements, providing all landscaping
requirements can be fulfilled and written approval is granted by the holder
of the easements and/or right-of-way.





      (2)    Street trees shall be located no greater than 10 feet
behind the right-of-way.  Street trees may be placed within the tree lawn
upon approval of the Parks and Recreation Director and Service Director. 
Shrubs shall not be permitted in tree lawns. Trees placed under overhead
utility wires shall be chosen from the appropriate section of the "Master
Plant Material List."





      (3)    In no case, however, shall landscaping and buffer yards
be established so as to block the sight distance at street or drive
intersections. Sight distance concerns shall be reviewed and approved by the
Service Director. Ground cover and trees with at least eight feet of limbless
trunk may be permitted within the sight distance triangle. In the case of a
city street intersection, the sight triangle shall consist of the area
between points 50 feet along both intersecting streets from their respective
edge of pavements.











   (G)    Landscaping for Vehicular Use Areas.  Landscaping within
parking areas, whether ground cover or upright plant material, is necessary
not only to reduce the generation of heat and water runoff, but to break up,
visually, the expanse of paved areas.  The use of parking islands or
peninsulas strategically placed throughout the parking lot is required to
landscape parking lot interiors.  The use of shade trees in these landscape
areas is encouraged.  All off-street parking areas, access drives or other
vehicle use areas shall be landscaped with plantings of grass, shrubs or
trees according to the following minimum requirements:





      (1)   Amount of Landscaping Required.





         (a)    Landscaping for any outdoor parking area
containing six or more spaces shall be provided around its perimeter as
indicated in the "Landscape Requirements Matrix."





         (b)    Vehicular use areas containing more than 6,000
square feet of area or 20 or more vehicular parking spaces, whichever is
less, shall provide interior landscaping of the peninsular or island types of
uncompacted, well-drained soil as well as perimeter landscaping.  An area
equal to five percent (5%) of the total area devoted to parking space and
parking lanes shall be landscaped and permeable.





      (2)    Interior Landscape Requirements.





         (a)    Minimum area. The minimum landscape area
permitted shall be 112 square feet, with a minimum inside dimension width of
seven feet.





         (b)    Maximum contiguous area. In order to encourage
the required landscape areas to be properly dispersed, no individual
landscape area shall be larger than 350 square feet in size in vehicular use
areas less than 30,000 square feet and no individual area shall be larger
than 1,500 square feet in size in vehicular areas over 30,000 square feet.
Individual landscape areas larger than that indicated above shall be
permitted as long as the additional area is in excess of the required minimum
total for the vehicular use area,





      (3)    Minimum Tree Specifications.





         (a)    Two trees shall be installed for every 5,000
square feet of total ground covered by structures and pavement.





         (b)    To retain visibility, deciduous trees have a
clear trunk of at least five feet above the ground. The remaining area shall
be landscaped with hardwood mulch, shrubs, and/or ground cover, not to exceed
two feet in height.





         (c)    Trees shall be planted at least four foot from
the edge of pavement where vehicles overhang.





         (d)    Permitted trees to fulfill this requirement
include those listed in the appropriate section of the “Recommended List of
Trees for West Carrollton.” Grouped ornamental and evergreen trees cannot
be used to fulfill this requirement.  The required number of trees may be
placed in any landscaped area of sufficient size to support a mature tree
specimen and shall meet the requirements defined in §154.13.01(D) above.





      (4)    Vehicle Overhang. Parked vehicles may hang over the
interior landscaped area no more than two (2) feet. Concrete or other wheel
stops shall be provided to ensure no greater overhang or penetration into the
landscaped area.





      (5)    Grass or ground cover shall be planted on all portions
of the property not occupied by structures, vehicular use areas or other
plant material. Any form of mulch shall only define a landscaped area and
shall not be permitted to be installed in lieu of grass or ground cover.











   (H)    Landscaping for Service Areas and Structures.  Service
structures shall be screened in all zoning districts. Service structures
shall include but not be limited to: loading docks, propane tanks, dumpsters,
outdoor storage areas, electrical transformers, utility vaults and other
equipment or elements providing service to a building or a site. Structures
may be grouped together, however, screening height shall be based upon the
tallest of the structures.





      (1)    Location of Screening. A continuous planting of
evergreen, fence, wall or earthen mound must enclose any service structure on
all sides, unless such structure must be frequently moved or accessed, in
which case screening material shall be established on three sides and shall
be at least one foot taller than the height of the enclosed structure, but
shall not be required to exceed ten feet in height in any case. If the fourth
side is visible from the public right-of-way, it shall be gated and
screened.  Plant material used to screen a service structure shall be an
evergreen species that retains its needles throughout the year.  Deciduous
plant material cannot be used to fulfill this screening requirement.  The
height of the evergreen plant material at installation must be equal to, or
greater than, two-thirds of the height of the service structure(s) and meet
the height and one hundred percent (100%) opacity requirement within four
years.





      (2)    Whenever a service structure is located next to a
building, wall, or vehicular use area, the building, wall, or vehicular use
screening material may fulfill the screening requirement for that side of the
service structure if the building, wall, or screening material is of
sufficient height to meet the height requirements set out in this section.





      (3)    Whenever service structures are screened by plant
material, such material may count toward the fulfillment of required interior
or perimeter landscaping. No interior landscaping shall be required within an
area screened for service structures.





      (4)    Protection of Screening. Whenever screening material is
placed around any trash disposal unit or waste collection unit which is
emptied or removed mechanically on a regular basis, a barrier shall be
provided which will prevent damage to the screening when the container is
moved or emptied.











   (I)    Landscape Requirements Matrix.










 


WHEN...

 

IS PROPOSED TO ABUT...

 

A MINIMUM LANDSCAPE



REQUIREMENT OF...

 

PLANT MATERIAL




Any commercial land use

 

Any L-D, R, or O-R district or land use

 

20 feet side and rear buffer yard is required with...

 

EITHER



(1)   1 shade tree @ 30 feet on-center; and



(2)   A double row 6 feet tall dense hedge.



OR



1.    6 feet solid wall, fence  or earth mound; and



2.    3 feet tall dense hedge @ 3 feet on-center, located on the outside
of the fence or wall; and



3.    1 street tree @ 30 feet on-center.



OR



1.    A double row, staggered planting of evergreen trees, 15 feet
on-center.




Any manufacturing or industrial land use

 

Any L-D, R, or O-R district or land use.

 

20 feet side and rear



buffer yard is required with...

 

EITHER



1.    25 feet wide earthen berm; and



2.    A double row of staggered evergreen trees @ 15 feet on-center



OR



1.   6 feet solid wall or fence; and



2.   3 feet tall dense hedge, located on the outside of the fence or wall.







FOR STORAGE YARDS



1.   6 feet solid wall or fence; and



2.   6 feet tall dense hedge if storage yard is in the front yard or
parallel to access drive




 



 



 


WHEN...

 

IS PROPOSED TO ABUT...

 

A MINIMUM LANDSCAPE



REQUIREMENT OF...

 

PLANT MATERIAL




Any multi-family land use

 

Any L-D, R, or O-R district or land use

 

15 feet side and rear buffer yard is required with...

 

EITHER



1.    1 shade tree @ 30 feet on-center; and



2.   A double row 6 feet dense hedge.



OR



1.   6 feet solid wall, fence or earth mound; and



2.   A 3 feet tall dense hedge, located on the outside of the fence or
wall.



OR



1.   A staggered, double row, planting of evergreen trees @ 15 feet
on-center




Any institutional land use

 

Any L-D, R, or O-R district or land use

 

15 feet side and rear buffer yard is required with...

 

EITHER



(1.   A staggered, double row planting of evergreen trees @ 15 feet
on-center.



OR



1.   A single row 6 feet dense hedge



OR



1.   A 6 feet solid wall or fence; and



2.   1 shade tree @ 30 feet on-center.




Any land use except single family and two-family dwellings

 

The public right-of-way, public or private street

 

Planting within the tree lawn, between the curb and sidewalk or edge or
pavement and sidewalk.

 

1 shade tree @ 30 feet on-center




Any land use except single family and two family dwellings

 

The public right-of-way,public or private street

 

10% of total required front yard area must be landscaped with...

 
A combination of trees,

shrubs, planting beds and/or

perennials in a motif

designed by the owner. This


is in addition to other required landscaping.




 



 



 


WHEN...

 

IS PROPOSED TO ABUT...

 

A MINIMUM LANDSCAPE



REQUIREMENT OF...

 

PLANT MATERIAL




A vehicular use area associated with any district or land use except
single-family residences

 

Any public or private street

 

Five (5) feet perimeter



screening with a 6 inch concrete curb on the parking lot side, and with...

 

EITHER



1.   1 shade tree @ 30 feet on-center; and



2.    shrubs @ 3 feet on-center.



OR



1.   1 accent tree @ 25 feet on-center (1 tree minimum); and



2.   shrubs @ 3 feet on-center.




 




   (J)   Modification. The city shall have the authority to modify any
of the aforementioned requirements when considering a proposed site plan in
order to address unique site-specific conditions or circumstances or with
respect to changes in elevation, environmental impact, durability of plant
material, aesthetic appeal, and any other factor that will result in a more
compatible buffer or screen with the surrounding neighborhood at the time of
application.  The city shall base its decision on all of the following
criteria:





      (1)   The specific conditions which are unique to the
applicant's land.





      (2)    The manner in which the strict application of the
provision of this chapter would deprive the applicant of a reasonable use of
the land in a manner equivalent to the use permitted other landowners in the
same zone.





      (3)   The unique conditions and circumstances are not the
result of actions of the applicant subsequent to the adoption of this section.





      (4)    Reasons that the modification shall preserve, not harm,
the public safety and welfare, and shall not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood.





      (5)    A demonstration that the applicant has provided for a
buffer that achieves the spirit of this section.











   (K)    Specifications for Plant Material.  The above sections
include specifications for plant materials. All plant material shall be
nursery grown in accordance with good horticultural practices.  Plant
material shall meet current standards set by the American Association of
Nurserymen and shall be freshly dug, have outstanding form and be free of
disease, insects and/or damage. Alternatives to these materials that can be
shown to meet both the intent and requirements of this Zoning Code may be
approved as part of a site plan:





      (1)    Shrubs. Shrubs shall be at least 18 inches average
height at the time of planting, and where required for screening, shall form
a continuous, year-round, solid visual screen within five (5) years after
planting.





      (2)    Ground Cover and Grass.  Ground cover shall be planted
a minimum of eight inches (8 in) on center and shall be planted in such a
manner to present a finished appearance and seventy- five percent (75%)
coverage after one (1) complete growing season.  Grass shall be planted in
species normally grown as permanent lawns. Grass species shall be selected to
assure slow growth and low water consumption whenever possible.  If approved
as part of a Site Plan, ground cover may also consist of rocks, pebbles, wood
chips, and other material.





      (3)    Vines.  Shall be at least 12 to 15 inches high at
planting, and are generally used in conjunction with walls and fences.





      (4)   Prohibited Species.  Species considered exotic and
invasive shall not be utilized.  Within any required landscaping, the
following tree species may not be used:










 




Common Name

 
Scientific Name


Box Elder
 
Acer Negundo


Silver Maple
 
Acer Saccharinum


Buckeye, Horsechestnut
 
Aesculus Species


Tree of Heaven
 
Ailanthus Altissima


Paper Birch
 
Betula Papyrifera


European White Birch
 
Betula Pendula


Northern Catalpa
 
Catalpa Speciosa


Ginkgo (Female)
 
Ginkgo Biloba


Osage-orange
 
Maclura Ponifera


Apple
 
Malus Punila


Mulberry
 
Morus Species


Poplar
 
Populus Species


Bradford Pear
 
Pyrus Calleryana “Bradford”


Upright English Oak
 
Quercus Robur “Fastigiata”


Black Locust
 
Robinia Pseudoacacia


Willow
 
Salix Species



European Mountain Ash

 
Sorbus Aucuparia


Moline American Elm
 
Ulmus Americana “Moline”


Siberian Elm
 
Ulmus Pumila











      (5)    In addition to the species listed above, trees which
produce nuts, seeds, or fruit that can create a hazard to pedestrians or
vehicles, shall not be planted in such a manner that the natural dripline of
an average adult tree of the species planted will be any closer than three
feet (3 ft.) of a pedestrian walkway or parking lot.





      (6)   Diversity.  As a rule, streets are often more
attractive when they contain only one kind of tree.  However the use of
several varieties adds interest to the plantings of the city and insures
against the loss of all trees in case of an epidemic disease striking any one
species.  The International Society of Arboriculture’s “Diversification
Formula” will be used as a guideline to prevent over planting of a single
tree species or family.  This formula states that, out of the total tree
planting, no more than 10% should be from one family, and no more than 5%
should be of one species.  See Section L which follows, the “Recommended
Trees for West Carrollton.”











   (L)    Recommended Trees for West Carrollton.  This list of
recommended trees for West Carrollton is designed to encourage an imaginative
selection of landscape trees.  Careful selection will prevent an
over-dependence on a few species.  This compilation will be useful to
residents, nurserymen, horticulturalists, landscapers, developers and
landscape architects. Planting and maintaining a diverse urban forest is the
goal of West Carrollton’s tree programs.  This idea is reflected in
landscape plan approval by the West Carrollton Planning Commission and in the
tree planting and replacement by the city.





      Along an individual street, uniform street tree plantings are
desirable.  However, over-use of a few species is inevitable without a
conscious effort to vary plant species and families.





      This list is divided into three size categories: large trees
which mature at a height of 50 feet or more (Group A); medium trees reaching
a mature height of between 30 and 50 feet (Group B); and small trees which
range from 10 to 30 feet at maturity (Group C).  Tree lawn sizes must
accommodate the tree size planted: Group A (> 7 ft.) Group B (4-7 ft.), Group
C (3-4 ft.). Use under utility lines is limited to small trees (Group C),
although medium trees may be planted as close as 10 lateral feet to utility
lines.





      Trees are alphabetized by their scientific name with the common
name given. Species considered invasive exotics should be avoided. (i.e.
Norway Maple, Acer platanoides).  Other species not on this list must be
approved.











Approved Street Trees for West Carrollton, Ohio











      (1)    Large Trees (Group A).










 




Common Name

 
Scientific Name


Bald Cypress
 
Taxodium Distichum


Black Gum (Tupelo)
 
Nyssa Sylvatica


Bur Oak
 
Quercus Macrocarpa


Chinkapin Oak
 
Quercus Muehlenbergii


Freemani Maple
 
Acer X Freemani


Ginkgo (Male)
 
Gingko Biloba


Green Ash
 
Fraxinus Pennsylvanica


Hybrid Elm
 
Ulmus X Spp.


Japanese Pagoda Tree
 
Sophora Japonica


Katsura Tree
 
Cercidiphyllum Japonicum


Kentucky Coffeetree
 
Gymnocladus Diocus


Lacebark Elm
 
Ulmus Parvifolia


Red Maple (Native)
 
Acer Rubrum


Red Oak
 
Quercus Rubra


River Birch
 
Betula Nigra


Sassafras
 
Sassafras Albinum


Shingle Oak
 
Quercus Imbricaria


Shumard Oak
 
Quercus Shumardii


Silver Linden
 
Tilia Tomentosa


Sugar Maple
 
Acer Saccharum


Swamp White Oak
 
Quercus Bicolor



Sweetgum (Northern Seed Source)

 
Liquidambar Styraciflua


Turkish Filbert
 
Corylus Colurna



White Ash   

 
Fraxinus Americana




 




      (2)   Medium Trees (Group B).










 


Common Name

 
Scientific Name


Amur Corktree
 
Phellodendron Amurense


Hedge Maple
 
Acer Campestre


Honeylocust
 
Gleditsia Triacanthos Var.

Inermis



Purpleglow Maple (Shantung Maple)

 
Acer Truncatum


Sargent Cherry
 
Prunus Sargentii


Sawtooth Oak
 
Quercus Acutissima



 




      (3)   Small Trees (Group C).










 


Common Name

 
Scientific Name


Autumnalis Cherry
 
Prunus Subhirtella Var. Autumnalis


Flowering Crabapple
 
Malus Spp.


Japanese Tree Lilac
 
Syringa Reticulata


Kousa Dogwood
 
Cornus Kousa


Serviceberry
 
Amelanchier Arborea

Amelanchier X

Grandiflora


Thornless Hawthorn
 

Crataegus Crusgalli Var. Inermis











SITE PLAN REVIEW AND ACCESS





MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS










154.14.01  SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)    When Site Plan Required. 




      (1)    A site plan is required when the proposed development
meets any of the following:





         (a)    A conditional use or PUD application;





         (b)    Multi-family dwellings of over six (6) units; or





         (c)    New commercial or industrial property development.





         (d)   A substantial expansion of existing commercial or
industrial structures defined as follows:





            1.   Fifty (50) percent or greater expansion of an
existing structure or structures which comprise(s) one thousand (1,000)
square feet or less.





            2.   Forty (40) percent or greater expansion of an
existing structure or structures which comprise(s) one thousand and one
(1,001) to ten thousand (10,000) square feet.





            3.   Thirty (30) percent or greater expansion of
an existing structure or structures which comprise(s) ten thousand and one
(10,001) to twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet.





            4.   Twenty (20) percent or greater expansion of
an existing structure or structures which comprise(s) twenty five thousand
and one (25,001) to fifty thousand (50,000) square feet.





            5.   Ten (10) percent or greater expansion of an
existing structure or structures which  comprise(s) fifty thousand and one
(50,001) square feet or more.





               (Ord. 3528.  Passed 6-25-13.)





      (2)    In order to promote the appropriate preparation of a
site plan consistent with the goals and objectives of this Zoning Code, the
Planning Commission may encourage and engage in informal discussions with the
applicant prior to formal submission of the site plan.  Such review of
preliminary plans and issues will provide greater assurance that the project
complies with the objectives, standards, and criteria of this Zoning Code
before major design and engineering expenditures have been committed to the
project.  This review reduces the likelihood that major adjustments and
revisions would be required as a result of deficiencies found during the
formal review of the plans.











   (B)    Formal Applications for Site Plan Approval.  All
applications for site plan approval shall be submitted to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer and shall contain the following information:





      (1)    A written description of proposed development that
includes:





         (a)    The applicant’s name, address, and phone number;





         (b)    A signed statement that the applicant is the
owner of the property or officially acting on the owner’s behalf;





         (c)    The address and parcel number of the property;





         (d)    The name and address of the property owner(s) of
record, if the applicant is not the owner;





         (e)    Name and address of the engineer, architect,
and/or surveyor;





         (f)    Project description, including the total number
of structures, units, bedrooms, offices, square feet, total and useable floor
area, parking spaces, employees by shift, and similar related
project-specific information;





         (g)    Project completion schedule/development phases;
and





         (h)    Names and addresses of all contiguous and
adjacent property owners.





      (2)    A traffic impact study (if required according to
§154.14.02).





      (3)    When a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3) is
required in accordance with Ohio  Environmental Protection Agency
regulations, a copy of such plan shall be submitted with the site plan.





      (4)    Site plan drawing(s) which illustrate the following
information:





         (a)    A vicinity map drawn at a scale of 1” = 2000’
and a site/landscape plan at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50
feet, with north arrow indicated;





         (b)    The gross and net acreage of all parcels in the
project;





         (c)    Land uses, zoning classification, and existing
structures on the subject parcel and adjoining parcels;





         (d)    Location of proposed and/or existing property
lines, dimensions, legal descriptions, setback lines, and monument locations;





         (e)    Existing topographic elevations at two-foot
intervals, proposed grades, and direction of drainage flows;





         (f)    Location and type of existing trees on the site
with a diameter of six inches (6") or more at four and one-half feet (4-1/2')
feet above grade.  Included with the location of the tree should be the
associated “drip line;”





         (g)    Location and elevations of existing watercourses
and water bodies, including natural and/or man-made surface drainage ways,
flood plains, and wetlands;





         (h)    Location of existing and proposed buildings and
intended uses thereof, as well as the length, width, and height of each
building;





         (i)    Proposed location of accessory structures,
buildings, and uses including, but not limited to, all flagpoles, light
poles, bulkheads, docks, storage sheds, transformers, air conditioners,
generators, and similar equipment, and the method of screening where
applicable;





         (j)    Location of existing public roads, rights-of-way
and private easements of record, and abutting streets;





         (k)    Location and dimensions of proposed streets,
drives, curb cuts, and access easements, as well as acceleration,
deceleration, and passing lanes (if any) serving the development;





         (l)    Location, design, and dimensions of existing
and/or proposed curbing, barrier-free access, carports, parking areas
(including indication of all spaces and method of surfacing), fire lanes, and
all lighting thereof;





         (m)    Location, size, and characteristics of all
loading and unloading areas;





         (n)    Location and design of all sidewalks, walkways,
bicycle paths, and areas for public use;





         (o)    Location of water supply lines and/or wells
including fire hydrants and shut off valves, and the location and design of
storm sewers, retention or detention ponds, waste water lines, clean out
locations, connection points, and treatment systems including septic systems,
if applicable;





         (p)    Location of all other utilities on the site
including but not limited to natural gas, electric, cable TV, telephone, and
steam;





         (q)    Proposed location, dimensions and details of
common open spaces and common facilities such as community buildings or
swimming pools, if applicable;





         (r)    Location, size, and specifications of all signs
and advertising features;





         (s)    Exterior lighting locations with area of
illumination illustrated, as well as the type of fixtures and shielding to be
used;





         (t)    Location and specifications for all fences,
walls, and other screening features with cross-sections;





         (u)    Location and specifications for all proposed
perimeter and internal landscaping, and other buffering features.  For each
new landscape material, the proposed size at the time of planting must be
indicated.  All vegetation to be retained on the site must also be
indicated, as well as its typical size by general location, or range of sizes
as appropriate;





         (v)    Location, size, and specifications for screening
of all trash receptacles and other solid waste disposal facilities;





         (w)    Location and specifications for any existing or
proposed above or below ground storage facilities for any chemicals, salts,
flammable materials or hazardous materials, as well as any containment
structures or clear zones required by government authorities;





         (x)    Identification of any significant site amenities
or unique natural features;





         (y)    Identification of any significant views onto or
from the site, to or from adjoining areas;  and





         (z)    North arrow, scale, and date of original
submittal and last revision.











   (C)    Site Plan Review.





      (1)    Approval Process.  All applications for site plan
approval shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer.  Once deemed
to be complete, the Planning Commission shall review all submitted materials
and may approve (or approve with modifications) a site plan and authorize the
issuance of a zoning certificate upon finding said plans are consistent with
the purposes, objectives, and requirements of this Zoning Code.





         (a)    The Planning Commission shall take action on any
site plan submitted under this section within sixty (60) days from the time
the Zoning Enforcement Officer receives a complete submission of required
materials.  Any person submitting a site plan may agree to a longer review
period by the Planning Commission.





         (b)    Prior to authorizing the issuance of zoning
certificates, the Board may seek expert advice or cause special studies to be
made for input to its review of any plans or proposals submitted.  Proposed
building plans shall be reviewed by  building officials and authorized
representatives of the Fire Department to assure conformance with appropriate
fire, safety, building, and sanitary conditions. 





         (c)    The applicant may be requested or may volunteer
to provide additional information or re-study all or part of the proposal, or
to have additional studies done. The costs of securing expert advise or
studies shall be borne by the applicant, but in no event shall such cost
exceed the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000) unless agreed to by the
applicant.  The Planning Commission may submit any or all site plans and
proposals to any other similar organization for review and recommendations
prior to acting on any such plan.





         (d)    When a particular site plan involves a variance
request and/or conditional use approval, the Planning Commission may consider
such matters concurrently with site plan approval provided all other
applicable hearing and notification requirements are met. 





      (2)    Review Criteria.  All site plans shall be reviewed on
the basis of uniform criteria that advance the principals of good site design
to provide safe vehicular access and pedestrian movement.  Site plans shall
also be reviewed on the basis of achieving site designs that will promote a
healthy natural and built environment for residents and will advance
principles defined in applicable community planning documents and this Zoning
Code.  Specific approval criteria include the following:





         (a)    The site plan shall show (consistent with the
findings of a Traffic Impact Study if included) that a proper relationship
will exist between thoroughfares, service roads, driveways, and parking areas
to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety on both public and
private lands.





         (b)    All development features, including the principal
buildings, open spaces, service roads, driveways and parking areas, shall be
so located and related as to minimize the possibility of adverse effects upon
adjacent development.





         (c)    Building location and placement shall be
developed with consideration given to minimizing removal of trees (in
accordance with former §154.13.01(B)(1)(f) and change of topography.





         (d)    Maximum visual and auditory privacy for
surrounding properties and occupants shall be provided through the design of
the relationship among buildings, fences and walls, landscaping, topography,
and open space.





         (e)    Parking area landscaping and screening shall
channel traffic flow in a safe manner, and on-site traffic circulation shall
be designed to provide adequate access for fire and police protection, and
minimize interference with the traffic carrying capacity of adjacent streets.





         (f)    Refuse storage and pick-up facilities shall be
indicated on the site plan and shall be fenced, screened, or landscaped to
prevent blowing or scattering of refuse, and to provide an adequate visual
barrier from locations both on- and off-site.





         (g)    All utilities on-site shall be located
underground.





         (h)    Grading and surface drainage provisions shall be
designed to minimize adverse effects on abutting properties, streams, and
public streets, and to minimize the possibility of erosion in a manner
consistent with the requirements of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWP3).





         (i)    The design and construction standards of all
private roads, driveways, and parking areas, shall conform to the provisions
of former §154.12.01 and/or as may be recommended through engineering
review.  All private streets, driveways, and parking areas are to be of a
useable shape and improved with asphalt, concrete, or other durable and
dustless pavement or surface.





         (j)    When a proposed site plan includes a conditional
use and/or variance, respective standards and conditions contained in
Articles 154.06.01 and 154.07.01 shall be met.





      (3)    Action on Site Plans.





         (a)    The Planning Commission shall take one of three
actions on a site plan as described below:





            1.    A site plan may be approved as submitted.





            2.    A site plan may be approved with
modifications expressly stated in a motion passed by the Planning Commission.





            3.    A site plan may be approved as submitted (or
with modifications) in phases as described in subsection F of this Section.





         (b)    Within 180 days following action by the Planning
Commission, the applicant shall obtain a Zoning Permit in accordance with the
requirements in §154.05.07.











   (D)    Conformance with Approved Site Plans.  All aspects of the
development shall conform to the approved site plan.











   (E)    Amendments to Approved Site Plans.  Amendments to approved
site plans may be made in the same manner as an original site plan approval





except that an applicant need not resubmit information that has already been
submitted as part of a previous site plan review process.











   (F)    Phased Site Plans.  In order to assure that a project will
be developed in a manner consistent with the purposes of this Zoning Code,
the Planning Commission may require or agree that the site plan(s) for a
project be submitted indicating development in phases, if such project can
logically be divided into phases.  The Planning Commission shall review the
entire project for conformance with all applicable regulations in this Code
and shall give preliminary approval to the entire project if it so
conforms.  However, the Planning Commission shall also have the power to
limit final approval and authorization for the Zoning Enforcement Officer to
issue zoning or conditional zoning certificates to one section or phase of
the total development at a time.  Approval of subsequent phases shall be
given subject to the following:





      (1)    Upon substantial compliance with the site plan(s) given
preliminary approval; and





      (2)    Upon conformance with all applicable regulations of
this Zoning Code; and





      (3)    Upon a finding by the Planning Commission that all
preceding phases conform to all requirements of this Zoning Code and conform
to approved site plans.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)











   (G)   Guarantee for Installation of Public Improvements.





      (1)   All site improvements shall conform to the approved site
plan and construction plans. 





      (2)   To provide assurance to the City that public
improvements will be completed once construction has begun, the developer
shall furnish a bond executed by a surety company, letter of credit, or
certified check equal to the cost of construction of such public improvements
as shown on the approved plans, and based on an estimate approved by the City
Manager as advised by the Service Director and in a form approved by the Law
Director.  Such surety shall be provided prior to issuance of a building
permit for the project.  Letters of credit shall not permit draws by the
developer without the express approval of the City. 





         (a)   For the purposes of this section, construction
shall be defined as any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate
related to one or more of the following public improvements: 
earth-disturbing activities including clearing, excavating, filling, and
grading of property; driveway approaches; sidewalks; street surfacing; curbs,
gutters, and public sanitary sewers; public water supply; stormwater
detention facilities; stormwater best management practices for runoff
quality; and street signs.





      (3)   The performance bond, letter of credit, or certified
check shall run to the City and shall provide that the developer, his heirs,
successors and assigns, their agent or servants, upon commencement of
construction, will comply with all applicable terms, conditions, provisions
and requirements of these regulations; will faithfully perform and complete
the work of constructing and installing all public improvements in accordance
with such laws and regulations; will complete all public improvements prior
to issuance of a final occupancy permit for the project; and will complete
all public improvements within one (1) year from the date of final approval
of the building permit, but the bond or letter of credit will run
indefinitely until released by the City.  In no case shall the work be
completed after one (1) year from the date of final approval of the building
permit, unless an extension is granted by the City as specified below. 





      (4)   Upon commencement of construction, if the installation
of any public improvement, for which guarantee has been made by the developer
in the form of bond, letter of credit, or certified check, is not completed
within one (1) year from the date of final approval of the building permit,
the developer may request the City to grant an extension of six (6) months,
provided (s)he can show reasonable cause for inability to complete said
public improvement(s) within the required one (1) year.  A maximum of two
six-month extensions may be granted.  At the expiration of the extension(s),
the City will use as much of the bond, letter of credit, or certified check
as necessary to complete the construction of the public improvements.





      (5)   All public improvements located within the public
right-of-way shall be completed within 14 days of initial excavation, unless
an extension is granted for reasonable cause by the City Manager as advised
by the Service Director and Director of City Planning.





      (6)   As required public improvements are completed, approved,
and accepted, the City Manager, as advised by the Service Director and
Director of City Planning, may reduce the amount of the performance bond,
letter of credit, or certified check.





      (7)   Periodic inspections during the installation of public
improvements shall be made by the City to ensure conformity with the approved
plans and specifications as required by these regulations.





      (8)   The developer shall schedule required inspections at
least forty-eight (48) hours in advance with proper administrative officials.





      (9)   The absence of an inspector from a project during
construction shall not relieve the developer from full responsibility under
this agreement.  Upon acceptable completion of installation of the required
public improvements, the City Manager as advised by the Service Director and
Director of City Planning shall issue a letter to the developer or his/her
agent and such letter shall be sufficient evidence for the release by the
City.





      (10)   When the Service Director and Director of City
Planning, following final inspection of a project, certify to the City
Manager that all public improvements have been constructed in accordance with
City specifications, the City Manager may proceed to accept the facilities
for which bond, letter of credit, or certified check has been posted.





      (11)   Whenever public improvements have not been constructed
in accordance with the agreement and with specifications as established, the
City Manager  as advised by the Service Director and Director of City
Planning may exercise his/her rights of foreclosure under the bond, letter of
credit, or certified check.





      (12)   Should construction not commence prior to expiration of
the building permit and any extensions granted in accordance with this
section, the performance bond, letter of credit, or certified check shall be
released in its entirety by the City. 
(Ord. 3477.  Passed 4-12-11.)










154.14.02  ACCESS MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENT.




   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of these access management regulations
is to promote and protect the public health and safety by providing
development regulations that will result in safer access to property and
safer traffic flow.  It is recognized that land use and site planning issues
are directly linked to the capacity of roadways to efficiently move traffic
through an area and provide safe access to adjoining property.  It is also
recognized that achieving an appropriate balance between roadway access to
adjoining property and the ability of roadways to carry through traffic will
not only reduce future congestion and accident rates, but will also enhance
emergency vehicle response times.  These requirements are further intended
to help achieve the following objectives:





      (1)    Provide a standard set of analytic tools and format for
preparing Traffic Impact Studies.





      (2)    Allow the community to assess the effects that a
proposed project may have on the community by outlining information needed
and evaluation procedures to be used.





      (3)    Help ensure safe and reasonable traffic operating
conditions on streets and intersections after development of the proposed use.





      (4)    Reduce the negative traffic impacts created by
individual developments, which may negatively impact such developments, by
helping to ensure the transportation system can accommodate the expected
traffic safely and efficiently.





      (5)    Realize a comprehensive approach to the overall impacts
of various developments along a corridor or within part of a community rather
than a piecemeal approach.





      (6)    Provide direction to community decision-makers, road
agencies, and developers of expected impacts of a project.





      (7)    Alert the community, transportation agencies, and
developers of improvements or modifications needed to the roadway, access, or
site design.





      (8)    Protect the substantial public investment in the
existing street system.











   (B)    Traffic Impact Study Required.





      (1)    A Traffic Impact Study shall be required and shall be
submitted by an applicant as part of a proposed site plan in accordance with
§154.14.01 when the proposed development will generate or has the potential
to generate more than one hundred (100) vehicle trip ends during the peak
hour of generation according to the most recent version of the ITE trip
generation manual.  A vehicle trip end is the total of entering and exiting
vehicles for the proposed development at full build out and occupancy.





Estimates of traffic volumes shall be based on weekday traffic for locations
at which weekday employment predominates.  Retail development shall include
weekend traffic volumes in the estimates.  Traffic impact studies are not
required for any type of residential subdivision.





      (2)    A Traffic Impact Study shall also be required for new
phases or changes to an existing development where a traffic study is more
than two (2) years old and roadway conditions have changed significantly
(volumes increasing more than two percent (2%) annually).  Additionally, a
Traffic Impact Study shall be required for a change or expansion at an
existing site where it is expected to increase traffic more than one hundred
(100) vehicle trip ends during the peak hour of generation according to the
most recent version of the ITE trip generation manual.











   (C)    Design Years.  The traffic impact study design year horizon
for a proposed development shall be twenty (20) years from opening day. 
However, if the vehicle trip ends in the peak hour of the proposed
development is greater than 100, but less than 400, the design year horizon
shall be ten (10) years from opening day.











   (D)    Traffic Impact Study Contents.





      (1)    Description of the site, surroundings, and study
area:  Illustrations and a narrative should describe the characteristics of
the site and adjacent roadway system (functional classification, lanes, speed
limits, etc.).  This description should include surrounding land uses,
expected development in the vicinity which could influence future traffic
conditions, special site features and a description of any planned roadway
improvements.  The study should define and justify the study area selected
for analysis.





      (2)    Description of the proposed development:  A
description of the proposed development should be provided, such as the
number and types of dwelling units, the gross and usable floor area, the
number of employees, and shift change factors.  Intended phasing or future
expansion should also be noted.





      (3)    Description of existing traffic conditions: 





         (a)    Traffic counts:  Existing conditions including
existing peak-hour traffic volumes (and daily volumes if applicable) on
street(s) adjacent to the site.  Existing counts, including turn movement
counts, for intersections in the vicinity which are expected to be impacted
should be provided.  Traffic count data shall not be more than two (2) years
old.





         (b)    Traffic counts shall be taken on a Tuesday,
Wednesday, or Thursday of non-holiday weeks.





         (c)    Roadway characteristics shall be described and
illustrated, as appropriate.  Features to be addressed include lane
configurations, geometries, signal timing, traffic control devices, posted
speed limits, average running speeds, and any sight distance limitations. 
Existing levels of service shall be calculated for intersections included
within the study area.





         (d)    Existing driveways and potential turning movement
conflicts in the vicinity of the site shall be illustrated and described.





         (e)    The existing right- of-way shall be identified
along with any planned expansion of the right-of-way.





      (4)    Background Traffic Growth:  The traffic impact study
shall examine “before and after” conditions in order to evaluate traffic
impacts associated with the proposed development.  The impacts of all access
alternatives on highway capacity and throughput shall be calculated for the
opening year Build and No-Build conditions and for the design year Build and
No-Build conditions using appropriate computer analysis software as agreed to
and acceptable to the City.





      (5)    Trip Generation: 





         (a)   Forecasted trip generation of the proposed
development for the a.m. (if applicable) and p.m. peak hour and average day
shall be calculated.  This forecast shall be based on the data and
procedures outlined in the most recent edition of Trip Generation published
by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE).





         (b)    Any trip reduction for pass-by trips, transit,
ride sharing, other modes, internal capture rates, etc., shall be based both
on ITE findings and documented survey results acceptable to the agency
reviewers.  The community may elect to reduce the trip reduction rates used.





         (c)    For projects intended to be developed in phases,
the trip generation by phase shall be described.





      (6)    Trip Distribution:





         (a)    The projected traffic generated shall be
distributed (inbound v. outbound, left turn v. right turn) onto the existing
street network to project turning movements at site access points and nearby
intersections where required.





         (b)    Projected turning movements shall be illustrated
in the report.





         (c)    A description of the application of standard
engineering procedures for determining the distribution shall be attached
(trip distribution model, market studies, counts at existing driveways, etc.).





      (7)    Impact Analysis:  Level of service or “capacity”
analysis at the proposed access points using the procedures outlined in the
most recent edition of the Highway Capacity Manual published by the
Transportation Research Board shall be provided.  Before and after capacity
analyses shall be performed for all street intersections where the expected
traffic generated at the site will comprise at least five percent (5%) of the
existing intersection capacity.





      (8)    Access Design/Access Management Standards:  The study
shall include a map and description of the location and design of proposed
access (driveways or new street intersections) including: any sight distance
limitations, dimensions from adjacent driveways and intersections within one
thousand (1,000) feet on either side of the main roadway, data to demonstrate
that the number of driveways proposed is the fewest necessary, and support
that the access points will provide safe and efficient traffic operation.





      (9)    Other Study Items:  The Traffic Impact Study shall
also include the following:





         (a)    Need for, or provision of, any additional
right-of-way where planned or desired by the applicable transportation agency.





         (b)    Changes that should be considered to the site
plan layout.





         (c)    If the use involves a drive-through facility, the
adequacy of the queuing area should be evaluated.





         (d)    If a median crossover is desired, separate
analysis should be provided.





         (e)    If a traffic signal is being requested, the
applicable traffic signal warrants shall be provided along with an analysis
of traffic progression along the roadway through coordination with other
signals.





         (f)    Description of site circulation and available
sight distances at site driveways.





      (10)    Mitigation/Alternatives:  The Traffic Impact Study
shall outline mitigation measures and demonstrate any changes to the level of
service achieved by these measures.  Any alternatives or suggested phasing
of improvements should be described.  The mitigation measures may include
items such as roadway widening, turn lane geometries, changes to
signalization, elimination or combination of access points, or reduction in
the proposed intensity of use.  Any applicable local or State agency shall
review proposed mitigation measures.  The construction and timing of roadway
improvements shall be described.





      (11)    Qualifications of Traffic Impact Study Preparer:  The
preparation of a thorough traffic impact study requires extensive background
and experience in traffic analysis.  The person responsible for the
preparation of the study shall meet the following requirements:





         (a)    Any Traffic Impact Study involving roadway or
traffic signal design work shall be prepared by, or under the supervision of,
a registered engineer (P.E.) with specific training in traffic engineering.





         (b)    The Traffic Impact Study should include a resume
of the preparer responsible for the report.  The Traffic Impact Study may
also include relevant experience of the preparer’s firm.  The study should
also be signed by the preparer with full recognition of potential liability
for the results and recommendations outlined in the report.











   (E)    Access Management Standards. 





      (1)    Access to Parcel:  To preserve and maintain efficient
traffic movement, permitted access to all thoroughfares shall be limited as
defined herein.  A goal of these access management standards is to limit and
reduce the number of driveways in favor of combined driveways and the
construction of service roads to handle access to multiple parcels.  These
regulations are in addition to any other state, or local approvals required.





         (a)    Number of Driveways:  Each lot is permitted to
have a single, two-way driveway except in cases where a Traffic Impact Study
clearly demonstrates the benefits of a second driveway from the standpoint of
traffic movement.  Examples of where a second drive may be justified include
large corner lots where driveways on both streets may be desirable and
instances where two, one-way drives are preferred more than one, two-way
drive.





         (b)    Location of Driveways:  All driveways shall be
located as far as practical from the intersection of public streets.





         (c)   Conditional Approval of Driveways:  As part of
the site plan review process, a site plan may be approved with a specific
driveway location under the condition that an agreement be reached between
the property owner and the City requiring that such driveway(s) be closed
when specific circumstances are met.  Such circumstances may include the
future construction of a service road on adjacent property, the opportunity
for a shared driveway with development of adjacent property, or other
site-specific circumstances.  This conditional approval may be required even
if the driveway(s) conforms to all other requirements of this section.





         (d)    Driveway Alignment:  New driveways shall be
aligned with existing driveways across a street unless such alignment is
shown to be undesirable in a Traffic Impact Study.  Where such alignments
are shown to be undesirable, the centerlines of opposing driveways shall be
offset at least one hundred feet (100').





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)











CONSERVATION DISTRICT DESIGN





REVIEW REGULATIONS










154.15.01  DESIGN REVIEW.




   The purpose of these West Carrollton Conservation District Design
Review Regulations are:





   (A)    To safeguard the architectural integrity and cohesiveness of
the oldest buildings and parts of the community important to the City’s
history in order to contribute to the economic, recreational, cultural, and
educational development of the City of West Carrollton;











   (B)    To maintain and enhance property values to promote the use
of, facilitate reinvestment in, and stimulate revitalization of buildings and
areas found to have historic architectural significance; and











   (C)    To provide controls and procedural standards for the
preservation of older homes in historically significant areas.










154.15.02  DEFINITIONS.




   The following definitions shall apply only to the provisions of the
West Carrollton Conservation District Design Review Regulations of the City
of West Carrollton Zoning Code:











   APPLICANT.  Any owner, owners, person(s), association, partnership, or
corporation who applies for a Certificate of Appropriateness in order to
undertake any change on property subject to these West Carrollton
Conservation District Design Review Regulations.











   WEST CARROLLTON CONSERVATION DISTRICT.  Any area within the corporate
limits of the City of West Carrollton, Ohio, designated by Council to be
subject to the provisions of these West Carrollton Conservation District
Design Review Regulations.










154.15.03  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DESIGN REVIEW ARCHITECT.




   (A)   In order to carry out the efficient review of applications
subject to the Conservation District Design Regulations, the city shall
contract with an Architect familiar with the style and construction of
historic structures, and  licensed as an Architect by the State of Ohio.











   (B)   Within the boundaries of the West Carrollton Conservation
District subject to design review, the Design Review Architect shall review
any demolition permit for a principle structure.










   (C)   After review of the plans for the new construction, addition,
or demolition, the Design Review Architect shall prepare a written report to
the Zoning Enforcement Officer giving his professional opinion about whether
the plans meet the Specific Architectural Design Guidelines contained in
Section 154.15.05.









154.15.04  TRIGGERING MECHANISM FOR DESIGN REVIEW.




   (A)   An application for a Certificate of Appropriateness issued by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be required for all property located
within the West Carrollton Heritage District for the following activities:





      (1)   New construction of a principle structure; or





      (2)   Additions to principle structures; or





      (3)   Demolition of principle structures.











   (B)   Whenever an applicant applies for a Zoning Certificate, the
permit application will be deemed as an application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness.










154.15.05  SPECIFIC ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN GUIDELINES.




   (A)   New Construction of a principal structure.  The minimum
height of a new structure shall be two stories











   (B)   Demolition of principle structures.  In reviewing the
proposed demolition of a principle structure, the Design Review Architect and
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall utilize the following guidelines in their
review and deliberation:





      (1)   A demolition permit shall not be issued by the Building
Inspector unless accompanied by an approved Certificate of Appropriateness. 
Such a Certificate of appropriateness shall be issued by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, after review and comment by the Design Review Architect,
only if the applicant has given clear evidence that one of the following
conditions exist:





         (b)   The structure has incurred extensive damage to its
basic structural elements such as the roof, walls, and foundation requiring
substantial reconstruction and presents an immediate danger to the public
safety as declared by the Chief Building Inspector.





         (c)   The structure has been declared a public nuisance
under Section 150.70 of the West Carrollton Code of Ordinances.





         (d)   The structure is not consistent with other
structures in the district in terms of historic character, architectural
style, construction material, height, setback, mass or use.





         (e)   The square foot cost of meeting the minimum
building code would exceed the square foot market value of similarly used and
improved structures in the district.  If the applicant applies for the
removal of a structure in accordance with this section, the following
evidence shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer:





            (1)   An itemized cost estimate provided by a
qualified architect, engineer, or contractor indicating those items required
to meet the minimum building code; and





            (2)   A market analysis by an appraiser or
qualified real estate professional indicating the square foot value of
similarly used and improved structures in the district; and





            (3)   A demolition cost estimate.










154.15.06  LIMITATION ON ISSUANCE OF ZONING & DEMOLITION PERMITS




   No Demolition Permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector for
demolition of any principle structure within the West Carrollton Conservation
District prior to obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness, in accordance
with the requirements outlined below.










154.15.07  CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.




   (A)   When the owner of a property within the West Carrollton
Conservation District proposes the demolition of a principle structure within
the Conservation District, they shall first apply for and secure a
Certificate of Appropriateness from the Zoning Enforcement Officer in
accordance with the triggering requirements of §154.15.04. The application
for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be made through the Building
Inspector, together with such plans, specifications, and other material as
the Design Review Architect and Zoning Enforcement Officer may need to
adequate review the application for compliance with these regulations.











   (B)    If the proposed demolition is determined by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, after review and comment by the Design Review Architect,
to have no adverse effect on the West Carrollton Conservation District and
does not violate the spirit and purpose of these regulations, then the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall issue the Certificate of Appropriateness.











   (C)    If the Zoning Enforcement Officer, after review and comment
by the Design Review Architect, determines that the proposed demolition will
have an adverse effect on the West Carrollton Conservation District, and does
violate the spirit and purposes of these regulations, then the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall deny issuance of the Certificate of Appropriateness.











   (D)    In the event that the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines
that a Certificate of Appropriateness shall not be issued, they shall notify
the applicant and the Building Inspector in writing of the reasons for such
determination.










154.15.08  PENALTIES.




   Whoever demolishes any principle structure  in violation of these West
Carrollton Conservation District Design Review Regulations shall be deemed in
violation of the Municipal Code and such violation shall be punishable under
§154.05.09 of the Municipal Code.










154.15.09  MINIMUM MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENT.




   The owner of an historic structure or any structure within the West
Carrollton Conservation District shall provide sufficient maintenance and
upkeep for such structure to ensure its perpetuation and to prevent its
destruction by deterioration, whether the building is vacant or inhabited.










154.15.10  SEVERABILITY.




   If any provision of these West Carrollton Conservation District Design
Review Regulations or the application thereof is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of these
regulations which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application and to this end the provisions of these West Carrollton
Conservation District Design Review Regulations are hereby declared severable.





HISTORY: (Newly proposed)











SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS





FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES










154.16.01  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.




   (A)   Location.  Accessory uses, buildings and related structures
may be permitted in any zoning district in association with a principal use
or structure as long as they are incidental and customary to the operation of
the permitted or conditional uses and harmonious with uses upon adjacent
properties.  Accessory uses shall meet all yard requirements for accessory
buildings.











   (B)   Regulations for Various Types of Accessory Buildings. 





      (1)    Detached.  Accessory buildings which have no
structural connection to the principal building shall be regarded as detached
accessory buildings.  Detached accessory buildings shall not be located
closer than five feet from a principal structure.





         (a)    Height.  No detached accessory building may
exceed the height of the principal building or 15 feet, whichever is less,
except when associated with an agricultural use.





         (b)    Front and side yards.  Detached accessory
buildings may not be located within the required front or side yards. 





         (c)    Rear yards.  Detached accessory buildings may be
located within required rear yards.  The total area occupied by all
accessory buildings may not exceed 35% of the area of the required rear
yard.  On corner lots, the rear yard shall be considered to extend across
the entire width of the lot for the purpose of computing the area of the
required rear yard.





         (d)    Setbacks.  Detached accessory buildings shall
not be located closer than five feet to any lot line.  Detached accessory
buildings also shall not be located closer to the road right-of-way than the
principal structure.  Further, no accessory building on a corner lot shall
be closer to the side lot line of an adjacent lot than the minimum side yard
requirement for the zoning district in which the accessory building is
located.





      (2)    Connected.  Accessory buildings which are connected to
the principal building by an open breezeway or covered walkway shall be
regarded as connected accessory buildings.  Connected accessory buildings
shall meet the requirements of detached accessory buildings.  The area of
connecting breezeways or covered walkways shall be included in the
calculation of the area of accessory buildings.





      (3)    Attached.  Accessory buildings that are joined to a
principal building with a permanent structure having a roof, walls and a
foundation, or that are otherwise structurally part of the principal
building, shall be regarded as being part of the principal building for the
purpose of determining setbacks.





         (a)    Yard requirements.  Attached accessory buildings
shall meet all yard requirements for principal buildings.





         (b)    Retail Sales and Services.  Attached retail
sales and services are permitted as accessory uses when clearly incidental to
the principal use.  With the exception of restaurants in conjunction with a
motel, such uses shall be conducted wholly within the principal building, and
without exterior advertising or display.  These activities shall be
conducted solely for the convenience of the employees, patients, patrons,
students, or visitors and not for the general retail public.  In hospitals
and clinics, these accessory uses may include drug stores, florists, gift and
book shops, and cafeterias.  In institutional settings, office buildings,
hotels, country club houses, and airports, such activities may include gift
and book shops, restaurants, cafeterias and coffee shops, lounges, pro shops,
and beauty and barber shops.  HISTORY: (Newly proposed)











   (C)    Maximum Size.  The area of all attached or detached
accessory buildings in residential districts shall not exceed 50% of the
above-ground living area of the principal building or 800 square feet,
whichever is greater. On residential lots larger than one-half acre in size,
the allowable area of accessory buildings shall be increased by 100 square
feet for each 10,000 square feet in excess of one-half acre. The area of any
connected accessory structure shall include breezeways, covered walkways, or
similar structures.











   (D)    Residential Districts.  Any accessory use or structure
incidental and customary to the operation of the permitted or conditional
uses may be permitted if it does not involve the conduct of any business,
trade, or industry. 
(Ord. 3274.  Passed 7-13-04.)










154.16.02  CLUSTER RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.




   The intent of Cluster Residential Subdivisions are to provide for and
encourage flexible and creative development techniques aimed toward providing
a healthy and safe, natural, and built environment. The following
requirements shall be satisfied:





   (A)    Property Ownership Requirements.  Any ownership arrangement,
including fee simple lots or condominiums are permitted in Cluster
Residential Subdivisions.  The arrangement of dwelling units shall comply
with all development standards contained in the applicable zoning district
except as modified below.





      (1)    Permitted Density. The maximum number of housing units
permitted in a Cluster Residential Subdivision is determined by using the
minimum lot area required in the zoning district and shall use the following
formula:





         (TSA/MLA) * 90 percent





         TSA : Total site area in square footage, excluding any area
within the existing public right-of- way or land that is subject to an
existing conservation easement.  Total site area also does not include any
area occupied by ponds that are greater than one acre in size.





         MLA : Minimum lot area in square footage required in a
given zoning district.





         90 percent  = A factor to account for public or private
right-of-way required in a development.





         When  the above formula produces a fractional value, the
number shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.





      (2)    Density Bonus.  At the sole option of the developer, a
bonus of additional housing units will be allowed when required open space is
made available to the public.  For every whole acre of land devoted to
walking/biking trails, equestrian trails, park areas, or other required open
space that is also available for public use, up to one additional housing
unit may be added to overall density, provided, however, that overall density
does not increase by more than fifteen percent (15%) beyond the number of
units allowed.





      (3)    Modifications to Area and Height Regulations.  Minimum
lot area requirements contained in given zoning districts are modified in a
Cluster Residential Subdivision to provide for required open space and to
allow for flexibility in design.  The Planning Commission may modify the
area and height regulations contained in the applicable zoning district if
appropriate to get the promote the best design.





      (4)    Lot Area Requirements.  Dwelling units are not
required to be on individual lots and there are no minimum lot sizes. 
However, when lots are included in a development plan, such lots shall be of
sufficient size and shape to accommodate dwelling units in compliance with
the spacing and yard requirements defined herein.





      (5)    Minimum Yard Depths.  Shall be determined by the
Planning Commission based on the type and height of the residences proposed,
topography, existing and proposed landscaping, and characteristics of
adjacent development.





      (6)    Sewage Disposal and Water.  Cluster Residential
Subdivisions shall be served by public sewage disposal and water facilities
consistent with applicable city regulations.





      (7)    Wetlands in Cluster Residential Subdivisions. 
Wetlands found within a site proposed to be developed as an Cluster
Residential Subdivision must remain in a natural state and no off- site
mitigation of wetlands shall be permitted.





      (8)    Minimum Required Open Space.  All Cluster Residential
Subdivisions shall incorporate not less than 50 percent of the total site’s
acreage as required common open space. This required open space shall be
designed and located to conserve significant natural features and historical
and cultural elements located on the site. In the case of phased
developments, open space shall be provided in a proportional manner with a
developed area.





      (9)    Areas Not Considered Required Open Space.  Areas that
specifically shall not be considered required open space include:





         (a)    Private roads and public road rights-of-way.





         (b)   Public or private parking areas, access ways, and
driveways.





         (c)    Required setbacks between buildings, parking
areas, and project boundaries.





         (d)    Required setbacks between buildings and streets.





         (e)    Required minimum spacing between buildings and
parking areas.





         (f)    Private yards.





         (g)    Land that is subject to preexisting conservation
easements or similar limitations n development.











   (B)    Use of Required Open Space.  Areas designated for required
open space may be:





      (1)    Preserved in its natural state.





      (2)    Designed and intended for the use and/or enjoyment of
residents (or general public) of the proposed development.





      (3)    Utilized as a buffer area to separate a development
from surrounding properties.





      (4)    Utilized for farming when authorized in a conservation
easement or in an Association’s covenants and restrictions.





      (5)    Utilized as wet or dry storm water management ponds or
basins. These ponds or basin may be located partially or entirely within the
required open space.  Easements shall be required to enable the maintenance
of these facilities





      (6)    Used as active recreation areas. These active
recreation areas shall be located in areas with the least impact on natural
amenities and wildlife habitats, of a useable size and shape for the intended
purpose.











   (C)    Design and Location of Required Open Space.  Land that is to
be designated as required open space shall be designed as a connected and
contiguous open space system and all residential properties shall have access
to this open space.











   (D)   Reclamation of Disturbed Open Space. Any areas to be
designated as required open space that is disturbed during construction or
otherwise not preserved in its natural state shall be landscaped with
vegetation that is compatible with the natural characteristics of the site.











   (E)   Future Subdivision and Development of Open Space.  All
required open space shall be restricted from further subdivision or
development by deed restriction, conservation easement, or other agreement in
a form acceptable to the City of West Carrollton.  Subject to permanent
restrictions as set forth above, required open space in a Cluster Residential
Subdivision may be owned by an Association, the City, a Land Trust or other
organization recognized by West Carrollton.  Required open space may be held
by the individual members of a Condominium Association as tenants-in-common
or may be held in common ownership by a Homeowner’s Association, Community
Association, or other similar legal entity.  The City’s legal advisor
shall determine, based on documents submitted with the development plan, that
the Association’s bylaws or code of regulations specifies the following
requirements:





      (1)    Membership in the Association shall be mandatory for
all purchasers of lots in the development or units in the condominium.





      (2)    The Association shall be responsible for maintenance,
control, and insurance of all common areas, including required open space.











   (F)   Conservation Easements.  With the permission of the City, the
owner(s) of the required open space may, in accordance with provisions of ORC
§5301.67 - .70, grant or transfer a conservation easement to any entity
described in ORC §5301.68, provided that the entity and the provisions of
the conservation easements are acceptable to the City of West Carrollton. 
When a deed restriction is proposed as the method of restricting further
subdivision of land designated as open space, the City of West Carrollton
shall be named as a party to such deed restrictions with approval authority
over any changes thereto.  The conveyance must contain appropriate provision
for assignment of the conservation easement to another entity authorized to
hold conservation easements under ORC §5301.68, in the event that the
original grantee becomes unwilling or unable to ensure compliance with the
provisions of the conservation easement.











   (G)   Development Plan Submission Requirements.  All proposed
Cluster Residential Subdivisions shall provide a site analysis and a
development plan in accordance  with all requirements set forth in
§154.14.01.  This site analysis and development plan, together with any
required application forms, shall be transmitted to and reviewed by the
Planning Commission in the manner described herein.











   (H)   Amendments.  After a Cluster Residential Subdivision has been
approved, adjustments, or rearrangements of buildings, parking areas,
entrances, heights, or yards may be requested. Changes, as defined herein, 
may be permitted with approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with
§154.14.01.










154.16.03  HOME OCCUPATIONS.




   Home occupations shall meet the following requirements:





   (A)    Not more than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling unit
shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.











   (B)    No home occupation shall be permitted in any accessory
building.











   (C)    No equipment or process shall be used which creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors, x-rays, radiation, smoke, heat, dust or
electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the
case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which
creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers,
or which causes fluctuations in line voltage, off the premises.











   (D)    No traffic shall be generated by the operation of the home
occupation which is greater than traffic volumes normally expected in the
neighborhood. Specifically, the home occupation shall not cause more than
three vehicles (including vehicles used by customers, vendors or delivery
services) to visit the residence per day. The operation and parking of these
vehicles shall not interfere with traffic circulation.











   (E)    No non-residential alterations to the interior or exterior of
the residences shall be permitted to accommodate the home occupation.











   (F)    No explosive, toxic, combustible or flammable materials in
quantities greater than allowed in residences will be used or stored on the
premises.











   (G)    The use of mechanical equipment, or the storage of supplies,
is limited to that which is compatible with a residential use.











   (H)    If the residential address is used in any advertisement of
the home occupation, the words "by appointment only" shall be included in the
advertisement.











   (I)    No outside storage of any kind shall be permitted in relation
to the home occupation, and





only commodities produced on the premises may be sold on the premises.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.179(O))










154.16.04  [Deleted]









154.16.05  RESOURCE AND MINERAL EXTRACTION.




   (A)   Resource and mineral extraction operations must meet the
following development standards:





      (1)    Excavation, washing, and stockpiling of extracted
material shall not be carried on closer than 50 feet to any property line, or
such greater distance as is deemed necessary for the protection of adjacent
property, except that this distance requirement may be reduced by the written
consent of the owner of abutting property, but in any such event, adequate
lateral support shall be provided for the abutting property.





      (2)    In the event that the site of the mining operation is
adjacent to the right-of-way of any public street or road, no part of such
operation may take place closer than 50 feet to the nearest line of such
right-of-way.





      (3)    Any excavated area adjacent to the right-of-way of any
public street or road shall be back-filled for a distance of 150 feet from
the right-of-way line.





      (4)    Fencing or other suitable barrier, including acceptable
plantings, shall be erected and maintained around the entire site or portions
thereof.





      (5)    All equipment and machinery shall be operated and
maintained in such manner as to minimize dust, noise, and vibration.  Access
roads shall be maintained in a dust-free condition by surfacing or other
treatment.





      (6)    Quarrying shall not be carried out closer than 300 feet
to any adjoining property line unless the written consent of such adjoining
property owner has first been obtained.





      (7)    An earthen mound sight and sound barrier of a minimum
of eight feet in height shall be provided to assure compatibility with
adjoining land uses.  The barrier shall be suitably planted and maintained.





      (8)    Rehabilitation requirements.  All mined-out areas
shall, within a reasonable length of time, be reclaimed and rehabilitated.
Within six months after completion of mining operations, the company shall
provide the city with a written plan indicating its intentions relative to
equipment and structure removal and the approximate date and time frame for
reclamation and rehabilitation of the mined-out area.










154.16.06  SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS.




   (A)   A permit is required before a dish antenna can be installed on
any lot within the city. The construction and installation of all dish
antennas shall conform to all applicable building code and electrical code
regulations and requirements.











   (B)    The total height of a dish antenna shall not exceed 15 feet.
This height requirement shall apply to both ground-mounted and roof-mounted
dish antennas. The height shall be measured from the highest point of the
dish antenna, when positioned for operation, vertically downward to the
nearest point of support. The point of support for all roof-mounted dish
antennas shall not extend above the roof line by which it is supported. In
all cases where the height requirements of the Zoning Code and the building
code conflict, the more restrictive requirement shall be used.











   (C)    The diameter of a dish antenna shall not exceed 12 feet.











   (D)    To be as visually unintrusive as possible, dish antennas
shall be restricted to those of a mesh-type construction in all residential
(R) zoning districts.











   (E)    Dish antennas over four feet in diameter shall not be
permitted to be located on the roof of any structure in any R or O-R zoning
district.











   (F)    Only one dish antenna shall be permitted on a lot in any LD,
R, O-R, O, or B-1 zoning district.











   (G)    Dish antennas 18 inches or less in diameter are exempt from
these regulations.





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.179(M)(5))










154.16.07  SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES




   (A)   No sexually-oriented business shall be established within five
hundred feet of:





      (1)    Any Residential District or individual residence;





      (2)    Any public library, educational institution, public
park or recreational facility, church or place of worship, child day care
facility, playground, or swimming pool;





      (3)    Any planned unit or planned cluster development
utilized for residential purposes.











   (B)    No sexually-oriented business shall be established within one
thousand feet of any other sexually-oriented business.











   (C)    For the purpose of this Section, measurement shall be made in
a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part of the
premises where a sexually-oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the premises of a use listed in section A above. Presence of
a municipal, county, or other political subdivision boundary shall be
irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements
of this Section.











   (D)    Prohibited Public Display.  No advertisements, displays or
other promotional materials shall be shown, distributed or exhibited so as to
be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks or walkways, or from other
public or semi-public areas.











   (E)    Public View to Be Prevented.  All building openings,
entries, windows, and doors of sexually-oriented business facilities shall be
located, covered, or serviced in such a manner as to prevent a view into the
interior from any public or semi-public areas, sidewalk or street. For new
construction, the building shall be oriented so as to minimize any
possibility of viewing the interior from any public or semi-public areas.











   (F)    External Audio and Visual Impact. No screens, loudspeakers,
or sound equipment shall be used for adult motion picture theaters (enclosed
or drive-in) or any other adult entertainment facility that can be seen or
discerned by the general public from public or semi-public areas.





HISTORY: (Newly Proposed; Formerly §154.181(C)(1)(m))










154.16.08  TEMPORARY USES.




   Temporary uses are permitted in each zoning district subject to the
applicable regulations of the district in which the use is permitted. A
zoning or occupancy certificate shall be obtained pursuant to §154.05.07. 
The following temporary uses are permitted, subject to the limitations
indicated:











   (A)    Christmas tree sales in the B-2 District for a period not to
exceed 60 days.











   (B)    Contractor's office, trailer, and equipment shed (containing
no sleeping or cooking accommodations) accessory to a construction project,
to continue only during the duration of the project.











   (C)    Real estate offices (containing no sleeping or cooking
accommodations unless located in a model dwelling unit) incidental to a new
housing development, to continue only until the sale or lease of all dwelling
units.











   (D)    Seasonal garden center retail outlets located in any B-2
District for a period not to exceed 90 consecutive days in any 180-day
period, subject to the following conditions:





      (1)    Retail sales only, limited to plants in containers and
prepackaged garden supplies. No storage or sale of bulk products is permitted.





      (2)    No portion of the display or any temporary structure
shall be located within ten feet of any property line or public right-of-way.





      (3)    No required off-street parking space or loading area
shall be utilized for display, storage or dispensing.











   (E)    Seasonal sale of farm produce,  including produce stands and
farm markets, in the following districts:  Agricultural (A), Commercial (B),
City Center (CC),  Manufacturing (M), and Olde Downtown (OD), to continue
for not more than five consecutive months per year and meeting the following
requirements:





      (1)   There shall be not more than one such use per lot or
lots under common ownership.





      (2)   Structures related to the use shall meet all applicable
setback requirements of the district in which they are located.  Structures
incidental to such sale on property used for agricultural pur poses need not
comply with the applicable front yard requirements if the structures are
removed or moved back of the required front yard at the end of the season
during which they are used.





      (3)   Adequate off-street parking and safe vehicular and
pedestrian access shall be provided for the use.  When the use is located
within a parking area serving a separate principal use on the same property,
the minimum number of parking and loading spaces required by §154.12.01 for
the principal use shall be maintained.





      (4)   Debris and trash generated by the use shall be routinely
collected.  The city reserves the right to require more frequent collection
as necessary.





      (5)   One temporary sign per public street frontage on the lot
or lots under common ownership is permitted, not to exceed 16 square feet in
area and meeting the requirements for temporary signs as outlined in Chapter
153, Signs.





      (6)   All portions of the use shall be maintained in a clean,
safe and sanitary condition at all times during operation.





      (7)   Compliance with all applicable licensing requirements of
the City of West Carrollton and the Montgomery County Combined General Health
District.





      (8)   The failure to comply with any of these requirements, as
determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, shall result in denial of a
permit or suspension of operation during that season.  Upon termination of
the operation, all remaining products, materials and displays shall be
immediately removed and the site restored to its prior condition.





         (Ord. 3460, passed 11-9-10)











   (F)    An open-air carnival or tent circus, but only in a B-2, M-1,
or M-2 District, and then only for a period that shall not exceed three days.











   (G)    Festivals sponsored by nonprofit organizations in any
district for a period not to exceed three days. Such use need not comply with
the front yard requirements. However, structures or equipment which might
block the view of operators of motor vehicles on the public streets shall not
be located within 30 feet of the intersection of the curb line of any two
streets.











   (H)    Promotional activities of retail merchants, located in any
business district, involving the display of goods and merchandise may be
conducted outside of enclosed buildings for a period of not more than 14 days
in any three-month period. Goods and merchandise that will be used in the
promotional activity and are also for sale within the building may be
displayed in the area immediately adjacent to the building subject to the
following conditions:





      (1)    No portion of the display or any temporary structure
shall be on located within ten feet of any property line or public
right-of-way.





      (2)    No required off-street parking space or loading area
shall be utilized for such display, storage, or dispensing.





      (3)    No food or drink shall be dispensed outside the
building except in accordance with standards and prior written approval of
the Montgomery County Combined General Health District.











   (I)    Tents in any district for permitted uses of that district
provided such use is not conducted within a tent for a period of not more
than 14 consecutive days in any 90-day period.











   (J)    (EDITOR’S NOTE: Former subsection (J) was repealed by
Ordinance 3475, passed April 12, 2011.)





HISTORY: (Formerly §154.179(N))










154.16.09  WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.




   Wireless Telecommunications Facilities criteria are in place to
minimize adverse health, safety, public welfare or visual impact through
buffering, siting design and construction, and the reduction of the need for
new or redundant wireless telecommunications facilities.





   (A)    General Requirements. The following requirements apply to all
wireless telecommunications facilities regardless of the zoning district in
which they are located. 





      (1)    Design and Construction.  Towers must be designed and
certified by an engineer registered in the State of Ohio to be structurally
sound and, at a minimum, in conformance with the Ohio Building Code (OBC).





      (2)   Maximum Height.  The maximum height of the wireless
telecommunications facility shall be the minimum height necessary to provide
service.





      (3)    Resource Protection Standards. The location of a tower,
equipment shelter and antenna support structure shall comply with all natural
resource protection standards established for the protection of flood plains,
wetlands and steep slopes as provided for in the Zoning, Flood Damage
Prevention, Stormwater Control, Subdivision and other development codes.





      (4)   Security.  All elements of a wireless telecommunication
facility, either completely or individually, shall be secured against
unauthorized access by the public. Safety forces of the city and co-locators
shall have reasonable access.  "No Trespassing" signs shall be posted around
the wireless telecommunications facility with a telephone number of whom to
contact in the event of emergency.  No fence shall be required on top of a
building or other structure if access to the roof or top of the structure is
secure.





      (5)    Landscaping.  Existing vegetation (trees and shrubs)
shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible.  Buffer plantings shall
be located around the perimeter of any security fence. In the alternative, an
evergreen screen may be planted around the perimeter of the property.





      (6)    Visibility, Lighting, and Advertising.  The tower
shall be a non-contrasting gray or similar color minimizing its visibility,
unless required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA).  All appurtenances shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment by the means of
camouflage. No tower shall be artificially lit except as required by the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).  No advertising shall be permitted
anywhere on the wireless telecommunication's facility.





      (7)    Co-location Requirements. 





         (a)    Public Property.





            (i)    The city shall undertake an identification
of publicly-owned properties that the city determines are suitable for such
use. The city shall regularly update such identification and make the results
of such identification available to the public.





            (ii)    Persons locating wireless
telecommunications facilities upon such identified publicly-owned properties
shall be exempted from the requirements herein regarding presentation of
proof that co-locations are not available. However, persons locating wireless
telecommunications facilities on publicly owned properties shall continue to
be subject to the requirements contained in §154.16.08(A).





            (iii)    In addition, persons locating wireless
telecommunications facilities on publicly-owned properties identified by the
city to be suitable for such purposes shall be exempt from the requirements
of §154.16.08 (B) and (C).





         (b)    Newly Constructed Wireless Telecommunication
Towers. 





            (i)     Prior to the construction of a new
telecommunications tower, it must be proven that it is not feasible to
co-locate on an existing tower. Owners of Wireless Tower Facilities must
allow for potential co-location of additional wireless telecommunication
facilities by other providers on the applicant's structure or within the same
site location.





            (ii)     No new tower shall be constructed in the
city unless such tower is capable of accommodating at least three additional
wireless telecommunications facility owned by another person, if height is
sufficient for coverage.





      (8)    Abandonment of Towers.





         (a)    All providers utilizing towers shall present a
report to the Planning and Economic Development Director notifying them of
any tower facility located in the municipality whose use will be discontinued
and the date this use will cease. If at any time the use of the facility is
discontinued for 180 days the Planning and Economic Development Director may
declare the facility abandoned. The facility's owner/operator will receive
written notice from the Planning and Economic Development Director and be
instructed to either reactivate the facility's use within 180 days, or
dismantle and remove the facility. If reactivation or dismantling does not
occur, the municipality will remove or will contract to have removed the
facility as a public nuisance and assess the owner/operator the Costs.





         (b)   The city shall provide the tower owner with the
right to a public hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals as with any
appeal of an administrative zoning order. All interested parties shall be
allowed an opportunity to be heard at the public hearing.





         (c)    After a public hearing is held, the Board of
Zoning Appeals may order the acquisition or demolition of the tower. The city
may require licensee to pay for all expenses necessary to acquire or demolish
the tower.





      (9)    Variances and Special Exceptions.  Any request to
deviate from any of the requirements of this section shall require variance
approval in conformance with the procedures set forth in Article 154.06.01 of
the Zoning Code.











   (B)    Wireless Telecommunication Facilities in Residential
Districts.  Wireless telecommunication facilities that include towers are
not permitted in L-D, R, or O-R districts except on any property with a
public institutional use (e.g. park, library, government, school or
utility).  However, it must be proven that it is not technically feasible to
locate in a more appropriate nonresidential zone.  A wireless
telecommunications facility may be located in a residential district subject
to the following conditions:





      (1)    Combined with a Nonresidential Use. An antenna may be
attached to a nonresidential building or a structure that is a permitted use
in the district; including, but not limited to, a church, municipal or
government building or facility, agricultural building, and a building or
structure owned by a utility. The following conditions shall be met:





         (a)    Maximum height: 15 feet, measured from the
highest point of the antenna, vertically downward to the highest point of the
existing structure.





         (b)    If the applicant proposed to locate the
telecommunication equipment in a separate equipment shelter, the equipment
shelter shall comply with accessory building regulations and the following:





            1.    A buffer yard shall be planted in accordance
with §154.13.01(A).





            2.    Vehicular access to the equipment shelter
shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular circulation on the site of
the principal use.





      (2)    Located on a Nonresidential Use Property. A tower to
support an antenna may be constructed on a property with a nonresidential use
that is a permitted use within the district, including but not limited to a
church, hospital, school, municipal or government building, facility, or
structure, agricultural use and utility use, subject to the following
conditions:





         (a)    Minimum yard requirements:





            1.   The tower shall be setback from any property
line abutting a residential structure by 200 feet.





            2.    Equipment shelter: same as for principally
permitted structures.





         (b)    Maximum height:





            1.    Tower: 200 feet, including the antenna.





            2.    Equipment shelter: same as the maximum
height in the relevant zoning district.





         (c)    Vehicular access to the tower and equipment
shelter shall, whenever feasible, be provided along the circulation driveways
of the existing use.





      (3)    Located on a Residential Building. An antenna for a
wireless telecommunications facility may be attached to a mid-rise or
high-rise apartment building subject to the following conditions:





         (a)    Maximum height: 15 feet, measured from the
highest point of the antenna, vertically downward to the  highest point of
the existing structure.





         (b)    If the applicant proposes to locate the
telecommunications equipment in a separate equipment shelter (not located in,
or attached to, the building), the equipment shelter shall comply with
accessory building regulations and with the following:





            1.   A buffer yard shall be planted in accordance
with §154.16.09(A)(5).





            2.    Vehicular access to the equipment shelter
shall, if at all possible, use the existing circulation system.





      (4)    Located in Open Space. A wireless telecommunications
facility is permitted on land that has been established as permanent open
space, or a park subject to the following conditions:





         (a)    The open space shall be owned by the
municipality, county or state government, a homeowners association,
charitable organization, or a private, non-profit association, charitable
organization, or a private, non-profit conservation organization.





         (b)    Maximum height:





            1.    Tower: 200 feet, including the antenna.





            2.    Equipment shelter: same as the maximum
height in the relevant zoning district.





         (c)    The tower shall be setback from any residential
property line 200 feet.





      (5)    Equipment Shelters.  Underground equipment shelters
are required in residential districts unless the design is deemed compatible
by the reviewing authority.











   (F)    Wireless Telecommunication Facilities in Non-residential
Districts. Wireless telecommunication facilities located in an O, B-1, B-2,
Olde Downtown, M-1 or M-2 District shall be subject to the following
conditions:





      (1)    Sole Use on a Lot.  A wireless telecommunications
facility is permitted as a sole use on a lot subject to the following
requirements:





         (a)    Minimum lot size:  two acres.





         (b)    Minimum yard requirements:





            1.    Tower: The minimum distance to any
residential use or district lot line shall be 200 feet, otherwise same as for
principally permitted structures.





            2.    Equipment shelter: Same as for principally
permitted structures.





         (c)    Maximum height:





            1.    Tower: 200 feet, including any antenna.





            2.    Equipment shelter: same as for principally
permitted structures.





      (2)    Combined with Another Use.  A wireless
telecommunications facility is permitted on a property with an existing use
subject to the following requirements:





         (a)    The existing or future use on the property may be
any permitted use in the district or any lawful nonconforming use, and need
not be affiliated with the wireless telecommunications provider. The wireless
telecommunications facility will not be considered an addition to the
structure or value of a nonconforming use.





         (b)    Minimum yard requirements:





            1.    Tower:  the minimum distance to any
residential use or district lot line shall be 200 feet, otherwise the minimum
distance is the same as for principally permitted structures.





            2.    Equipment shelter:  same as for accessory
structures.





         (c)    Maximum height:





            1.    Tower: 200 feet, including any antenna.





            2.    Equipment shelter: Same as for principally
permitted structures.





         (d)    Access.  The service access to the equipment
shelter shall be provided along the circulation of the existing use whenever
feasible.





      (3)    Combined with an Existing Structure. Where possible, an
antenna for a wireless telecommunications facility shall be attached to an
existing structure or building subject to the following requirements:





         (a)    Maximum height: 15 feet, measured from the
highest point of the antenna, vertically downward to the highest point of the
existing structure.





         (b)    If the applicant proposes to locate the
telecommunications equipment in a separate equipment shelter not located on
or attached to the building, the equipment shelter shall comply with the
following:





            1.    Shall comply with the requirements for an
accessory building.





            2.    Shall be located to the rear of the primary
building or structure.





            3.    Vehicular access to the shelter shall not
interfere with any required parking or vehicular circulation on the site for
the principal use.





HISTORY:  (Former §154.186;  Ord. 3063, passed 9-23-97)










154.16.10  GARAGE SALES.




   (A)   Definition.  Any general casual sale, open to the public and
conducted on residential premises for the purpose of disposing of
miscellaneous primarily used personal property.  As used in this section,
this definition shall include but is not limited to any sale entitled "garage
sale", "patio sale", "yard sale", "carport sale", "basement sale", "porch
sale", "driveway sale", or "rummage sale".











   (B)   Registration Required.  Any person planning to conduct a
garage sale in the city shall contact the City of West Carrollton Planning
and Building Department prior to the sale and furnish the following
information:





      (1)   The name and phone number of the person conducting the
sale, who shall be a resident of the city;





      (2)   The address of the premises where the sale is to be
conducted;





      (3)   The dates and hours of duration of the sale;





      (4)   The dates of any garage sales held on the property
within the current calendar year; and





      (5)   Any additional information deemed necessary by the
Planning and Building Department.











   (C)   Prohibitions.





      (1)   No garage sale shall be conducted on the same property
more than two times within a calendar year, with each sale not to exceed 72
hours.  Garage sales occurring more frequently are considered as engaging in
a retail sales business in a residential zone, which is prohibited.





      (2)   No garage sale shall be conducted by a person who does
not own or lease the premises on which the sale is conducted.





      (3)   No garage sale shall be conducted prior to 8:00 a.m. or
after dusk.





      (4)   No garage sale shall offer for sale primarily a single
commodity, nor primarily new merchandise or food items.





      (5)   No items for sale, signs, or other materials relating to
the sale shall remain in public view after dusk on the last day of the sale.





      (6)   No fee or other charge shall be imposed upon members of
the public attending any garage sale.











   (D)   Signs.  Temporary signage promoting a garage sale shall meet
all requirements of Chapter 153, Signs.











   (E)   Block Garage Sales.  By submitting the unanimous written
consent of all involved property owners on a residential block, a request may
be made to the City of West Carrollton for permission to hold a "block garage
sale". Each resident participating in such sale shall be included in the
information required in paragraph (B) of this section.  Block garage sales
shall meet all requirements of this section.











   (F)   Exceptions.





      (1)   Participation in the City of West Carrollton's annual
Community Garage Sale Day(s) shall not be counted toward the maximum number
of sales permitted in paragraph (C)(1).





      (2)   Notwithstanding the requirements of paragraph (C)(1),
one additional sale per property may be held under each of the following
circumstances:





         i.   If it is made necessary through the estate or
guardian of a resident of the premises, commonly known as an "estate sale".





         ii.   If the resident is relocating from the premises,
commonly known as a "moving sale".





      (3)   It is not the intent of this section to prohibit sales
by nonconforming businesses located in residential zoning districts.











   (G)   Penalty.  Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be
fined not more than twenty-five dollars ($25) for a first offense, not more
than fifty dollars ($50) for a second offense, and not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for a third and each subsequent offense.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or
noncompliance occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 3449.  Passed 5-11-10.)










154.16.11  MOBILE FOOD VENDORS.




   (A)   Definition.  For the purposes of this section, a Mobile Food
Vendor shall be defined as any person who sells, offers for sale, or
distributes free of charge, food or beverages to the public from any unit
(vehicle, trailer, cart, wagon, or similar use) which is designed to be
readily moveable.  A unit shall not include tents or similar portable
structures.  The food may be cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed and/or
portioned for service, sale, or distribution in the Mobile Food Vendor
unit.   











   (B)   Mobile Food Vendor License Required. 





      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of operating a Mobile Food Vendor unit without first obtaining a
Mobile Food Vendor License from the City of West Carrollton.  This Mobile
Food Vendor License shall be non-transferrable to any other Mobile Food
Vendor or location not approved as part of the License application.





      (2)   This Mobile Food Vendor License shall be valid for six
(6) months from the date of issuance.  It shall be renewable thereafter for
either a six-month or twelve-month term, conditional on satisfactory
compliance with the requirements of this Section and all applicable laws. 





      (3)   At a minimum, the Mobile Food Vendor shall provide the
following information in the Mobile Food Vendor License application:





         i.   The name and contact information of the applicant.





         ii.   The address of the property or properties where
the Mobile Food Vendor operation is to be conducted.





         iii.   Written permission of the property owner(s)
consenting to the Mobile Food Vendor operation on his/her property.





         iv.   Proposed operating hours.





         v.   Maps and drawings of the proposed site(s) for the
Mobile Food Vendor operation showing the location of all buildings, parking
and loading areas, streets and driveway approaches, open spaces, refuse and
service areas, utilities, signs, landscaping, and any such other site
information as the City may require.





         vi.   A narrative statement describing the proposed
Mobile Food Vendor operation.





         vii.   A photograph of any Mobile Food Vendor unit to be
used in operation of the business.





         viii.   A signed indemnification statement and copy of
liability insurance for the business in an amount not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000), naming the City of West Carrollton as an additional
insured, as further described below.





         ix.   Proof of access to permanent restrooms with a hand
sink for use by employees, as evidenced by written agreement between the
vendor and the business or entity which will provide such access.





         x.   Information requested by the Police Department to
conduct a background check, which shall be at the expense of the applicant.





         xi.   A valid copy of all required licenses or permits
required by governmental health or transportation authorities, including but
not limited to the Public Health - Dayton and Montgomery County and the
Department of Motor Vehicles.





         xii.   Any additional information deemed necessary by
the City.





      (4)   The approved operating location(s) shall be indicated on
the license.  The license must be prominently displayed on the Mobile Food
Vendor unit along with any other required licenses, and shall be available
for inspection upon request.





      (5)   The Mobile Food Vendor License is non-transferable and
may be used only by the applicant individual, partners, or entities capable
of taking title to whom the license was granted.  Any change in the
individual, partners, or entities capable of taking title is a transfer of
ownership interest and  voids the license, except as follows.  A license
may be transferred one time as the result of the licensee's death to the
holder's heirs and assigns provided the transferee intends to continue the
business, subject to an acceptable background check as provided by this
Section.  If the business is to be sold or liquidated, the license is
non-transferable at death.











   (C)   Fees.





      (1)   Upon application for a Mobile Food Vendor License, a
non-refundable application fee shall be paid as set forth in Chapter 37 of
the City of West Carrollton Code of Ordinances.





      (2)   Upon issuance of the Mobile Food Vendor License and
annually thereafter, a non-refundable Mobile Food Vendor License Fee shall be
due and payable as fixed from time to time and as set forth in Chapter 37 of
the City of West Carrollton Code of Ordinances.  This annual fee is in
addition to the Mobile Food Vendor Application Fee due with the initial
application and in addition to fees as may be required by other governing
jurisdictions.











   (D)   Location. 





      (1)   Mobile Food Vendors shall be permitted only in the
following zoning districts, except as otherwise provided in subsections
(D)(3) and (D)(4) below:





         i.   O Office District.





         ii.   B-1 Convenience Commercial District.





         iii.   B-2 General Commercial District.





         iv.   OD Olde Downtown District.





         v.   CC City Center District.





         vi.   M-1 Business Park District.





         vii.   M-2 Manufacturing District.





         viii.   M-3 Rural Manufacturing District.





      (2)   A Mobile Food Vendor License granted under this section
shall permit one Mobile Food Vendor unit to be located on one of up to three
non-residential properties within any permitted zoning district, with the
written permission of the property owner(s) and consistent with the
requirements of this Section and all other applicable laws.  During the term
of the Mobile Food Vendor License, the Mobile Food Vendor shall operate from
one of the approved locations, but may relocate the unit to any other
approved location at the vendor's discretion.  These locations may be
changed during the term of the permit upon submission of a new Mobile Food
Vendor License application and payment of application fee as approved by the
City.  No other Mobile Food Vendors may be permitted to operate at said
locations during the term of the permit.  Locations shall be approved on a
first-come, first-served basis.





      (3)   Notwithstanding subsections (D)(1), (D)(2), and (D(4),
the City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to grant:





         i.   Permission to locate Mobile Food Vendor units on
any City-owned property consistent with these regulations, for an additional
fee as provided in Chapter 37 of the Code of Ordinances.





         ii.   Revocable street privileges for the placement of
Mobile Food Vendors within designated parking spaces in the public
right-of-way, consistent with the requirements of Chapter 73:  Parking, this
Section, and all other applicable laws.  In consultation with the Service
Director, in order to approve such street privileges the City Manager must
determine the proposed location is compatible with the public interest in
using the public right-of-way, considering factors such as the right-of-way
width, parking, traffic, pavement durability,  and proximity to street
furniture, bus stops, other businesses, and other Mobile Food Vendors.  No
street privileges shall be granted where a Mobile Food Vendor will
substantially obstruct a public way, impair the movement of pedestrians or
vehicles, impair the clear view of traffic from any direction, or pose a
hazard to public safety. 





      (4)   Notwithstanding paragraphs (D)(1), (2), and (3), Mobile
Food Vendor units shall not be located:





         i.   Within one hundred (100) feet of property
containing a restaurant located in an enclosed building, unless operated by
the restaurant owner or written permission by the restaurant or property
owner is provided.  However, this restriction does not prevent approval of
any new restaurant located in an enclosed building within 100 feet of any
pre-existing approved Mobile Food Vendor location.  In that event, the
Mobile Food Vendor may continue at the pre-approved location until the
expiration of the permit term.  Upon renewal of the permit, the Mobile Food
Vendor must then relocate to meet the requirements of this subsection.





         ii.   On property used exclusively for single-family
residential purposes, irrespective of its zoning classification.





         iii.   In the right-of-way adjacent to any land owned by
a public or private school, unless written permission has been granted by the
school.





         iv.   In the right-of-way adjacent to any property
containing a festival, special or civic event that is licensed or sanctioned
by the City, unless the Mobile Food Vendor is an authorized participant in
such event.





         v.   On any unpaved surface.





         vi.   Closer than five (5) feet to the public
right-of-way, unless permission is granted by the City to locate within the
right-of-way as provided in subsection (B)(3)(iii).











   (E)   General Requirements.  Mobile Food Vendors shall meet the
following requirements:





      (1)   The license is valid for one Mobile Food Vendor unit
only.





      (2)   Mobile Food Vendor units shall not:





         i.   Be in such a deteriorated physical condition as to
adversely affect the character, appearance, image, or economic value of
surrounding property.





         ii.   Exceed twenty-eight (28) feet in length, eight and
one-half (8.5) feet in width, or ten (10) feet in height. 





         iii.   Occupy parking spaces which result in a violation
of the minimum parking requirements for the principal use or other permanent
uses on the property.





         iv.   Remain attached to any vehicle used to haul the
unit.  Such hauling vehicle shall be detached from the unit and parked in a
lawful parking space separate from the unit.





         v.   Contain a drive-through.





         vi.   Substantially obstruct a public way, impair the
movement of pedestrians or vehicles, or pose a hazard to public safety.





      (3)   Mobile Food Vendors may set up tables and chairs in the
space immediately adjacent to the unit, provided the tables and chairs are
placed:





         i.   Only on a paved surface.





         ii.   In a location that does not block the entrance or
exit of any building or access to bus stops, fire escapes, sidewalks, or
utility equipment.





         iii.   In a location that is not less than five (5) feet
from any alley, pedestrian crosswalk, driveway approach, curb ramp, or fire
hydrant.





         iv.   Such that an open area of not less than four (4)
feet is available for pedestrian traffic around the tables and chairs.





         v.   Such that no other requirement of this Section is
violated.





      (4)   Adequate paved parking must be available immediately
adjacent to the Mobile Food Vendor to ensure public safety of its patrons and
the traveling public.





      (5)   Mobile Food Vendors shall not block, obstruct, or
otherwise restrict free passage of vehicles or pedestrians in the lawful use
of streets or sidewalks or ingress or egress to property, or obstruct
required sight distance.





      (6)   Mobile Food Vendors shall provide proof of access to
permanent restrooms with a hand sink for use by employees, as evidenced by
written agreement between the vendor and the business or entity which will
provide such access. 





      (7)   Any power required for the Mobile Food Vendor unit shall
not use utilities drawn from the public right-of-way.  Electrical power from
private property may be used when written consent is provided by the property
owner.  All other power sources must be self-contained, and no external
generators shall be permitted.  No power cable or equipment shall be
extended across any public street, alley, or sidewalk. 





      (8)   No Mobile Food Vendor shall generate noise detectable
beyond the premises on which it is located, nor use any outside sound
amplifying equipment, music, or noisemakers such as bells, horns, or whistles.





      (9)   No outdoor storage of equipment shall be permitted.





      (10)   The Mobile Food Vendor shall maintain an area within a
30-foot radius of the unit clear of all litter and debris arising from its
operation, and shall remove all waste generated by the operation at the end
of each business day, which shall not be placed in City trash receptacles. 
No waste liquids, garbage, litter or refuse shall be dumped or drained into
sidewalks, streets, gutters, drains, or any other place except one trash
receptacle provided and serviced by the Mobile Food Vendor for customer
use.  All such containers shall be leak-proof and nonabsorbent and shall be
kept covered with tight-fitting lids at all times.





      (11)   The Mobile Food Vendor shall provide a signed statement
that the vendor will hold harmless the City and its officers and employees,
and shall indemnify the City, its officers and employees for any claims for
damage to property or injury to persons which may be occasioned by any
activity carried on under the terms of the Mobile Food Vendor License.  The
Mobile Food Vendor shall furnish and maintain such public liability, food
products liability, and property damage insurance as will protect the vendor,
property owners, and the City from all claims for damage to bodily injury,
including death, which may arise from the operations under the Mobile Food
Vendor License or in connection therewith.  Such insurance shall be issued
by an insurance company licensed to do business in Ohio and shall provide
coverage of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence. 
The policy shall further provide that it may not be cancelled except upon
thirty (30) days written notice served upon the City Manager of the City of
West Carrollton.  A Mobile Food Vendor License issued pursuant to the
provisions of this Section shall be invalid at any time the insurance
required herein is not maintained and evidence of continuing coverage is not
filed with the City Manager of the City of West Carrollton.





      (12)   No Mobile Food Vendor License shall be issued until the
Mobile Food Vendor provides a valid copy of all required licenses or permits
required by governmental health or transportation authorities, including but
not limited to the Public Health - Dayton and Montgomery County and the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles.











   (F)   Signs. Signs related to the Mobile Food Vendor shall only be
permitted on the Mobile Food Vendor unit, not to extend above the top of the
unit, and shall consist only of the vendor name and logo and any items
provided for sale or distribution to the public.  Sign area shall be limited
to no more than one (1) square foot of sign area per lineal foot of the
Mobile Food Vendor unit face, with no more than one sign per unit face. 
Some or all of the permitted sign area may be transferred to another unit
face, provided the total sign area does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
unit face.  No freestanding signs shall be permitted.  All other
requirements of Chapter 153: Signs not in conflict with these requirements
shall apply to Mobile Food Vendors.











   (G)   Exceptions.  The regulations in this Section do not apply to:





      (1)   Ice Cream Peddlers as regulated by Chapter 111 of the
City of West Carrollton Codified Ordinances.





      (2)   Mobile Food Vendors that supply food and/or beverages
during any special public, school, or charitable event.





      (3)   Temporary sales of seasonal produce as regulated by
Section 154.16.08(E).











   (H)   License Adverse Action. 





      (1)   Any Mobile Food Vendor who violates any provision of
this Section shall be issued a written warning for the first violation.  Any
Mobile Food Vendor who commits a second violation of any provision of this
Section, which may or may not be related to any other prior violation by the
Mobile Food Vendor, shall be issued a fine in the amount of five hundred
dollars ($500.00), which shall be paid within ten business days.  A third
violation of any provision of this Section by the Mobile Food Vendor, which
may or may not be related to any other prior violation by the Mobile Food
Vendor, will result in immediate revocation of the Mobile Food Vendor License
and loss of eligibility for future Mobile Food Vendor Licenses.   





      (2)   Notwithstanding paragraph (H)(1), an application for or
an approved Mobile Food Vendor License may be immediately denied, revoked,
suspended, or not renewed for any of the following reasons:





         i.   Conviction of the Mobile Food Vendor owner or any
employee within the last ten years for a crime of violence, a crime involving
moral turpitude, a crime involving drug convictions, or a crime involving sex
offenses. 





         ii.   Fraud or misrepresentation contained in the
license application.





         iii.   Fraud or misrepresentation made in the course of
conducting the Mobile Food Vendor business.





         iv.   Conduct of the licensed Mobile Food Vendor
business in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or to constitute a
danger to the public health, safety, or welfare.





         v.   Abandonment of the location by failure to operate a
Mobile Food Vendor operation during at least three-fourths (3/4) of the
business days available.





         vi.   Refusal of the Mobile Food Vendor to comply with
any requirements of this Section or other applicable law.





         vii.   For any good cause shown.





      (3)   When good cause has been demonstrated to deny, revoke,
suspend, or not renew a Mobile Food Vendor license, the City shall issue an
order which shall become effective immediately upon service of a written
notice to the licensee.  Such notice shall specify the reason for denial,
revocation, suspension, or non-renewal and may provide for conditions upon
which the license may be approved or reinstated, upon compliance with said
conditions.





Should no conditions be given for the possible approval or reinstatement of
the license, the order shall constitute a denial or revocation of the license.











   (I)   Appeal.  Any person aggrieved by any administrative decision
pursuant to this Section may submit an appeal of said decision as provided in
Section 154.05.06 of the City of West Carrollton Code  of Ordinances. 
(Ord. 3475.  Passed 4-12-11.)










154.16.12  HOOKAH BARS.




   (A)      Purpose.   The purpose of these regulations is to
differentiate hookah bars from smoking establishments, retail tobacco stores,
and general retail sales due to their inherent differences in nature,
function, and effect; and to establish minimum standards for the operation of
hookah bars in order to minimize adverse effects on surrounding property and
ensure the goals of the 2009 West Carrollton Comprehensive Plan to maintain
and enhance the community's image and economic vitality are met.











   (B)      Applicability.   These regulations shall apply to all
hookah bars as defined in this chapter.











   (C)      Requirements.   











      (1)   Location. A hookah bar shall not be permitted to operate
on property abutting any property containing a conforming single-family
residence, nor within a five hundred (500) foot radius, as measured by a
straight line from wall to wall, of any of the following: 











         (a)   Any other hookah bar or smoking establishment.











         (b)   Any public or private school or day care facility.











         (c)   Any public park or recreation facility.











         (d)   Any religious institution.











         (e)   Any sexually-oriented business, tattoo or body
piercing shop, gun shop, or pawn shop.











      (2)   Hours of operation.  A hookah bar shall not be
permitted to operate between the hours of midnight and 7:00 a.m.











      (3)   Minors prohibited.  No person under eighteen (18) years
of age shall be permitted to enter, work at, or patronize a hookah bar.











      (4)   Alcoholic beverages prohibited.  The sale and/or
consumption of alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted at any hookah bar.











      (5)   Intoxicated persons prohibited.  Any person obviously
under the influence of any intoxicating drug or beverage shall not be
permitted to enter or patronize a hookah bar.











      (6)   Outdoor activity prohibited.  Outdoor activity related
to a hookah bar shall not be permitted.   











      (7)   Loitering prohibited.  The owner or operator of a
hookah bar shall not permit loitering by persons outside the hookah bar.











      (8)   Ventilation system required.  A hookah bar shall
provide adequate ventilation for smoke in accordance with all city, state,
and federal laws.  The ventilation shall also ensure that smoke from the
hookah bar is incapable of migrating into any other portion of the building
hosting the hookah bar, or into any other building in the vicinity of the
hookah bar.











      (9)   Lighting and visibility.  No window coverings or window
tinting shall be permitted which prevents visibility of the interior of a
hookah bar from outside the premises during operating hours.  The interior
of a hookah bar shall be maintained with adequate illumination to make the
conduct of patrons within the premises readily discernible to person with
normal visual acuity.











      (10)   Parking.  Parking for a hookah bar shall be provided
as required for "Taverns, cocktail lounges" in Zoning Code Section 154.12.01,
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.











      (11)   Annual license.











         (a)   A person or entity seeking to own or operate a
hookah bar within the City must receive a license, to be issued and renewed
annually by the Chief of Police.  The Chief of Police shall review each
application, conduct any additional investigation which is deemed reasonable
in assessing each application, and maintain a record of any person or entity
who has received such a license.   











         (b)   Based on the findings of the investigation, the
Chief of Police may impose additional conditions upon the hookah bar's
operation which in the discretion of the Chief of Police are necessary to
ensure compatibility with other uses in the vicinity and to ensure the public
health, safety, and welfare.





   





         (c)   The Chief of Police may deny an application for a
hookah bar license for any of the following reasons:  the applicant has been
convicted of a felony; the applicant is under the age of twenty-one (21)
years; the applicant has made a false statement in the application for a
license; the application on its face indicates that the proposed hookah bar
cannot be operated in accordance with the requirements of this section.











         (d)   A hookah bar license may be revoked for any of the
following reasons:  the owner or operator of the hookah bar violates any
requirement of this section; the owner or operator of the hookah bar is
convicted of a felony; the hookah bar is not in compliance with one or more
of the conditions of its license.











         (e)   Notwithstanding this license requirement and any
additional conditions imposed by the Chief of Police, a hookah bar shall also
obtain all other approvals and permits required by Title XV: Land Usage of
the Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton. 











         (f)   A fee for this license may be charged as provided
in Chapter 37: General Fee Schedule.





 





      (12)   Compliance with state and federal laws.  A hookah bar
shall be in compliance with all state laws pertaining to smoking in a place
of employment or in a public place, including but not limited to Ohio R.C.
Chapter 3794: Smoking Ban, as well as all state and federal laws pertaining
to the sale or furnishing of tobacco products to minors. 





(Ord. 3567.  Passed 8-25-15.)
















154.17.01 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.




   (A)   Purpose and Applicability.





      (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to promote development in
the City of West Carrollton that contributes to it as a unique place that
reflects its historic past, physical character and community identity. 
These regulations serve as a basis to promote creative and appealing
architectural design; to enhance the longevity, overall integrity, and
economic value of the built environment; and to strengthen the City's image.





         (Ord. 3419.  Passed 4-28-09.)





      (2)   This chapter shall apply to new construction of and
major façade alterations to non-residential and multi-family residential
buildings in the following zoning districts.  Additions to existing
buildings may continue with a similar exterior design to maintain
architectural continuity.





         (a)   R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District.





         (b)   R-5 Multiple-Family Residential District.





         (c)   R-PUD Planned Development District.





         (d)   O-R Office Residential District.





         (e)   O Office District.





         (f)   B-1 Convenience Commercial District.





         (g)   B-2 General Commercial District.





         (h)   OD Olde Downtown District.





         (i)   CC City Center District.





         (j)   M-1 Business Park District, excepting the
following uses: light manufacturing; warehousing/wholesaling/distribution
facilities.





         (k)   M-2 Manufacturing District, excepting the
following uses: heavy manufacturing; warehousing/wholesaling/distribution
facilities.





         (l)   M-3 Rural Manufacturing District, excepting the
following uses:  heavy manufacturing; warehousing/wholesaling/distribution
facilities.





         (m)   PUD Planned Unit Development District.  (Ord.
3616.  Passed 9-12-17.)





      (3)   The Planning Commission shall review the architectural
design of all buildings regulated by this chapter in accordance with the
requirements specified herein.  All applications for design approval shall
contain a written description of the proposed improvements as well as
architectural elevations showing the color, dimensions, and materials of all
improvements, at a minimum, and all other materials necessary for
consideration of the request.











   (B)   Definitions.





      (1)   Brick.  A solid masonry unit of clay or shale, formed
into a rectangular prism while plastic and burned or fired in a kiln.  No
manufactured brick shall be permitted.





      (2)   Major façade alteration.  Any material change in
external architectural features including but not limited to walls, roofs,
windows, siding, awnings/canopies, doors, and entrances, but not including
painting, affecting more than fifty (50) percent of the total exterior wall
area. 





      (3)   Stone.  Granite, marble, limestone, slate, river rock,
field stone, and other hard and durable naturally occurring all-weather
stone.  Cut stone is acceptable.  No manufactured stone shall be permitted.











   (C)   Building Design and Mass.





      (1)   Architectural elevations for all buildings shall be that
the design, massing, materials, shape, and scale, of all buildings shall
create a unified design on the premises and shall be visually compatible.





      (2)   All architectural elevations of principal buildings
shall consist of a base, a body, and a cap. 





         (a)   The base shall occupy the lowest portion of the
elevation, and shall have a height no less than eight (8) percent of the
average wall height.





         (b)   The body shall occupy the middle portion of the
elevation, and shall have a height no less than sixty (60) percent of the
average wall height.





         (c)   The cap shall occupy the highest portion of the
elevation, excluding the roof, and shall have a height no less than eight (8)
percent of the average wall height, not to exceed the height of the base. 
The cap shall consist of at least one of the following architectural
features: a cornice, parapet, awning, canopy, or eaves.





         (d)   The base and cap shall be clearly distinguishable
from the body through changes in color, material, pattern, profile, or
texture. The cap and base shall have different materials than body unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Commission.





      (3)   Blank building walls in public view are prohibited. 
Buildings shall incorporate architectural elements which serve to break up
the horizontal emphasis of the elevation.  Roofline changes, material or
color changes, horizontal and vertical wall offsets, projections, recesses,
pilasters, awnings, building entrances, true or faux windows, and other
similar features are examples that may be utilized. 





      (4)   All building rooftop mechanical equipment shall be
screened from public view from all directions with architectural features
(roof forms or parapet walls) of each building.  Metal screening will not be
accepted.











   (D)   Building Materials. 





      (1)   Base:  full-sized clay brick, natural stone, or
textured concrete block are permitted as siding materials for the base of the
building.





      (2)   Body:  full-sized clay brick or natural stone are
permitted as siding materials for the body of the building. 





      (3)   Cap:  full-sized clay brick, natural stone, textured
concrete block, natural wood, or applied materials such as exterior
insulation finish system (E.I.F.S.) or other synthetic materials are
permitted materials for the cap of the building.





      (4)   The following materials may be permitted for limited use
on the building base or cap with the specific approval of the Planning
Commission:  textured concrete block, masonry product, steel, architectural
metal, natural wood, HardiPlank (fiber cement siding), or other similar
building material. 











   (E)   Colors.  All exterior building colors shall be of
low-reflectance, subdued earth tones.  The use of black or high-intensity
metallic or fluorescent colors is prohibited.  Any building color or color
combinations whose major function is to convey visual information or to
attract visual attention is considered a sign and shall be subject to the
requirements of Chapter 153:  Signs.











   (F)   Other.





      (1)   Pitched roofs, especially gable and hip roofs, are
encouraged.  The height of any pitched roof shall not exceed one-half (1/2)
of the overall building height.  Permitted materials for pitched roofs
include wood, slate, fiberglass reinforced asphalt roof shingles and standing
seam or terned metal.  Except when used on flat roofs that are not generally
visible, roll roofing, built-up tar and gravel, metal panel or corrugated
metal, plastic, or fiberglass roofing materials other than fiberglass
reinforced asphalt roof shingles shall be prohibited.





      (2)   Service station canopies and columns, and freestanding
ground or monument signs shall be clad in full-sized clay brick or natural
stone matching the material and color of the principal building.





      (3)   Dumpster enclosures shall be clad on three sides in
full-sized clay brick or natural stone matching the material and color of the
principal building, with a locking powder-coated black opaque aluminum gate.











   (G)   Waivers.  Alternatives to these requirements shall be
reviewed and evaluated by the Planning Commission on the basis of whether the
request will contribute to the enhancement, longevity, safety, utility, and
overall integrity of a proposed structure.  (Ord. 3419.  Passed 4-28-09.)



























Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 155
FAIR HOUSING PRACTICES









Section










155.01   Definitions





155.02   Unlawful discriminatory practices





155.03   Exceptions





155.99   Penalty




 



155.01  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.










   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION.  Any distinction or difference in
treatment based on the race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or
ancestry of a person.










   FAMILY.  A spouse, child, parent, grandparent, brother or sister,
mother-in-law, or father-in-law.










   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.  Any individual or individuals, partnership,
associations, organizations, trustees, corporations, agents, legal
representatives, receivers, or other organized groups of persons regularly
engaged in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans on real
property.










   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION.  Any building or structure or portion thereof
which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged, or designed to be used or
occupied as the home residence or sleeping place of one or more individuals,
groups, or families whether living independently of each other; and any
vacant land offered for sale or lease, including land offered for use as a
trailer park and sites offered for mobile homes.  Also any housing
accommodation held or offered for sale or rent by a real estate broker,
salesman, or agent, or by any other person pursuant to authorization of the
owner, by the owner himself, or his legal representative.










   INSURER.  Any individual or individuals, partnerships, 
associations,  trustees, corporations, agents, legal representatives,
receivers, or other organized groups of persons regularly engaged in the
business of issuing casualty insurance policies or title insurance policies
on real property.










   PERSON.  One or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
organizations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers, and other organized groups of persons.  Also
including, but is not limited to, any owner, lessor, assignor, builder,
manager, broker, salesman, agent, employee, lending institution, and the
state, and all political subdivisions, authorities, agencies, boards, and
commissions thereof.










   PURCHASER.  Any occupant, prospective occupant, lessee, prospective
lessee, buyer, prospective buyer, tenant, or prospective tenant.










   REAL ESTATE AGENT.  Any real estate broker, real estate salesman, or
an agent thereof, or any other person, partnership, association or
corporation, who, for consideration, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents,
negotiates, offers, or attempts to negotiate the sale, purchase, exchange or
rental of real property or holds himself out as engaged in the business of
selling, purchasing, exchanging, renting, or otherwise transferring any
interest in real property.










   RESTRICTIVE COVENANT.  Any specification limiting the transfer,
rental, lease, or other use of any housing accommodation because of race,
color, religion, sex, national origin, or ancestry, or any limitation based
upon affiliation with or approval by any person, directly or indirectly,
employing race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or ancestry as a
condition of affiliation or approval.










   SELLER.  Individuals, partnerships, associations, organizations,
trustees, corporations, agents, legal representatives, receivers, and other
organized groups of persons that:





   (A)   Sell real property whether improved or unimproved;





   (B)   Lease or rent real property in a single building consisting of
one or more housing units.










   STEERING.  Any real estate marketing, financing, or advertising
practice which limits the choice of a prospective user of housing
accommodations due to his race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or
ancestry.










   UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE.  Any act prohibited by this
chapter. 
(Ord. 2156, passed 9-11-79)









155.02  UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES.




   (A)   It shall be unlawful discriminatory practice, for any real
estate agent, seller, or other person:





      (1)   To refuse to sell, transfer, assign, rent, lease,
sublease, finance, or otherwise deny or withhold housing accommodations from
any person because of the race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or
ancestry of any prospective purchaser, occupant, or user of such housing.





      (2)   To represent to any person that housing is not available
for inspection when in fact it is so available.





      (3)   To discriminate against any person in the terms or
conditions of selling, transferring, assigning, renting, leasing, or
subleasing any housing or in furnishing facilities, services, or privileges
in connection with the ownership, occupancy, or use of any housing because of
the race, color, religion, sex, ancestry, or national origin of any present
or prospective purchaser, occupant, or user of such housing.





      (4)   To print, publish, or circulate any statement or
advertisement relating to the sale, transfer, assignment, rental, lease,
sublease, or acquisition of any housing which indicates any preference,
limitation, specification, or discrimination based upon race, color, sex,
religion, ancestry, or national origin.





      (5)   To make any inquiry, elicit any information, make or
keep any record, or use any form of application containing questions or
entries concerning race, color, religion, sex, ancestry, or national origin
in connection with the sale or lease of any housing, except where required or
permitted by the government of the United States or any department or agency
thereof, or by the State of Ohio or any department or agency thereof, or by
any court of competent jurisdiction.





      (6)   To include in any transfer, rental, or lease of housing
any restrictive covenant, or to honor or exercise, or attempt to honor or
exercise, any such restrictive covenant, provided that the prior inclusion of
a restrictive covenant in the chain of title shall not be deemed a violation
of this provision.





      (7)   To induce or solicit or attempt to induce or solicit a
housing listing, sale, or transaction by representing that a change has
occurred or may occur with respect to the racial, religious, or ethnic
composition of the block, neighborhood, or area in which the property is
located, or induce or solicit or attempt to induce or solicit such sale or
listing by representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons
of any race, color, religion, sex, ancestry, or national origin, in the area
will or may have results such as the following:





         (a)   The lowering of property values;





         (b)   A change in the racial, religious, or ethnic
composition of the block, neighborhood, or area in which the property is
located;





         (c)   An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in
the area;





         (d)   A decline in the quality of the schools serving
the area;





      (8)   To deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers'
organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting housing accommodations, or to discriminate
against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or
participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or
ancestry.










   (B)   It shall be unlawful discriminatory practice, for any
financial institution or other person:





      (1)   To refuse to lend money, whether or not secured by
mortgage or otherwise, for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation,
repair, or maintenance of  housing  or  to  otherwise  withhold
financing of housing from any person because of the race, color, religion,
sex, ancestry, or national origin of any present or prospective purchaser,
occupant, or user of such housing, provided such person, whether an
individual corporation, or association of any type, lends money as one of the
principal aspects of his business or incidental to his principal business and
not only as a part of the purchase price of an owner-occupied residence he is
selling nor merely casually or occasionally to a relative or friend.





      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms or
conditions of any loan of money, whether or not secured by mortgage, or
otherwise, for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, or
maintenance of housing because of the race, color, religion, sex, ancestry,
or national origin of any present or prospective owner, occupant, or user of
such housing.





      (3)   To print, publish, or circulate any statement or
advertisement relating to the loan of money, whether or not secured by
mortgage or otherwise, for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation,
repair, or maintenance of housing which indicates any preference, limitation,
specification, or discrimination based upon race, color, religion, sex,
ancestry, or national origin.





      (4)   To make any inquiry, elicit any information, make or
keep any record, or use any form of application containing questions or
entries concerning race, color, religion, sex, ancestry, or national origin
in connection with the loan of any money, whether or not secured by mortgage
or otherwise, for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, or
maintenance of housing, except where required or permitted by the government
of the United States or any department or agency thereof, or by the State of
Ohio or any department or agency thereof, or by any court of competent
jurisdiction.










   (C)   It shall be unlawful discriminatory practice, for any insurer
or other person:





      (1)   To discriminate in the issuance, insuring, extending,
granting, or renewing or in the fixing of rates, premiums, terms, or
conditions of any casualty insurance policy or title insurance policy for the
sale, purchase, rental, leasing, or construction of any real property or
improvement thereon.





      (2)   To make an inquiry, elicit any information, make or keep
any record, or use any form of application containing questions or entries
concerning race, color, religion, sex, ancestry, or national origin in
connection with any casualty insurance policy or title insurance policy for
the sale, purchase, rental, leasing or construction of any real property or
improvement thereon, except where required or permitted by the government of
the United States or any department or agency thereof, or by the State of
Ohio or any department or agency thereof, or by any court of competent
jurisdiction.










   (D)   It shall be unlawful discriminatory practice, for any person:





      (1)   To coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised
or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person
in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this
chapter.





      (2)   To, by force or threat of force, willfully injure,
intimidate, or interfere with, or attempt to injure, intimidate, or interfere
with:





         (a)   Any person because of his race, color, religion,
sex, national origin, or ancestry and because he is or has been selling,
purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or negotiating for
the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or occupation of any dwelling, or
applying for or participating in any service, organization, or facility
relating to the business of selling, or renting housing accommodations;





         (b)   Any person because he is or has been, or in order
to intimidate such person or any other person or any class of persons from:





            1.    Participating, without discrimination on
account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or ancestry, in any
of the activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in
division (a) above;





            2.   Affording another person or class of persons
opportunity or protection so to participate.





         (c)   Any person because he is or has been, or in order
to discourage such person or any other person from  lawfully  aiding  or 
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or ancestry, in any of the
activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in division (a)
above, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any
denial of the opportunity to so participate.





      (3)   To discriminate in any manner against any other person
because he has opposed any unlawful practice defined in this section, or
because he has made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any
manner in any investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this chapter.





      (4)   To aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce the doing of any
act declared by this section to be an unlawful discriminatory practice, or to
obstruct or prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this
chapter, or any order issued thereunder, or to attempt directly or indirectly
to commit any act declared by this section to be an unlawful discriminatory
practice.





      (5)   To make or cause to be made, with intent to mislead, any
false entry or statement of fact in any report, account, record, or other
document submitted to any public official, board, or commission, authorized
by statute or ordinance to investigate unlawful discriminatory practices. 
No person shall willfully neglect or fail to make or cause to be made full,
true and correct entries in such reports, accounts, records, or other
documents submitted to such public official, board, or commission. 
(Ord. 2156, passed 9-11-79)









155.03  EXCEPTIONS.




   (A)   However, nothing in this chapter shall bar any religious or
denominational institution or organization, or any charitable or educational
organization, which is operated, supervised, or controlled by or in
connection with a religious organization, or any bona fide private or
fraternal organization, from giving preference to persons of the same
religion or denomination, or to members of such private or fraternal
organization, or from making such selection as is calculated by such
organization to promote the religious principles or the aims, purposes, or
fraternal principles for which it is established or maintained.










   (B)   Provided further that the prohibitions contained in this
chapter shall not apply to the rental of a portion of the housing
accommodation by the occupant thereof.










   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall require an order to offer
property for sale, lease, or rental to any person if the owner has any reason
to believe that such person is not negotiating for the purchase, rental, or
lease of such property in good faith.










   (D)   No person shall knowingly and intentionally induce and entrap
another to commit a violation of this chapter not contemplated by him for the
purpose of instituting prosecution against him. 
(Ord. 2156, passed 9-11-79)









155.99  PENALTY.




   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
unlawful, discriminatory practice, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
Penalty, see § 130.99
























CHAPTER 156
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION CODE









Section










   General Provisions









156.01.1   Statutory authorization



156.01.2   Findings of fact



156.01.3   Statement of purpose



156.01.4   Methods of reducing flood losses



156.01.5   Lands to which these regulations apply



156.01.6   Basis for establishing the  areas of special flood hazard



156.01.7   Abrogation and greater restrictions



156.01.8   Interpretation



156.01.9   Warning and disclaimer of liability



156.01.10   Severability



 



Definitions



 



156.02.1   Definitions.




   





Administration









156.03.1   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator



156.03.2   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator



156.03.3   Floodplain development permits



156.03.4   Application required



156.03.5   Review and approval of a floodplain development permit
application



156.03.6   Inspections



156.03.7   Post-construction certifications required



156.03.8   Revoking a floodplain development permit



156.03.9   Exemption from filing a development permit



156.03.10   Map maintenance activities



156.03.11   Data use and flood map interpretation



156.03.12   Substantial damage determinations



 



Use and Development Standards



for Flood Hazard Reduction



 



156.04.1   Use regulations



156.04.2   Water and wastewater systems



156.04.3   Subdivisions and large developments



156.04.4   Residential structures



156.04.5   Nonresidential structures



156.04.6   Accessory structures



156.04.7   Recreational vehicles



156.04.8   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks



156.04.9   Assurance of flood carrying capacity



 



Appeals and Variances



 



156.05.1   Appeals Board established



156.05.2   Powers and duties



156.05.3   Appeals



156.05.4   Variances



156.05.5   Procedure at hearings



156.05.6   Appeal to the Court



 



Enforcement



 



156.06.1   Compliance required



156.06.2   Notice of violation



156.06.3   Violations and penalties



 



Stormwater Runoff, Soil Erosion, and Sedimentation Control



 



156.33   Purpose



156.34   Definitions



156.35   Scope and intent



156.36   Stormwater runoff control standards



156.37   Soil erosion and sedimentation control standards



156.38   Runoff control and sediment abatement plan requirements



156.39   Administration and appeals



156.40   Compliance responsibility



 



156.99   Penalty



 









GENERAL PROVISIONS









156.01.1 Statutory Authorization.




   ARTICLE XVIII, Section 3, of the Ohio Constitution grants
municipalities the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures for
promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens. Therefore,
the City Council of West Carrollton, State of Ohio, does ordain as follows: 





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.01.2  Findings of Fact.




   The City of West Carrollton has special flood hazard areas that are
subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base. Additionally, structures that are inadequately
elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage also
contribute to the flood loss. In order to minimize the threat of such damages
and to achieve the purposes hereinafter set forth, these regulations are
adopted. 





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)










156.01.3 Statement of Purpose.




   It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare, and to: 





   A.    Protect human life and health;










   B.    Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;










   C.    Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;










   D.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;










   E.    Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;










   F.    Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper
use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect
property and minimize future flood blight areas;










   G.    Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions;










   H.    Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties
within and near flood prone areas;










   I.    Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;










   J.    Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial
values of the floodplain;










   K.    Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or
environmentally incompatible; and










   L.    Meet community participation requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Program. 
(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.01.4  Methods of Reducing Flood Loss.




   In order to accomplish its purposes, these regulations include methods
and provisions for:





   A.    Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in flood heights or velocities;










   B.    Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be





protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;










   C.    Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
flood waters;










   D.    Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating, and other
development which may increase flood damage; and,










   E.    Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers
which will unnaturally





divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.01.5  Lands to Which These Regulations Apply.




   These regulations shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard
within the jurisdiction of the City of West Carrollton as identified in
Section 156.01.6, including any additional areas of special flood hazard
annexed by the City of West Carrollton.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.01.6  Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.




   For the purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or
maps are adopted:





   A.    Flood Insurance Study for Montgomery County, Ohio and
Incorporated Areas dated January 6, 2005. Flood Insurance Rate Map for
Montgomery County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas dated January 6, 2005.










   B.    Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by
a registered Professional Engineer in the State of Ohio which has been
approved by the City of West Carrollton as required by Section 156.04.3
Subdivisions and Large Scale Developments.





   Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. Such
maps and/or studies are on file at the Civic Center, 300 E. Central Ave.,
West Carrollton, Ohio 45449.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.01.7  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.




   These regulations are not intended to repeal any existing ordinances
including subdivision regulations, zoning or building codes. In the event of
a conflict between these regulations and any other ordinance, the more
restrictive shall be followed. These regulations shall not impair any deed
restriction covenant or easement but the land subject to such interests shall
also be governed by the regulations.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.01.8  Interpretation.




   In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all
provisions shall be:





   A.    Considered as minimum requirements;










   B.    Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,










   C.    Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes. Where a provision of these regulations may be in
conflict with a state or Federal law, such state or Federal law shall take
precedence over these regulations.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.01.9  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.




   The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
These regulations do not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damage. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the
City of West Carrollton, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damage that results from reliance
on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder. 





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.01.10  Severability.




   Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the
part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)










DEFINITIONS









156.02.1 Definitions.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these
regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application.









Accessory Structure





A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and
subordinate to, the principal structure.










Appeal





A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any
provision of these regulations or a request for a variance.










Base Flood





The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The base flood may also be referred to as the 1% chance annual
flood or one-hundred (100) year flood.










Base (100-Year) Flood Elevation (BFE)





The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to a specified
datum, usually the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North
American Vertical Datum of l988, and usually expressed in Feet Mean Sea Level
(MSL). In Zone AO areas, the base flood elevation is the natural grade
elevation plus the depth number (from 1 to 3 feet).










Basement





Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on
all sides.










Development





Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or
materials.










Enclosure Below the Lowest Floor





See "Lowest Floor."










Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management) Issued by President Carter in
1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted
in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas,
unless there is no practicable alternative.










Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.










Fill





A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.










Flood or Flooding





A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:





1.    The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or





2.    The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.










Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)





Usually the initial map, produced by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
or U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, for a community
depicting approximate special flood hazard areas.










Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)





An official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development has delineated the areas of
special flood hazard.










Flood Insurance Risk Zones





Zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that indicate the magnitude of the flood
hazard in specific areas of a community. Following are the zone definitions:





Zone  A: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; base
flood elevations are not determined.










Zones A1-30 and Zone AE:





Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; base flood
elevations are determined.










Zone AO:





Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; with flood depths
of 1 to 3 feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain); average depths are
determined.










Zone AH:





Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; flood depths of 1
to 3 feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood elevations are determined.










Zone A99:





Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood to be protected
from the 100-year flood by a Federal flood protection system under
construction; no base flood elevations are determined.










Zone B and Zone X (shaded):





Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject to the 100-year flood with average
depths of less than 1 foot or with contributing drainage area less than 1
square mile; and areas protected by levees from the base flood.










Zone C and Zone X (unshaded):





Areas determined to be outside the 500-year floodplain.










Flood Insurance Study (FIS) The official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown
on Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps), and the water surface elevations of the
base flood.










Flood Protection Elevation





The Flood Protection Elevation, or FPE, is the base flood elevation. In areas
where no base flood elevations exist from any authoritative source, the flood
protection elevation can be historical flood elevations, or base flood
elevations determined and/or approved by the Floodplain Administrator.










Floodway





A floodway is the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge.
A floodway is typically determined through a hydraulic and hydrologic
engineering analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water surface
elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated height. In
no case shall the designated height be more than one foot at any point within
the community. 










The floodway is an extremely hazardous area, and is usually characterized by
any of the following: Moderate to high velocity flood waters, high potential
for debris and projectile impacts, and moderate to high erosion forces.










Freeboard





A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for the
purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many
unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as
wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the
hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.










Historic structure





Any structure that is:





1.    Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;










2.    Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; or










3.    Individually listed on the State of Ohio's inventory of historic
places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.










Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis





An analysis performed by a professional engineer, registered in the State of
Ohio, in accordance with standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA,
used to determine flood elevations and/or floodway boundaries.










Letter of Map Change (LOMC)





A Letter of Map Change is an official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend
or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway
Maps, and Flood Insurance Studies. LOMC's are broken down into the following
categories:










Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA):





A revision based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly
included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current
effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property
is not located in a special flood hazard area.










Letter of Map Revision (LOMR):





A revision based on technical data that, usually due to manmade changes,
shows changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway
delineations, and planimetric features. One common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is
a determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated by
fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, excluded from the
special flood hazard area.










Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR):





A formal review and comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies
with the minimum National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management
criteria. A CLOMR does not amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate
Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, or Flood Insurance Studies.










Lowest floor





The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) of a
structure. This definition  excludes an "enclosure below the lowest floor"
which is an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement
area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable
design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures below the
lowest floor.










Manufactured home





A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured
home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". For the purposes of these
regulations, a manufactured home includes manufactured homes and mobile homes
as defined in Chapter 3733 of the Ohio Revised Code.










Manufactured home park





As specified in the Ohio Administrative Code 3701-27- 01, a manufactured home
park means any tract of land upon which three or more manufactured homes,
used for habitation are parked, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, and includes any roadway, building, structure, vehicle, or
enclosure used or intended for use as part of the facilities of the park. A
tract of land that is subdivided and the individual lots are not for rent or
rented, but are for sale or sold for the purpose of installation of
manufactured homes on the lots, is not a manufactured home park, even though
three or more manufactured homes are parked thereon, if the roadways are
dedicated to the local government authority.










National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)





The NFIP is a Federal program enabling property owners in participating
communities to purchase insurance protection against losses from flooding.
This insurance is designed to provide an insurance alternative to disaster
assistance to meet the escalating costs of repairing damage to buildings and
their contents caused by floods. Participation in the NFIP is based on an
agreement between local communities and the Federal government that states if
a community will adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations to
reduce future flood risks to all development in special flood hazard areas,
the Federal government will make flood insurance available within the
community as a financial protection against flood loss.










New construction





Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
initial effective date of the City of West Carrollton Flood Insurance Rate
Map, October 15, 1981, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.










Person





Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, or any other entity, including state and local governments and
agencies. An agency is further defined in the Ohio Revised Code Section
111.15 as any governmental entity of the State and includes, but is not
limited to, any board, department, division, commission, bureau, society,
council, institution, state college or university, community college
district, technical college district, or state community college. "Agency"
does not include the General Assembly, the Controlling Board, the Adjutant
General's Department, or any court.










Recreational vehicle





A vehicle which is:





1.   Built on a single chassis,





2.   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection,





3.   Designed to be self- propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck, and





4.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.










Registered Professional Architect





A person registered to engage in the practice of architecture under the
provisions of sections 4703.01 to 4703.19 of the Revised Code.










Registered Professional Engineer





A person registered as a professional engineer under Chapter 4733 of the
Revised Code.










Registered Professional Surveyor





A person registered as a professional surveyor under Chapter 4733 of the
Revised Code.










Special Flood Hazard Area





Also known as "Areas of Special Flood Hazard", it is the land in the
floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. Special flood hazard areas are designated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency on Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Insurance
Studies, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Hazard Boundary Maps as
Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99.  Special flood hazard areas may also
refer to areas that are flood prone and designated from other federal state
or local sources of data including but not limited to historical flood
information reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and
flood prone soils associated with a watercourse. 










Start of Construction





The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.










Structure





A walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground.










Substantial Damage





Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring
the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.










Substantial Improvement





Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value
of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This
term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless
of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include:





1.    Any improvement to a structure which is considered "new
construction,"





2.    Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit
by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or





3.    Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure".










Variance





A grant of relief from the standards of these regulations consistent with the
variance conditions herein.










Violation





The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with
these regulations.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)










ADMINISTRATION









156.03.1  Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.




   The Director of Planning and Economic Development is hereby appointed
to administer and implement these regulations and is referred to herein as
the Floodplain Administrator.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.03.2  Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator




   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include but are not limited to:





A.    Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood hazard
areas.










B.    Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood
protection elevation information.










C.    Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these regulations have been met, or refuse to issue the same in
the event of noncompliance.










D.    Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of
these regulations have been committed.










E.    Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection
necessary for the administration of these regulations including Flood
Insurance Rate Maps, Letters of Map Amendment and Revision, records of
issuance and denial of permits to develop in special flood hazard areas,
determinations of whether development is in or out of special flood hazard
areas for the purpose of issuing floodplain development permits, elevation
certificates, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken for
violations of these regulations.










F.    Enforce the provisions of these regulations.










G.    Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings.










H.    Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up.










I.    Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard
areas identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these
regulations.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.03.3  Floodplain Development Permits




   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction or other
development activity including but not limited to filling; grading;
construction; alteration, remodeling, or expanding any structure; or
alteration of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact
with any identified special flood hazard area, as established in Section
156.01.6, until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the
Floodplain Administrator. Such floodplain development permit shall show that
the proposed development activity is in conformity with the provisions of
these regulations. No such  permit shall be issued by the Floodplain
Administrator until the requirements of these regulations have been met.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.03.4  Application Required




   An application for a floodplain development permit shall be required
for all development activities located wholly within, partially within, or in
contact with an identified special flood hazard area. Such application shall
be made by the owner of the property or his/her authorized agent, herein
referred to as the applicant, prior to the actual commencement of  such
construction on a form furnished for that purpose.  Where it is unclear
whether a development site is in a special flood hazard area, the Floodplain
Administrator may require an application for a floodplain development permit
to determine the development's location. Such applications shall include, but
not be limited to:





A.    Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of  materials, drainage facilities, and the
location of the foregoing.










B.    Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed.










C.    Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures.










D.    Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide
enforcement of these  regulations.










E.    Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the State of Ohio and submitted with an application for a
floodplain development permit  when applicable: 





   1.    Floodproofing certification for non- residential floodproofed
structure as required in Section 156.04.5.





   2.    Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
of a structure not meeting the design requirements of Section 156.04.4(E) are
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces.





   3.    Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that
the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in Section 156.04.9(C).





   4.    A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard
areas where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by Section 156.04.9(B).





   5.    A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact
of any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by
Section 156.04.9(A).





   6.    Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivisions and
large scale developments as required by Section 156.04.3.










F.    The application fee for a Floodplain Development Permit Application
shall be $25.00. 





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.03.5  Review and Approval of a Floodplain Development Permit Application




   A.    Review.





   1.    After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application
shall be reviewed until all information required in Section 156.03.4 has been
received by the Floodplain Administrator.





   2.    The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have
been received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from
which prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for
obtaining such permits as required including permits issued by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and Section
404 of the Clean Water Act, and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
under Section 401 of the Clean Water Act.










B.    Approval.   Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of a complete
application, the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove
the application. If an application is approved, a floodplain development
permit shall be issued. All floodplain development permits shall be
conditional upon the commencement of work within one (1) year. A floodplain
development permit shall expire one (1) year after issuance unless the
permitted activity has been substantially begun and is thereafter pursued to
completion.
(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.03.6  Inspections




   The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections at
appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor
compliance with permit conditions.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.03.7  Post-Construction Certifications Required



   The following as-built certifications are required after a floodplain
development permit has been issued:




A.    For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency Elevation Certificate completed by a
registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated
structures in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the
elevation certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner's
representative.










B.    For all development activities subject to the standards of Section
156.03.10(A), a Letter of Map Revision. 
(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.03.8  Revoking a Floodplain Development Permit



   A floodplain development permit shall be revocable, if among other
things, the actual  development activity does not conform to the terms of
the application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of
a permit, an appeal may be taken to the Appeals Board (Variance Board for
Counties) in accordance with Section 156.05 of these regulations. 
(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)








156.03.9  Exemption from Filing a Development Permit



   An application for a floodplain development permit shall not be
required for:




A.    Maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement sealing, or
for small nonstructural development activities (except for filling and
grading) valued at less than $5,000.










B.    Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured home
park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Health and
subject to the flood damage reduction provisions of the Ohio Administrative
Code Chapter 3701.










C.    Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting Board
under Chapter 4906 of the Ohio  Revised Code.










D.    Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous Waste
Siting Board under Chapter 3734 of the Ohio Revised Code.










E.    Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which are
subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 - Floodplain Management.





   Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain development
permit is also exempt from the standards of these regulations.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.03.10  Map Maintenance Activities




   To meet National Flood Insurance Program minimum requirements to have
flood data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to ensure that the City of West
Carrollton flood maps, studies and other data identified in Section 156.01.6
accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain management
criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance activities
are identified:





A.    Requirement to Submit New Technical Data





   1.    For all development proposals that impact floodway
delineations or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that
technical data reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months
of the date such information becomes available. These development proposals
include:





      a.    Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base
flood elevations or alter floodway boundaries;





      b.    Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed
structures where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special
flood hazard area;





      c.    Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation
or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and





      d.    Subdivision or large scale development proposals
requiring the establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with
Section 156.04.3.





   2.    It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical
data, required in accordance with Section 156.03.10A., prepared in a format
required for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision,
and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions
shall be the responsibility of the applicant.





   3.    The Floodplain Administrator shall require a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development
permit for:





      a.    Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base
flood elevation; and





      b.    Proposed development which increases the base flood
elevation by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway.





   4.    Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a Letter of
Map Revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to Section
156.03.10 A.1.










B.    Right to Submit New Technical Data





   The Floodplain Administrator may request changes to any of the
information shown on an effective map that does not impact floodplain or
floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such as labeling or
planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate supporting
documentation made in writing by the City Manager of the City of West
Carrollton, and may be submitted at any time.










C.    Annexation/Detachment.





   Upon occurrence, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify FEMA in
writing whenever the boundaries of the City of West Carrollton have been
modified by annexation or the community has assumed authority over an area,
or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management
regulations for a particular area. In order that the City of West
Carrollton's Flood Insurance Rate Map accurately represent the City of West
Carrollton boundaries, include within such notification a copy of a map of
the City of West Carrollton suitable for reproduction, clearly showing the
new corporate limits or the new area for which the City of West Carrollton
has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.03.11  Data Use and Flood Map Interpretation




   The following guidelines shall apply to the use and interpretation of
maps and other data showing areas of special flood hazard:





A.    In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas,
or in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation
and floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator
shall review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available
from a federal, state, or other source.










B.    Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA flood
maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and
floodway boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width
and/or lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased
base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA
flood maps and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain
Administrator.










C.    When Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Insurance
Study have been provided by FEMA:





   1.    Upon the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by the
FEMA, the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all
previously existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of
administering these regulations.





   2.    Prior to the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by
FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where
no base flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist or where the preliminary
base flood elevations or floodway areas exceed the base flood elevations
and/or floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA. Such
preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.










D.    The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special
flood hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation
as provided in Section 156.05.3, Appeals and Variances.










E.    Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and
field elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection
elevations (as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table,
established high water marks, etc.) shall prevail.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.03.12  Substantial Damage Determinations




   Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes including
flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire, etc. After such a damage event, the
Floodplain Administrator shall:





A.    Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood
hazard areas;










B.    Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures
located in special flood hazard areas; and










C.    Make reasonable attempts to notify owners of substantially damaged
structures of the need to obtain a floodplain development permit prior to
repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction.





   Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other measures
to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent repair
process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service
announcements, and other public information materials related to the
floodplain development permits and repair of damaged structures; 
coordinating with other federal, state, and local agencies to assist with
substantial damage determinations; providing owners of damaged structures
materials and other information related to the proper repair of damaged
structures in special flood hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially
damaged structures with Increased Cost of Compliance insurance claims.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)










USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION





   The following use and development standards apply to development wholly
within, partially within, or in contact with any special flood hazard area as
established in Section 156.01.6 or 156.03.11(A):









156.04.1 Use Regulations




A.    Permitted Uses. All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section or
any other applicable land use regulation adopted by City of West Carrollton
are  allowed provided they meet the provisions of these regulations.










B.    Prohibited Uses.





   1.    Private water supply  systems in all special flood hazard
areas identified by FEMA, permitted under Section 3701 of the Ohio Revised
Code.





   2.    Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special flood
hazard areas, permitted under Section 3734 of the Ohio Revised Code.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.04.2  Water and Wastewater Systems




   The following standards apply to all water supply, sanitary sewerage
and waste disposal  systems not otherwise regulated by the Ohio Revised
Code: 





A.    All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;










B.    New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and,










C.    On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to or contamination from them during flooding.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.04.3  Subdivisions and Large Developments




   A.    All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these
regulations;










   B.    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;










   C.    All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and










   D.    In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data are not available,  the applicant shall provide a hydrologic
and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for
all subdivision proposals and other proposed developments containing at least
50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is less.










   E.    The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical
data to FEMA in Section 156.03.10 A.1.d. when a hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis is completed that generates base flood elevations as required by
Section 156.04.3 D.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.04.4  Residential Structures




A.    New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to
or above the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring
(156.04.4A.) and construction materials resistant to flood damage
(156.04.4B.) are satisfied.










B.    New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.










C.    New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so
as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding.










D.    New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. In
Zone AO areas with no elevations specified, the structure shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the
highest adjacent natural grade.










E.    New construction and substantial improvements, including
manufactured homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the
flood protection elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood
waters may have an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure
meets the following standards:





   1.    Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage; and





   2.    Be designed and certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or





   3.    Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a
total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one
foot above grade. The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.










F.    Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.










G.    Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall be exempt
from the development standards of Section 156.04.4.










H.    In AO Zones, new construction and substantial improvement shall have
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from the structure.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.04.5  Nonresidential Structures




A.    New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of
Section 156.04.4 A. - C.  and E. - G.










B.    New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the





level of the flood protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:





   1.    Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the
flood protection elevation;





   2.    Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,





   3.    Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Floodproofing
Certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with Section 156.04.5 B.1. and 2.










C.    In Zone AO areas with no elevations specified, the structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above
the highest adjacent natural grade.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.04.6  Accessory Structures




   Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be granted
for accessory structures containing no more than 600 square feet. Such
structures must meet the following standards:





A.    They shall not be used for human habitation;










B.    They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;










C.    They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of flood waters;










D.    They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;










E.    Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the flood protection
elevation; and










F.    They shall meet the opening requirements of Section 156.04.4 E.3.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.04.7 Recreational Vehicles




   Recreational vehicles must meet at least one of the following standards:





A.    They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas for
more than 180 days, or










B.    They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or










C.    They must meet all standards of Section 156.04.4.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.04.8  Above Ground Gas or Liquid Storage Tanks




   All above ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to
prevent flotation or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.04.9  Assurance of Flood Carrying Capacity



   Pursuant to the purpose and methods of reducing flood damage stated in
these regulations, the following additional standards are adopted to assure
that the reduction of the flood carrying capacity of watercourses is
minimized:




A.    Development in Floodways





   1.    In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to
issuance of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional
engineer, demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any
increase in the base flood elevation; or





   2.    Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base
flood elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed
by the applicant:





      a.    Meet the requirements to submit technical data in
Section 156.03.10 A.;





      b.    An evaluation of alternatives which would not result in
increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are
not feasible;





      c.    Certification that no structures are located in areas
which would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;





      d.    Documentation of individual legal notices to all
impacted property owners within and outside the community, explaining the
impact of the proposed action on their property; and





      e.    Concurrence of the City Manager of the City of West
Carrollton and the Chief Executive Officer of any other communities impacted
by the proposed actions.










B.    Development in Riverine Areas with Base Flood Elevations but No
Floodways





   1.    In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA
where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated, the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
base flood elevation more than 1.0 (one) foot at any point. Prior to issuance
of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic
and hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that this standard has been met; or,





   2.    Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified
by FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have
been designated causing more than one foot increase in the base flood
elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the
applicant:





      a.    An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an
increase of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation
why these alternatives are not feasible;





      b.    Section 156.04.9 A., items a. and c.-e..










C.    Alterations of a Watercourse.  For the purpose of these
regulations, a watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its
banks. The extent of the banks shall be established by a field determination
of the "bankfull stage." The field determination of "bankfull stage" shall be
based on methods presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General
Technical Report RM-245, Stream Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide
to Field Technique or other applicable publication available from a Federal,
State, or other authoritative source. For all proposed developments that
alter a watercourse, the following standards apply:





   1.    The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the
issuance of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a
description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of the proposed development, and certification by a
registered professional engineer that the bankfull flood carrying Capacity of
the watercourse will not be diminished.





   2.    Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and
the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such
notification must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.





   3.    The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain
Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with
the City of West Carrollton specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If
an agreement is required, it shall be made a  condition of the floodplain
development permit.





   4.    The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical
data in Section 156.03.10 A.1.c. when an alteration of a watercourse results
in the relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including
the placement of culverts.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)










APPEALS AND VARIANCES









156.05.1  Appeals Board Established




A.    The Board of Zoning Appeals, as established by the City, shall hear
and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.










B.    All meetings of the Appeals Board shall be open to the public except
that the Board may deliberate in executive sessions as part of quasijudicial
hearings in accordance with law. The Appeals Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question and shall keep
records of all official actions. Records of the Appeals Board shall be kept
and filed in the Civic Center, 300 E. Central Ave., West Carrollton, Ohio.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.05.2  Powers and Duties




A.    The Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made
by the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or enforcement of these
regulations.










B.    Authorize variances in accordance with Section 156.05.4 of these
regulations.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.05.3  Appeals




   Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official action
of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Appeals Board provided that such person shall file,
within 10 days of the date of such notice and order, or other official
action, a brief statement of the grounds for such hearing or for the
mitigation of any item appearing on any order of the Floodplain
Administrator's decision. Such appeal shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant, and be filed with the Floodplain Administrator. Upon receipt of
the appeal, the Floodplain Administrator shall transmit said notice and all
pertinent information on which the Floodplain Administrator's decision was
made to the Appeals Board.





   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Appeals Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in
interest, and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is
submitted. 
(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.05.4  Variances




   Any person believing that the use and development standards of these
regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an application for
a variance. The Appeals Board shall have the power to authorize, in specific
cases, such variances from the standards of these regulations, not
inconsistent with Federal regulations, as will not be contrary to the public
interest where, owing to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of these regulations would result in
unnecessary hardship.





A.    Application for a Variance





   1.    Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance
is sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the
Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it
to the Appeals Board.





   2.    Such application at a minimum shall contain the following
information: Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of
the variance sought; and reason for the variance request.





   3.    All applications for a variance shall be accompanied by a
Variance Application Fee as set in the schedule of fees for Land Usage
Applications, Chapter 157, of the West Carrollton Code of Ordinances adopted
by the City of West Carrollton.










B.    Notice for Public Hearing. The Appeals Board shall schedule and hold
a public hearing within thirty (30) days  after the receipt of an
application for a variance from the Floodplain Administrator.





   Prior to the hearing, a notice of such hearing shall be given in one
(1) or more newspapers of general circulation in the community at least ten
(20) days before the  date of the hearing. 










C.    Public Hearing.  At such hearing the applicant shall present such
statements and evidence as the  Appeals Board requires. In considering such
variance applications, the Appeals  Board shall consider and make findings
of fact on all evaluations, all relevant factors,  standards specified in
other sections of these regulations and the following factors: 





   1.    The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.





   2.    The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.





   3.    The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.





   4.    The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.





   5.    The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.





   6.    The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.





   7.    The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.





   8.    The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area.





   9.    The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.





   10.    The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.





   11.    The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.










D.   Variances shall only be issued upon:





   1.    A showing of good and sufficient cause.





   2.    A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the
property. Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of
these regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the
applicant.





   3.    A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these
regulations; additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public
expense, nuisances, fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws.





   4.    A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages.





   5.    A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.





   Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these
regulations, the Appeals Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems  necessary to further the purposes of these
regulations.










E.    Other Conditions for Variances





   1.    Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.





   2.    Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items in Section 156.05.4
C.1. to 11. have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond
one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.





   3.    Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.05.5  Procedure at Hearings




   A.    All testimony shall be given under oath.










   B.    A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except
confidential deliberations of the Board, but including all documents
presented and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.










   C.    The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and
testimony in support of the appeal or variance.










   D.    The administrator may present evidence or testimony in
opposition to the appeal or variance.










   E.    All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the
adverse party or their counsel.










   F.    Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall
become part of the record for appeal.










   G.    The Board shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the
attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance
and service shall be collected in advance.










   H.    The Board shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its
decision. The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and
thereafter issued in writing or the decision may be issued in writing within
a reasonable time after the hearing.
(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.05.6  Appeal to the Court




   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board may appeal such
decision to the Montgomery County Court of Common Pleas, as provided in
Chapter 2506 of the Ohio Revised Code.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)










ENFORCEMENT









156.06.1  Compliance Required




   A.    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or
altered without full compliance with the terms of these  regulations and all
other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of
these regulations, unless specifically exempted from filing for a development
permit as stated in Section 156.03.9.










   B.    Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a
violation of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with
Section 156.06.3.










   C.    Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans
and applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the
use, and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in
accordance with Section 156.06.3. 
(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.06.2  Notice of Violation.




   Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of these regulations, he shall give notice of such
violation to the person responsible therefore and order compliance with these
regulations as hereinafter provided. Such notice and order shall:










A.    Be put in writing on an appropriate form;










B.    Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections
of these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial action
which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these
regulations;










C.    Specify a reasonable time for performance;










D.    Advise the owner, operator, or occupant of the right to appeal;










E.    Be served on the owner, occupant, or agent in person. However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail
to the person's last known mailing address, residence, or place of business,
and/or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.





(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)









156.06.3  Violations and Penalties.




   Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply
with any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a strict liability
offense, and shall constitute a first degree misdemeanor. Any person who
violates these regulations or fails to comply with any of its requirements
shall upon conviction thereof be fined or imprisoned as provided by the laws
of the City of West Carrollton. Each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
City of West  Carrollton from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. The City of West Carrollton
shall prosecute any violation of these regulations in accordance with the
penalties stated herein. 
(Ord. 3280.  Passed 10-26-04.)










STORMWATER RUNOFF, SOIL EROSION,





AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL









156.33 PURPOSE.



   The purpose of §§ 156.33 through 156.40 is to establish standards,
principles, and procedures to regulate construction-oriented,
earth-disturbing site development activities which cause or may cause adverse
impacts of accelerated surface water runoff, soil erosion, and sediment
deposition by provisions designed to:



 



   (A)    Permit development without increasing the flooding of other
lands;



 



   (B)    Reduce damage to receiving streams and storm drainage systems
and impairment of their capacity which may be caused by increases in the
quantity and rate of water and sediment discharged;



 



   (C)    Preserve the rights and options of all property owners and
assure the long-term adequacy of storm drainage systems;



 



   (D)    Prevent destruction of the natural features, soils, and
vegetative cover of sites in the community; and



 



   (E)    Promote and protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.



(Ord. 2589, passed 5-26-87)








156.34  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of §§ 156.33 through 156.40 the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



 



   APPROVING AGENT. The City Engineer or his designee.



 



   CHANNEL. A natural stream that conveys water; a ditch or channel
excavated for the flow of water.



 



   CLEARING. The clearing, grubbing, scalping, removal of trees and
stumps, and removing and disposition of all vegetation and debris within the
site, including the conditions resulting therefrom.



 



   CONSTRUCTION. The erection, alteration, repair, renovation, demolition,
or removal of any building or structure; and the clearing, stripping,
excavating, filling, grading, and regulation of sites in connection therewith.



 



   CUT. An excavation. The difference between a point on the original
ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade. Also,
the material removed in excavation.



 



   DEBRIS. Loose refuse or earth material not suitable for use as
presently situated or constituted as determined by the approving agent.



 



   DEVELOPER. Any individual, subdivider, firm, association, syndicate,
partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity commencing
proceedings under §§ 156.33 - 156.40 to effect the development of land for
himself or for another.



 



   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.



 



   DEVELOPMENT AREA. Any contiguous area owned by one person or developed
as a single unit included within the scope of these regulations, upon which
earth-disturbing activities are planned or under way.



 



   DITCH. An open channel with intermittent flow, either dug or natural,
for the purpose of drainage or irrigation. (See STREAM, DRAINAGEWAY, and
GRASSED WATERWAY).



 



   DRAINAGEWAY. An area of concentrated water flow other than a river,
stream, ditch, or grassed waterway.



 



   DUMPING. The grading, pushing, piling, throwing, unloading, or placing
of earth material.



 



   EARTH-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any grading, excavation, filling, or other
alteration of the earth's surface where natural or man-made ground cover is
destroyed and which may result in or contribute to erosion and sediment
pollution.



 



   EARTH MATERIAL.  Soil, sediment, rock, sand, gravel, and organic
material or residue associated with or attached to the soil.



 



   EROSION. The wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind,
ice, or other geological agents, including such processes as gravitational
creep; detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by wind, water, ice,
or gravity.



 




      (1)   ACCELERATED EROSION. Erosion much more rapid than
normal, natural, or geologic erosion, primarily as a result of the influence
of the activities of man.










      (2)    GULLYEROSION. A type of erosion caused by water
accumulating in narrow channels and over short periods during and immediately
after rainfall or snow or ice melt activity which removes soil such that
channels become considerably deeper than what would otherwise result by
normal smoothing or tilling operations.










      (3)    NATURAL EROSION or GEOLOGICAL EROSION. The wearing away
of the earth's surface bywater, ice, or other natural agents under natural
environmental conditions of climate, vegetation, and the like, undisturbed by
man.










      (4)    NORMAL EROSION. The gradual erosion of land used by man
which does not greatly exceed natural erosion.










      (5)    RILL EROSION. An erosion process in which numerous
small channels only several inches deep are formed; occurs mainly on recently
disturbed soils.










      (6)    SHEET EROSION. The removal of a fairly uniform layer of
soil from the land surface by wind or runoff water.










   EXCAVATION. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated, or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.










   FILLAny act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material
is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved to a new location
above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface and
shall include the conditions resulting therefrom; the difference in elevation
between a point on the original ground and a designated point of higher
elevation on the final grade; the material used to make a fill.










   FINISHED GRADE.The final grade or elevation of the ground surface
conforming to the approved grading plan.










   FLOODPLAIN SCOUR. The abrading and wearing away of the nearly level
land situated on either side of a channel due to overflow flooding.










   GRADING.The stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, or any
combination thereof of earth- disturbing activity, including land in its cut
or filled conditions.










   GRASSED WATERWAY. A broad and shallow natural course or constructed
channel with erosion-resistant grasses or similar herbaceous cover which is
used to conduct surface water drainage runoff at non-erosive velocities.










   HAZARD.Any danger to public health, welfare, and safety including
exposure to risk or damage to property or liability for personal injury; or
risk of harm to land, air, or water resulting in environmental degradation.
Hazards can include flooding and ponding, compaction and settling,
landslides, earthquakes, toxic chemicals, radiation, fire, and disease.










   MULCHING.The application of suitable materials on the soil surface to
conserve moisture, hold soil in place, and aid in establishing plant cover.










   NATURAL VEGETATION.Any ground cover in its original state before
commencement of earth-disturbing activities.










   NUISANCE.A public nuisance as known by common law or in equity
jurisprudence.










   PERMANENT VEGETATION.Producing long-term vegetative cover, for example,
bluegrass, tall fescue, crown vetch, and the like.










   PERMITTEE.Any person to whom approval of a site plan according and
pursuant to this standard is granted, or who is subject to inspection under
it.










   PERSON.Any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, agency,
unincorporated association, municipal corporation, county, or state agency
within the state, the federal government, or any combination thereof.










   PLAN.As used in this standard, the runoff control and sediment
abatement plan.










   PLANS.Profiles, typical cross sections, working drawings, and
supplemental drawings of site, grading, drainage, and runoff and
sedimentation control plans, vicinity map, soil map, and other plans as
approved, or exact reproductions thereof, which show the location, character,
dimensions, and details of the work.










   POLLUTION.The man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, and
biological integrity of air and water resources.










   PUBLIC WATERS.Those waters within lakes (except private ponds and lakes
on single properties), rivers, streams, ditches, or waters leaving property
on which surface water originates.










   RUNOFF. The portion of rainfall, melted snow, or irrigation water that
flows across the ground surface and eventually is returned to streams.










      (1)   ACCELERATED RUNOFF. Increased rate and volume of runoff
due to less permeable surface primarily caused by urbanization.










      (2)   PEAK RATE OF RUNOFF. The maximum rate of runnoff for any
24-hour storm of a given frequency.










   SEDIMENT. Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site or origin
by air, water, gravity, or ice, and has come to rest on the earth's surface
either above or below water.










   SEDIMENT BASIN. A barrier, dam, or other suitable detention facility
built across an area of water flow to settle and retain sediment carried by
surface drainage runoff waters.










   SEDIMENT POLLUTION. Failure to use management or conservation practices
to abate wind or water erosion of the sail or to abate the degradation of
waters by soil sediment in conjunction with land grading, excavating,
filling, or other soil-disturbing activities.










   SITE.Any lot or parcel of land or a series of lots or parcels of land
adjoining or contiguous or joined together under one ownership where
clearing, stripping, grading, or excavating is performed.










   SLOPE.The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100 feet
of horizontal distance.










   SLOUGHING.A downward movement of an extended layer of soil over a slope
frequently resulting from the undermining action of surface water runoff or
the earth-disturbing activity of man.










   SOIL.All earth material of whatever origin that overlies bedrock, and
may include the decomposed zone of bedrock which can be readily excavated by
mechanical equipment.










   SOIL LOSS.Soil moved from a given site by the forces of erosion, and
redeposited at another location.










   STEEP SLOPE.A slope over 15% grade, which is characterized by increased
runoff, erosion, and sediment hazards.










   STORM FREQUENCY. The average period of time in years within which a
storm of a given duration and intensity can be expected to be equaled or
exceeded.










   STREAM. A body of water running or flowing on the earth's surface or
channel in which such flow occurs. Flow is continuous or seasonally
intermittent.










   STRIPPING.Any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the
vegetative surface cover.










   SUBDIVISION.The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as
contiguous units on the last preceding tax roll, into two or more parcels,
sites, or lots, any one of which is less than five acres for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, provided, however,
that the division or partition of land into parcels of more than five acres
not involving any new streets or easements of access, and the sale or
exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners, where the sale or exchange
does not create additional building sites, shall be excepted; or the
improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential, commercial, or
industrial structures or groups of structures involving the division or
allocation of land for the opening, widening, or extension of any street or
streets, except private streets serving industrial structures; the division
or allocation of land as open spaces for the common use by owners, occupants,
or lease holders or as easements for the extension and maintenance of public
sewer, water, storm drainage, or other public facilities.










   SUBSOIL.That part of the soil below the surface soil or plow layer.










   SURFACE SOIL. The uppermost part (five to eight inches) of the soil
commonly stirred by tillage implements, or its equivalent in uncultivated
soils.










   SWALE.A low lying stretch of vegetated land which gathers and carries
surface water runoff at a reduced rate of flow and conveys it downstream at
less erosive velocities.










   TEMPORARY VEGETATION. Short- term vegetative cover used to stabilize
the soil surface until final grading and installation of permanent vegetation
(for example, oats, rye or wheat).










   WATERCOURSE.Any natural or artificial waterway (including, but not
limited to, streams, rivers, creeks, ditches, channels, canals, conduits,
culverts, drains, drainageways, waterways, gullies, ravines, or washes) in
which waters flow in a definite direction or course, either continuously or
intermittently; and including any area adjacent thereto which is subject to
inundation by reason of overflow of flood water.





(Ord. 2589, passed 5-26-87)









156.35  SCOPE AND INTENT.




   (A)    These standards shall apply to both the development and
redevelopment of land proposed for the following types of land uses.





      (1)    Land used or being developed for residential,
commercial, office, or industrial purposes, or other non-farm uses.





      (2)    Land used or being developed for recreation, wildlife,
or natural purposes.





         (a)    Runoff or sediment control will be required for
the development of a public facility, undertaken by a government agency, in
accordance with an approved control policy.










   (B)    Any person or persons proposing to develop or redevelop land
for any of the uses listed above shall design and implement a site grading
and drainage development plan which will:





      (1)   Yield quantities of surface water runoff from the
development site at rates which are the same as or less than those before
development occurred and result in rates of gross erosion as specified in
division (E)(3) below.





      (2)    Not result in increasing current potentials for
sedimentation of lands, siltation of waters, and flooding of watercourses
that are at lower elevations off-site.










   (C)    Changes subject to regulation under this section shall not be
made in the existing natural surface composition or subsurface configuration
of any land proposed for development or redevelopment within the city for
land uses specified under division (C)(1) below, nor shall approval of a site
development plan be given:





      (1)    Unless a determination is made by the approving agent
that implementation of an approved site grading and drainage development plan
would not cause runoff, erosion, and sediment impacts that would be harmful
or damaging to the lands and waters off-site; or





      (2)    Until a plan required according to division (F) below
for minimizing the harmful and damaging potentials of runoff, erosion, and
sediment impacts anticipated to result from implementation of a proposed site
grading and drainage development plan has been approved by the approving
agent.










   (D)    Development situations may exist such that the development
will have none of the harmful effects associated with increased runoff rates
and volumes, or sediment deposition. The developments are eligible for a
waiver from these standards; however, the waiver applies only to the
following requirements and may have specific conditions attached by the
approving agent.





      (1)    The preparation of plans, maps, or information
specified in division (F) below.





      (2)    The installation of sediment abatement control devices
until such time as site inspection indicates they may be necessary.





      (3)    Controlling runoff to predevelopment conditions as in
this division (D), except that stormwater runoff must be controlled to the
maximum volume and minimum rate feasible for the site as determined by the
approving agent.










   (E)    The request for a waiver shall be in writing and shall
include sufficient detail to determine that granting a waiver will not be
detrimental to abutting properties or to the drainage system. However, the
waiver does not in any way imply a relaxation of any of the other standards
in this regulation, including the requirement for adequate on-site drainage,
the ability to accept runoff from land tributary to the development, or
reasonable control of soil erosion and sediment.










   (F)    Development activities for which waivers may be considered
may include but are not limited to the following:





      (1)    Single-family residential developments involving
improvement of an individual lot in a previously approved subdivision.





      (2)    Modifications to, or redevelopment of, an existing
development which will not result in additional impervious areas.





      (3)    Minor additions to existing property, such as
driveways, sidewalks, patios, and the like.




         (Ord. 2589, passed 5-26-87)








156.36  STORMWATER RUNOFF CONTROL STANDARDS.




   (A)    Each development shall provide for the on-site or off-site
detention of excess stormwater runoff resulting from that development. For
the purpose of this standard, EXCESS STORMWATER RUNOFF shall include all
increases in stormwater resulting from: an increase in the impervious surface
of the site, including all additions of buildings, roads, and parking lots;
changes in soil absorption caused by compaction during development;
modifications in contours, including the filling or draining of small
depressional areas, alterations of drainageways, or regrading of slopes;
destruction of forest; alteration of drainageways or installation of
collection systems to intercept street flows or to replace swales or other
drainageways; or the alteration of subsurface flows, including any
groundwater dewatering or diversion practices such as curtain drains,
compared with the site in its natural state.










   (B)    Any foreseeable increase in the rates and volume of site
surface drainage water runoff caused by site development shall be controlled
so that  post-development peak rate of runoff does not exceed that of
predevelopment for all 24-hour storms between a one-year frequency and the
critical storm frequency as determined below. A recommended method which may
be used to determine changes in rates and volumes of runoff is presented in
the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Engineering Division of the Soil
Conservation Service (SCS), Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical
Release No. 55 (Washington, D.C.: USDA, January 1975), and the Ohio
Supplement (April 1981). To find the critical storm frequency for which
additional control will be needed:





      (1)    Determine the percent increase in runoff volume for a
one-year frequency, 24-hour storm; and





      (2)    Determine the critical storm frequency for which
additional control is needed by using the percent increase in runoff volume,
derived in division (B)(1) above, in the table below:










Percent Increase in Runoff Volume from a





One-Year Frequency, 24-Hour Storm









 




Equal to or



Greater Than



Percent

 




Less Than (Percent)

 

Critical Storm


Frequency

(Years)



--   

 

10

 

   1




10

 

20

 

2




20

 

50

 

5




50

 

100

 

10




100

 

250

 

25




250

 

500

 

50




500

 

--

 

100





 




   (C)      The peak rate of runoff from the critical storm
occurring over the development shall not exceed the peak rate of runoff from
a one-year frequency storm occurring over the same area under predevelopment
conditions. Storms of less frequent occurrence (longer return period) than
the critical storm shall have peak rate of runoff not greater than for the
same storm under predevelopment conditions. As an example, if the total
volume is shown to be increased by 35%, the critical storm is a five-year
storm. The peak rate of runoff for all storms up to this intensity shall be
controlled so as not to exceed the peak rate of runoff from a one-year
frequency storm under predevelopment conditions in the area. The runoff from
a more intense storm need only be controlled so as not to exceed the
predevelopment peak rate from the same frequency of storm.










   (D)    Design regulations. All detention facilities and improvements
required by this section shall comply with the following regulations.





      (1)    Storage volumes. Storage may be provided by wet or dry
bottom basins or reservoirs or rooftop storage facilities.





      (2)    Maximum depth. The maximum planned depth of stormwater
stored should be five feet unless site conditions lend themselves to greater
depths.





      (3)    Outlet control structures. Outlet control structures
shall be designed as simply as possible and shall operate automatically. They
will be designed to limit discharges into existing or planned downstream
channels or conduits so as not to exceed the existing flow from the site in
its natural condition.





      (4)    Spillway. Emergency overflow facilities shall be
provided unless inflow is controlled to divert flows when the basin is at
capacity.





      (5)    Dry bottom basin. For basins designed without permanent
pools:





         (a)    Interior drainage. Provisions must be made to
facilitate interior drainage, to include the provision of natural grades to
outlet structures, longitudinal and transverse grades to perimeter drainage
facilities, or the installation of subsurface drains.





         (b)    Multipurpose features. These may be designed to
serve secondary purposes for recreation, open space, or other types of use
which will not be adversely affected by occasional or intermittent flooding.





         (c)    Cleaning. The basins shall be designed for
periodic cleaning and removal of sediments, which shall be removed from the
site or otherwise disposed of in an appropriate manner.





         (d)    Slopes. Approach slopes should be 6:1 but not
more than 3:1.





      (6)    Wet basins. For basins designed with permanent pools:





         (a)    Depth for fish. If fish are used to help keep the
basin clean, at least one-quarter of the area of the permanent pool must have
a minimum depth of ten feet.





         (b)    Facilities for emptying. For emergency purposes,
cleaning, or shoreline maintenance, facilities shall be provided or plans
prepared for the use of auxiliary equipment to permit emptying and drainage.





         (c)    Pollution abatement. Aeration facilities may be
required when the quality of the influent and detention time would result in
a lowering of dissolved oxygen content in the basin.





         (d)    Slopes. Approach slopes should be 6:1 but not
more than 3:1 and shall be at least four to six feet wide and slope gently
toward the basin. The side slopes shall be of nonerosive material with a
slope of 1:1 or flatter. The ledge shall be four to six feet wide and slope
gently toward the shore to prevent people or objects from sliding into deep
water. There shall be a freeboard of 12 to 18 inches above the high-water
elevation on all retention basins. Alternate designs for side slopes may be
considered under special circumstances where good engineering practice is
demonstrated.





         (e)    Cleaning. The basins shall be designed to include
sediment traps in all inlets. Sediment traps shall be designed to permit
periodic cleaning and maintenance. A basin maintenance plan shall be
developed to insure that the design depths of the basin will remain over time.





      (7)    Building regulations.





         (a)    Rooftop storage. Detention storage requirements
may be met either in total or in part by detention on flat roofs. Design
specifications of the detention shall be a part of the application for a
zoning certificate. These specifications shall include the depth and volume
of storage, design of outlet devices and downdrains, elevations of overflow
scuppers, design loadings for the roof structure, and emergency overflow
provisions. Rooftop storage shall not be permitted to drain directly into
sanitary sewers or streets.





         (b)    Parking lot storage. Paved parking lots may be
designed to provide temporary detention storage of stormwater on a portion of
their surfaces. Outlets shall be designed to empty the stored waters slowly,
and depths of storage must be limited so as to prevent damage to parked
vehicles, and storage areas shall be posted with warning signs. Maximum
recommended depth is six inches. Alternate designs may be considered under
special circumstances where good engineering practice is demonstrated.





         (c)    Detention storage. All or a portion of the
detention storage may also be provided in underground detention facilities.




            (Ord. 2589, passed 5-26-87)








156.37 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL STANDARDS.




   (A)    In order to prevent both soil erosion and sedimentation, a
soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be required whenever a
development will involve any clearing, grading, transporting, or other form
of disturbing land by the movement of earth.










   (B)    Sediment deposition caused by accelerated stormwater runoff
over a development site or by accelerated erosion due to the sloughing or
sliding of surface soil that has been exposed by grading, dumping,
stockpiling, or any other excavation-related earth disturbances shall be
retarded wherever possible and confined to within the boundaries of the
development site.










   (C)    The accumulative monthly predicted amounts of gross soil loss
anticipated from sheet and rill erosion shall be abated to within an average
annual rate of 15 tons per acre during the first year, ten tons per acre for
any year thereafter of site development activities, and to within five tons
per acre per year after site development is completed. The Universal Soil
Loss Equation as referenced within the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service (SCS), Water Management and Sediment Control for
Urbanizing Areas (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, June
1978), or other approved methods shall be used to predict average annual
rates of gross soil loss by month from a development site.










   (D)    Specifically, the following protection shall be provided for
all disturbed areas: minimize velocities of water runoff, maximize protection
of disturbed areas from stormwater runoff, and retain sedimentation within
the development site as early as possible following disturbances. A list of
major problem areas for erosion and sedimentation control follows. For each
one, the purpose of requiring control is described. Soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures for all such areas shall be provided with a
view toward achieving the specific purpose listed below for which a control
plan is required:





      (1)    Erodible slopes: prevent detachment and transportation
of soil particles from slope.





      (2)    Streams, streambeds, streambanks, bodies of water, lake
shorelines: prevent detachment and transportation of soil particles.





      (3)    Drainageways: prevent detachment and transportation of
soil particles (which would otherwise deposit in streams, bodies of water, or
wetlands); promote deposit or sediment loads (traversing these areas) before
these reach bodies of water.





      (4)    Land adjacent to streams, ponds, lakes, and wetlands:
prevent detachment and transportation of soil particles.





      (5)    Enclosed drainage structure: prevent sedimentation in
structure, erosion at outfall of system, and deposit of sediment loads within
system or beyond it.





      (6)   Large flat surface areas (unpaved): prevent detachment
of soil particles and their off-site transportation.





      (7)    Impervious surfaces: prevent the detachment and
transportation of soil (in response to an increase in the rate or volume of
runoff of the site or its concentration caused by impervious surfaces).





      (8)    Borrow and stockpile areas: divert runoff from face of
slopes which are exposed in the excavation process; convey runoff in
stabilized channels to stable disposal points; leave borrow areas and
stockpiles in stable condition.





      (9)    Adjacent properties: prevent their erosion or
deposition with sediment.










   (E)    The Appendix presents graphic examples of erosion and
sedimentation control measures and indicates, by asterisk, when any such
measure may effectively control the problem area. One or more of each such
asterisked measure shall suffice to comply with the requirements of this
section.





(Ord. 2589, passed 5-26-87)









156.38 RUNOFF CONTROL AND SEDIMENT ABATEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)    Any person seeking approval of a development proposal shall:





      (1 )   Provide mapped information about the location and
vicinity of the area proposed for development; and





      (2)    Furnish three types of information and maps about the
proposed land development and site location: an existing characteristics
inventory, a predevelopment conditions assessment, and an abatement control
plan.





         (a)    Minor additions referenced in division §
156.35(D) below may be exempted from this requirement by the approving agent.










   (B)    Specifically, all proposed land developments shall have plans
or maps of an appropriate scale that depict existing and proposed
improvements, including, but not limited to:





      (1)    Structures, streets, sidewalks, driveways, parking
lots, storm drainage systems and appurtenances, utilities, poles, and the
like; and





      (2)    Elevations, contour lines, inverts of sewers, and
drainage facilities, and the like.





      (3)    Location of the boundary of the 100-year floodplain.










   (C)    Abatement control plan content requirements.





      (1)    A runoff control and sediment abatement plan shall
identify how accelerated surface water runoff, increased erosion, and
sediment deposition induced by site development are to be controlled to
within the abatement standards of §§ 156.36 and 156.37.





      (2)    All proposed controls are to be designed in accordance
with methods and techniques set-forth in the SCS texts cited in §§ 156.36
and 156.37 or others approved by the City.





      (3)    A runoff control and sediment abatement plan shall be
comprised of, but not limited to, the following information:





         (a)    A map rendered on the base which indicates the
number, types, dimensions, and locations of all runoff, erosion, or sediment
control devices to be utilized either temporarily or permanently on a
development site;





         (b)    All pertinent computations made to arrive at the
final dimensions of each control device shall be presented along with plan
and section view drawings of the same rendered at an appropriate design scale
to be agreed upon between the applicant and the approving agent; and





         (c)    Schedules detailing the timing for the
installation and maintenance of each control device.





            (Ord. 2589, passed 5-26-87)









156.39  ADMINISTRATION AND APPEALS.




   (A)    The approving agent shall review all applications for zoning
certificates, subdivisions, and planned unit developments to determine that
the requirements of §§ 156.33 through 156.40 have been satisfied.









   (B)    The costs of engineering review for site grading and drainage
development plans shall be covered by a plan review fee. The plan review fee
shall be paid by the applicant to the City at the time the final plans have
been approved by the City. The fee shall be as set forth in Section 37.28 of
Chapter 37 , General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
West Carrollton.









   (C)    The provisions of §§ 156.33 through 156.40 may be varied as
follows:





      (1)    The approving agent may waive those requirements as
specified in division (D)(4) below.





      (2)    As part of the review and approval process of
subdivisions or planned unit developments, the Planning Commission has the
authority to vary the provisions of §§ 156.33 through 156.40.





      (3)    All other appeals and requests for variances from the
provisions of §§ 156.33 through 156.40 may be granted by the Board of
Zoning Appeals. A public hearing shall be held by the Board of Zoning Appeals
in considering an appeal or application for a variance. Notice thereof shall
be given not less than ten days prior to the date of the public hearing by
posting notice on or near the parcel of land involved, at places which will
be conspicuous to the neighboring properties and the public, or by publishing
notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Notice may also be
given by such other means as the Board of Zoning Appeals deems appropriate.
Failure of any person, other than the applicant, to receive notice of any
hearing or public hearing shall in no way affect the validity of the action
taken.










   (D)    Variances shall be issued by the Board or Commission only if
it finds all of the following conditions to exist:





      (1)    The variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief;





      (2)    There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
exceptional conditions applying to the property in general that do not apply
to other properties in the vicinity;





      (3)    Failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant;





      (4)    The authorizing of the variance will not be of
substantial detriment to other property or the public interest.





(Ord. 2589, passed 5-26-87; amend. Ord. 2761, passed 6-26-90; amend. Ord.
2875, passed 9-22-92; amend. Ord. 3436, passed 12-22-09)









156.40  COMPLIANCE RESPONSIBILITY.




   (A)    Performance liability. No provision of this standard shall
limit, increase or otherwise affect the liabilities of the permittee nor
impose any liability upon the City not otherwise imposed by law.










   (B)    Operations and management. During site development, a
permittee is responsible for:





      (1)    Carrying out all provisions as approved in the plan and
required by this standard;





      (2)    Promptly removing all soil, miscellaneous debris, or
other materials that may become spilled, dumped, or otherwise deposited on
any public thoroughfares during transport to and from the





development site; and





      (3)    Taking precautions to inhibit the deposition of
sediment into any sewer system or natural watercourse.










   (C)    Enforcement.





      (1)    The developer's engineer shall be required to inspect
all drainage facilities under construction and certify their compliance with
approved plans, and in addition, the City may inspect all drainage facilities
while under construction. When facilities are not constructed according to
approved plans, the City has the explicit authority to compel compliance and
require correction of any situations which are not according to the approved
plans.





      (2)    Site development operations shall be subject to
inspections by the City to determine whether a site development plan is being
implemented in compliance with provisions of this standard and any plan
approval conditions.





      (3)    After each inspection the inspector shall complete a
site development status report. If the inspector finds that operations are
being conducted by a permittee in violation of an approved plan or provisions
of this standard, a stop-work order may be issued at that time.










   (D)    Ownership and maintenance. Permanent runoff control and
sediment abatement installation which are to be privately owned and
maintained by an individual or group of property owners shall be:





      (1)    Designed and constructed by the permittee with
easements sufficient to allow adequate access for inspections and corrective
actions, if necessary, by the City;





      (2)    Regularly inspected by the City to ensure
privately-owned installations are being properly maintained, and, if not,
shall be repaired by them at the expense of the responsible owner; and





      (3)    Maintained as installed by the permittee according to
the approved design and not be altered unless approved by the City.





         (Ord. 2589, passed 5-26-87)









156.99  PENALTY.




   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor of the first degree.
Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions of and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall on conviction thereof be
fined or imprisoned as provided by the laws of the City. Each day such
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violations.





(Ord. 2278, passed 8-25-81; amend. Ord. 2582, passed 3-24-87)

























CHAPTER 157
FEES FOR LAND USAGE APPLICATIONS









Section










157.01   Fees for applications




 



157.01  FEES FOR APPLICATIONS.




   (A)   Fees for applications presented to the City are hereby
established and are set forth in Section 37.29 of Chapter 37, General Fee
Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton.





(Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)
























CHAPTER 158
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE









Section











   ADMINISTRATION









158.01   General.



158.02   Applicability.



158.03   Liability.



158.04   Duties and powers of the Code Official.



158.05   Approval.



158.06   Violations.



158.07   Notices and orders.



158.08   Unsafe structures and equipment.



158.09   Emergency measures.



158.10   Public nuisance declaration process.



158.11   Demolition.



158.12   Right to appeal.



158.13   Property maintenance re-inspection fee.









   DEFINITIONS









158.14   General.









   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS









158.15   General.



158.16   Exterior property areas.



158.17   Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs.



158.18   Exterior structure.



158.19   Interior structure.



158.20   Handrails and guardrails.



158.21   Rubbish and garbage.



158.22   Extermination.









   LIGHT, VENTILATION AND





   OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS









158.23   General.



158.24   Light.



158.25   Ventilation.



158.26   Occupancy limitations.









   PLUMBING FACILITIES AND





   REQUIREMENTS









158.27   General.



158.28   Required facilities.



158.29   Toilet rooms.



158.30   Plumbing systems and fixtures.



158.31   Water system.



158.32   Sanitary drainage system.



158.33   Storm drainage.









   MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL





   REQUIREMENTS









158.34   General.



158.35   Heating facilities.



158.36   Mechanical equipment.



158.37   Electrical facilities.



158.38   Electrical equipment.



158.39   Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters.



158.40   Duct systems.









   FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS









158.41   General.



158.42   Means of egress.



158.43   Fire-resistance ratings.



158.44   Fire protection systems.



158.45   Unoccupied, vacant and abandoned structures.



 



   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL



   REGISTRATION AND EDUCATION



   PROGRAM



 



158.46   General.



158.47   Registration required.



158.48   Inspection required.



159.49   Notification.



158.50   Violations and penalties.



158.51   Appeal.



158.52   Disclaimer of liability.



158.53   Severability.



 



158.97   Property maintenance and nuisance compliance times.*









   REFERENCED STANDARDS









158.98   Referenced standards.









   PENALTIES









158.99   Penalty.









ADMINISTRATION









158.01  GENERAL.




     (A)   Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of West Carrollton, hereinafter referred to as
"this code".










   (B)   Scope.  The provisions of this code shall apply to all
existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises
and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures,
equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation,
protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other
hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners,
operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises,
and for administration, enforcement and penalties.










   (C)   Intent.  This code shall be construed to secure its expressed
intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they
are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and
premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these
provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health
and safety as required herein. Except where hazards to life, limb, sanitation
or adjoining properties are involved, nothing in this maintenance code shall
require changes in any buildings which were built in full compliance with the
applicable codes in force at the time of their construction or alteration,
provided such buildings have been properly maintained and used for only such
use as originally permitted.










   (D)   Severability.  If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or
phrase of this code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.02  APPLICABILITY.




   (A)   General. The provisions of this code shall apply to all
matters affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in
Section 158.01. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code
specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.










   (B)     Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards
required by this code or a previous regulation or code under which the
structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be
maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause
any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this
section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied
dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs
or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this code are not
intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection
and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise
specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be
responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises.










   (C)     Application of other codes. Repairs, additions, or
alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in
accordance with the procedures and provisions of the codes referenced in
Section 150.01. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or
set aside any provisions of the West Carrollton Zoning Code.










   (D)     Existing remedies. The provisions in this code shall not be
construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its
officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure
which is dangerous, unsafe and insanitary.










   (E)     Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.










   (F)     Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards
referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in 158.98 and
considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of
each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code
and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.










   (G)     Requirements not covered by code. Requirements necessary
for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture,
structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare,
not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the code
official.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.03  LIABILITY.




   Liability of code enforcement department personnel for any tortuous act
will be determined by Ohio courts to the applicable provisions of Chapter
2744 of the Revised Code.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.04 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL.




   (A)     General. Enforcement of this code shall be this
responsibility of the Code Official, and such other appropriate personnel as
may be designated by the City Manager.










   (B)    Rule-making authority. The code official shall have authority
as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare, to
adopt and promulgate rules and procedures; to interpret and implement the
provisions of this code; to secure the intent thereof; and to designate
requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions. Such
rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance
requirements specifically provided for in this code, or of violating accepted
engineering methods involving public safety.










   (C)    Inspections. The code official shall make all of the required
inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or
individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be
certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. The code official is authorized to engage such expert
opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that
arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.










   (D)    Right of entry. The code official is authorized to enter the
structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to
constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry
is refused or not obtained, the code official is authorized to pursue
recourse as provided by law.










   (E)    Identification. The code official shall carry proper
identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of
duties under this code.










   (F)    Notices and orders. The code official shall issue all
necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.










   (G)    Department records. The code official shall keep official
records of all business and activities of the department specified in the
provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained in the official
records as long as the building or structure to which such records relate
remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by other regulations.










   (H)    Coordination of inspections. Whenever in the enforcement of
this code or another code or ordinance, the responsibility of more than one
code official of the jurisdiction is involved, it shall be the duty of the
code officials involved to coordinate their inspections and administrative
orders as fully as practicable so that the owners and occupants of the
structure shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors or multiple
or conflicting orders. Whenever an inspector from any agency or department
observes an apparent or actual violation of some provision of some law,
ordinance or code not within the inspector's authority to enforce, the
inspector shall report the findings to the code official having jurisdiction.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.05 APPROVAL.




   (A)    Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties
involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the code official shall
have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the
code official shall first find that special individual reason makes the
strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance
with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not
lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of action
granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files.










   (B)    Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions
of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or
to prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this
code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative
material or method of construction shall be approved where the code official
finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent
of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered
is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in
this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability
and safety.










   (C)    Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of
compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or
method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to
substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the code official
shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of
compliance at no expense to the jurisdiction.










      (1)    Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in
this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized
and accepted test methods, the code official shall be permitted to approve
appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency.










      (2)    Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the
code official for the period required for retention of public records.










      (3)    Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment and
devices shall not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have
been reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper
working condition and approved.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.06 VIOLATIONS.




   (A)    Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or
corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions
of this code.










   (B)    Notice of violation. The code official shall serve a notice
of violation or order in accordance with Section 158.07.










   (C)    Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a
notice of violation or order served in accordance with Section 158.07 shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and the violation shall be deemed a strict
liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code
official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or
termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the
provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall
be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and
shall be a lien upon such real estate.










   (D)    Violation penalties. Whoever violates any provision of this
code, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof,
shall be guilty of the provisions set forth in Section 158.99 of the city of
West Carrollton Codified Ordinances. Each day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.  (Ord.
3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)










   (E)    Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties
herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction
from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a
violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the
building, structure or premises.  Assessment of cost incurred by the city
for actions taken at the direction of the legal officer to restrain, correct
or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or
utilization of the building, structure or premises shall be recovered
pursuant to Section 158.99(E).





(Ord. 3545.  Passed 3-11-14.)









158.07 NOTICES AND ORDERS.




   (A)    Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code official
determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to
believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner
prescribed in Sections 158.07 (B) and 158.07 (C) to the person responsible
for the violation as specified in this code. Notices for condemnation
procedures shall also comply with Section 158.08 (C).










   (B)    Form. Such notice prescribed in Section 158.07 (A) shall be
in accordance with all of the following:





      1.   Be in writing.





      2.   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification.





      3.   Include a statement of the violation or violations and
why the notice is being issued.





      4.   Include a correction order with a reasonable compliance
time frame utilizing table 158.97 as a guide to make the repairs and
improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance
with the provisions of this code.





      5.   Inform the property owner of the right to appeal.





      6.   Include a statement of the right to file a lien in
accordance with Section 158.06 (C).










   (C)    Method of service. Such legal notice shall be deemed to be
properly served if a copy thereof is (a) delivered to the owner, occupant, or
agent, in person (b) sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the
owner at the last known mailing address with return receipt requested or (c)
posted in a conspicuous place in or about the premises affected.





      (1)     If the registered or certified mail envelope is
returned with an endorsement showing that the service was unclaimed, the
notice may be served by ordinary mail to the owners last known mailing
address. This mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing, and
service shall be deemed complete on that date of mailing.





      (2)     When service is perfected by posting notice on or
about the premises affected, such posting shall be evidenced by a photograph
and a notarized certificate of service. Such notice, photograph, and
certificate of service shall be sent by ordinary mail to the last known
mailing address as evidenced by a certificate of mailing, and service shall
be deemed completed on that date.





      (3)     If service of written notice is unable to be
perfected by any of the hereinbefore methods, the City Manager or his/her
designee shall cause the notice to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city, once each week for two consecutive weeks, and
service shall be deemed completed on the second date of publication.










   (D)    Penalties.  Penalties for noncompliance with orders and
notices shall be as set forth in Section 158.06 (D) and 158.99










   (E)    Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of
any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon
whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease
or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the
provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied
with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of
violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official
a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or
lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of
violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making
the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of
violation.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.08  UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT.




   (A)    General. When a structure or equipment is found by the code
official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human
occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant
to the provisions of this code.





      (1)    Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is
found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public
or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to
protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure
contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated,
structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation,
that partial or complete collapse is possible.





      (2)    Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler,
heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device,
flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the
structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a
hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the
premises or structure.





      (3)    Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is
unfit for human occupancy whenever the code official finds that such
structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the
structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is insanitary, vermin or rat
infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation,
illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment
required by this code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a
hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public.





      (4)    Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found
in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this
code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.










   (B)    Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and
unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural
collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation
on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an
attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises
within the time specified in the order, the code official shall cause the
premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by
contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall
be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal
resource.










   (C)    Notice. Whenever the code official has condemned a structure
or equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in
a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and
served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or
equipment in accordance with Section 158.07 (C). If the notice pertains to
equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice
shall be in the form prescribed in Section 158.07 (B).










   (D)    Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible
to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the code official
shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the
word "Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the
premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.










      (1)    Placard removal. The code official shall remove the
condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any
person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of
the code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code.










   (E)    Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and
placarded by the code official shall be vacated as ordered by the code
official. Any person who shall occupy a placard premises or shall operate
placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises
who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded
equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.09 EMERGENCY MEASURES.




   (A)    Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the code official,
there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure
which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen
and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is
actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the
proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors
or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective
or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered
to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code
official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice
reading as follows: "This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been
Prohibited by the Code Official." It shall be unlawful for any person to
enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making
the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the
same.










   (B)    Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of
this code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent
danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the
necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render
such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein
described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken
as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency.










   (C)    Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the code
official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority
having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places
adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.










   (D)    Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the code
official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the
required work as expeditiously as possible.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)










   (E)    Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance
of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the
jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the
premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of
such costs, including an administrative fee as specified in Section 37.30,
Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
West Carrollton.





(Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)










   (F)    Hearing.  Any person ordered to take emergency measures
shall comply with such order forthwith.  Any affected person shall
thereafter, upon petition directed to the Board of Zoning Appeals, be
afforded a hearing as described in this code.





(Ord. 3502.  Passed 1-10-12.)









158.10  PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARATION PROCESS.




   (A)    Abatement notice. Whenever the City Manager or his/ her
designee determines that there has been a violation of any provision of
Section 158.14(F)(33), in the city, he/she shall give legal notice of such
violation to the person or persons responsible therefor, and require
compliance with the ordinance, as hereinafter provided.





      (1)     Issuance of such notice shall be as set forth in
Section 158.07. The aforesaid notice shall state, in brief, the findings of
the above officer or officers of the city with respect to the existence of a
public nuisance, as defined in Section 158.14(F)(33) or otherwise as defined
in the West Carrollton Code of Ordinances, and shall further state that
unless the owner or owners thereof shall cause the abatement of the public
nuisance within 30 days after the service of the notice, the same will be
abated by the city at the expense of the owner or owners. The owner or owners
may at any time after receipt of the notice make a request in writing or in
person to the City Manager or his/her designee, to be furnished with a
written list of the items which are alleged to constitute the public nuisance
and which are alleged to be in need of repair and/or replacement, and/or
removal.










   (B)    Remedy. The owner or owners may make immediate application in
writing or in person to the City Manager or his/her designee for a building
permit to undertake the repair or replacement of items alleged to constitute
the public nuisance. The City Manager or his designee, upon receiving the
complete plans and specifications covering the repairs or replacements,
indicating abatement of the nuisance conditions and in conformity with the
Ohio Building Code, the Ohio Residential Code, or the National Electrical
Code shall, upon approval of the plans and specifications, cause a building
permit to be issued to the owner or owners. The City Manager or his/her
designee may grant more than 30 days to the owner or owners in which to
effect the repairs and/or replacement and/or removal, if there appears to be
a bona fide intention to abate the nuisance and good cause for a reasonable
delay is shown to exist.  (Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)










   (C)    Hearing. The owner or owners may, within 14 days after
receipt of the notice, make a demand in writing to the Board of Zoning
Appeals for a hearing on the question of whether in fact a public nuisance,
as defined in Section 158.14(F)(33), exists and/or whether more than 30 days
should be granted to the owner or owners to abate the nuisance.  The hearing
shall be held within reasonable time following receipt of the written demand
and at least two days’ notice of the hearing shall be given to the owner or
owners.  The hearing shall be conducted by the Board of Zoning Appeals.  A
majority of the members of the Board of Zoning Appeals must concur that a
public nuisance, as defined by Section 158.14(F)(33), exists before
enforcement of the abatement is carried out.  A majority of the Board of
Zoning Appeals may amend or modify the notice and/or order, or extend the
time for compliance by the owner.  A copy of the decision and order of the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall be promptly served upon the owner or owners in
the manner provided by Section 158.07.  The decision of the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall be final and conclusive, unless the owner or owners shall file,
within ten days after the decision is rendered, an appeal to a court of
competent jurisdiction.  Otherwise, the same shall become final and
conclusive at the termination of said ten-day period.





(Ord. 3502.  Passed 1-10-12.)










   (D)    No restriction on authority. This chapter shall not be deemed
to be a limitation or restriction on the authority of any department,
division, officer, official, or employee of the city, but shall be deemed an
enlargement of any authority existing by virtue of the statutes of the state,
or any ordinance hereto enacted by the Council.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.11 DEMOLITION.




   (A)    General. The code official shall order the owner of any
premises upon which is located any structure, which in the code official's
judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or
occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to
demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being
made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and
remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal
construction of any structure for a period of more than two years, to
demolish and remove such structure.










   (B)    Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall comply with
Section 158.07.










   (C)    Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply
with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official shall
cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available
public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the
cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate
upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.










   (D)    Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered
demolished and removed,  the governing body or other designated officer
under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the
salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net
proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and
removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or
transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, for the
person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a
surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state.










   (E)    Permit required; Disconnection of utilities.





      (1)    No person shall demolish any building or structure
without securing a permit from the City Planning and Building Department.





      (2)   As a condition of receiving a demolition permit, the
owner, agent or person in control of a building or structure to be demolished
shall notify, in writing, the appropriate utilities or public authorities
serving the building or structure regarding the person's intentions to
demolish the building or structure. Such notice shall include a request that
the utilities be disconnected seven days prior to demolition. The owner,
agent or person in control of the building, or structure to be demolished, or
the utility company, shall provide evidence to the Planning and Building
Department that the utilities have been discontinued. The permit will not be
issued until all proper verification has been received. Proof of verification
that services have services have been discontinued can be found on the
application for a demolition permit.










   (F)    Bond or other surety required. Prior to the issuance of a
demolition permit, the owner, agent or person in control of the property
subject to demolition may be required to post with the City a performance
bond, or other surety approved by the City Manager or his/her designee to
assure the City that the demolition work will proceed as permitted. The value
of the surety shall not exceed the cost associated with the demolition and
site restoration. The terms of the surety shall provide that the City may
retain or claim the surety proceeds if the permit holder fails to perform the
demolition activities in accordance with the permit granted. The value of the
surety may be reduced in the course of the demolition work, at the sole
discretion of the City Manager, if in the estimation that the City Manager,
sufficient surety remains to assure completion of the demolition and site
restoration activity.










   (G)    Site conditions.





      (1)    During the course of the demolition activity the owner,
agent or person in control of the property subject to the demolition shall
take steps to ensure the safety of the general public. The proposed steps
shall be in compliance with generally accepted building industry safety
practices as may be reflected in building codes applicable in the City and
State of Ohio and in standards on file in the office of the Building
Department for construction site safety measures.





      (2)    Following the completion of demolition work, the owner,
agent or person in control of the property subject to the demolition activity
shall provide for the restoration of the site so as to address safety and
nuisance concerns.





         (a)   All sites shall be brought to a level or other
grade determined to be appropriate by the City Manager or his/her designee,
and in compliance with Section 156.33 - 156.40 Storm Water Runoff, Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control. The owner shall install a silt fence to
protect against sediment run off, and to protect all catch basins and storm
drains from sediment contamination. If storm lines and structures become
contaminated or filled with silt or debris during demolition, the permit
holder shall have the lines and structures cleaned and videotaped prior to
final acceptance.





         (b)    All surface irregularities, wells, basements,
cellars, sidewalks, vaults or coal chutes remaining after demolition shall be
filled with clean hard fill and compacted consistent with City standards on
file in the office of the Planning and Building Department.





         (c)    All underground storage tanks shall be removed
and shall be filled with clean hard fill and compacted consistent with City
standards on file in the office of the City Planning and Building Department.





         (d)    The party securing the demolition permit shall
provide for the disposal of the debris associated with the demolition and/or
rehabilitation work. The debris must be placed in an appropriate container
for removal by a private contractor, or another arrangement shall be made for
the disposal of the debris on at least a weekly basis. No property owner or
holder shall permit the non-containerized accumulation of demolition debris
on any property in the City for a period of seven calendar days. All debris
and material associated with the demolition work must be removed from the
property.





         (e)    All sanitary sewer laterals, and water services
that serve the subject building or structure must be effectively abandoned,
and plugged at the main line, or as may be required by the City Manager or
his/her designee.





         (f)    The contractor shall provide positive drainage to
eliminate ponding within the site.





         (g)    The contractor shall grade lot to match
surrounding grade elevations, and to result in no apparent low or high areas.
All areas to be seeded shall be free of rock larger than 1 inch and other
foreign material and shall be satisfactorily shaped and finished. Hand raking
will be required if machines do not provide results equivalent to hand raking.





         (h)  The party securing the demolition permit shall apply
sod or grass seed to address soil erosion control. The City Manager or
his/her designee may require that straw or mulch material be placed on the
site that is seeded to prevent erosion and enhance the likelihood of
successful growth. The City manager or his/her designee will inspect all
seeded areas no earlier than six (6) months and no later than twelve (12)
months after final seeding. For any areas identified without a uniform
density of at least seventy (70) percent grass cover, repair seeding and
mulching or inter-seeding shall be performed as specified in the ODOT
Construction and Material Specification Manual Section 659.










   (H)    Time limit for permit. The party receiving the demolition
permit must complete the demolition activity within six (6) months from the
receipt of the permit. The time limit may be extended at the discretion of
the City Manager or his/her designee. The petitioner must provide evidence to
show that extenuating circumstances prohibited the completion of the
demolition work in the six (6) month period.  (Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)










   (I)    Demolition permit fee. The demolition permit fee shall be as
set forth in Section 37.25 of Chapter 37, General Fee Schedule, of the
Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton.





(Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)









158.12  RIGHT TO APPEAL.




   (A)   Board of Zoning Appeals.  In order to execute the purpose of
this code, the Board of Zoning Appeals, hereafter referred to as the Board,
shall have the following duties:





      (1)   To decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an
error in any interpretation, judgment, determination or decision made by the
code official in the administration or enforcement of this Property
Maintenance Code.  Filing of an appeal shall stay further enforcement action
until the appeal is heard by the Board and a written decision issued.





      (2)   To grant variances from the provisions of this code to
provide reasonable time for work required for compliance.  Variances may be
granted only if all of the following apply:





         (a)   That such variance shall not allow for long term
noncompliance with the provisions of the code;





         (b)   That such variance will vary only a minimum from
the literal provisions of the ordinance with respect to sanitation, safety
and rehabilitation;





         (c)   That undue hardship is clearly demonstrated with
respect to the cost or scheduling of improvements; and





         (d)   That such variance would not permit the creation
or continuation of a public nuisance.










   (B)   Hearings.  Any person affected by a notice of violation,
revocation or denial of a permit which has been issued in connection with the
enforcement of any provision of this code may request and shall be granted a
hearing on the matter before the  Board of Zoning Appeals provided that such
person shall file in the office of the code official a written petition
requesting such hearing and set forth the name, address and phone number of
the petitioner and a brief statement of the ground for such a hearing or for
the mitigation of any item appearing on any order of the code official. 
Such petition shall be filed within ten days after receipt of the notice and
order, revocation or denial of permit.  Upon receipt of such a petition, the
Board shall set a time and place for hearing and shall give the petitioner
written notice thereof.  The hearing shall be commenced within a reasonable
time after a petition has been filed.  In case of an administrative appeal
or variance being requested for an emergency order of the code official, the
Board shall schedule a hearing within ten working days of the filing of a
petition for such hearing.  At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and to show cause, why any item appearing on such
notice and order should be modified or withdrawn.  The failure of the
petitioner or his/her representative to appear and state his case at such
hearing shall have the same effect as if no petition were filed.





      (1)   Findings.  After a hearing, the Board shall sustain,
modify or withdraw any items appearing on the notice and order by majority
vote, depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions of this
chapter have been complied with, and the petitioner and the code official
shall be notified in writing of such findings.





      (2)   Record.  The proceedings at such hearings, including
the findings and decisions of the Board and reasons therefore, shall be
summarized and reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record in
the office of the code official.  Such record shall also include a copy of
every notice and order issued in connection with the matter.





      (3)   Appeal of decision.  Appeals from the Board shall be to
the Montgomery County Court of Common Pleas, as provided by the state
statutes. 
(Ord. 3502.  Passed 1-10-12.)









158.13 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE RE-INSPECTION FEE.




   A re-inspection fee as set forth in Section 37.31, Chapter 37, General
Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton shall
be instituted for any re-inspection subsequent to the first inspection, and
shall be paid by the owner, tenant or person responsible for correction of
violations of this chapter. Notice shall be accompanied by a statement of the
amount of cost incurred, and in the event the same is not paid within 30 days
after the mailing of the notice, then such amount shall be certified to the
County Auditor for collection the same as other taxes and assessments are
collected.





(Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)










DEFINITIONS









158.14  GENERAL.




   (A)    Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms
shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.










   (B)    Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include
the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.










   (C)    Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in
this code and are defined in the codes referenced in Section 150.01, such
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.










   (D)    Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the
methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted
meanings such as the context implies.










   (E)    Parts. Whenever the words "dwelling unit' "dwelling,"
"premises," "building," "rooming house," "rooming unit" "housekeeping unit"
or "story" are stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they
were followed by the words "or any part thereof."










   (F)    General definitions.





      (1)    APPROVED. Approved by the code official.





      (2)    AUTOMOBILE PARTS. Any portion or part of any
motor-driven vehicle as detached from the vehicle as a whole.





      (3)   BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partly or
completely below grade.





      (4)    BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures including
a bathtub or shower.





      (5)    BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used
for sleeping purposes.





      (6)    CLEAN HARD FILL. Construction and demolition debris
which consists only of reinforced or non-reinforced concrete, brick, block,
tile and/or stone which can be re-utilized as construction material.  Brick
in clean hard fill includes but is not limited to refractory brick and
mortar.  Clean hard fill does not include materials contaminated with
hazardous wastes, solid wastes, or infectious wastes.





      (7)    CODE OFFICIAL. The City Manager or his/her designee is
charged with the enforcement of this code.





      (8)    CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.





      (9)    CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS.  Those materials
resulting from the alteration, construction, destruction, rehabilitation, or
repair of any manmade physical structure, including, without limitation,
houses, buildings, industrial or commercial facilities, or roadways. 
"Construction and demolition debris" does not include materials identified or
listed as solid wastes, infectious wastes, or hazardous wastes pursuant to
Chapter 3734 of the Revised Code and rules adopted under it; or materials
from mining operations, nontoxic fly ash, spent nontoxic foundry sand, and
slag; or reinforced or non-reinforced concrete, asphalt, building or paving
brick, or building or paving stone that is stored for a period of less than
two years for recycling into a usable construction material.  For the
purpose of this definition, "materials resulting from the alteration,
construction, destruction, rehabilitation, or repair of any manmade physical
structure", are those structural and functional materials comprising the
structure and surrounding site improvements, such as brick, concrete and
other masonry materials, stone, glass, wall coverings, plaster, drywall,
framing and finishing lumber, roofing materials, plumbing fixtures, heating
equipment, electrical wiring, and components containing no hazardous fluids
or refrigerants, insulation, affixed carpeting, asphaltic substances, metals
incidental to any of the above, and weathered railroad ties and utility
poles.  "Materials resulting from the alteration, construction, destruction,
rehabilitation, or repair" do not include materials whose removal has been
required prior to demolition, and materials which are otherwise contained
within or exist outside the structure such as solid wastes, yard wastes,
furniture and appliances.  Also excluded in all cases are liquids including
containerized or bulk liquids, fuel tanks, drums and other closed or filled
containers, tires and batteries.





      (10)    CULTIVATE. To loosen or dig (soil) around growing
plants.





      (11)    DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.





      (12)    EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved
for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee
owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use
under, on or above a said lot or lots.





      (13)   EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and
on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such
premises.





      (14)    EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects,
rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or
making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying,
fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods.





      (15)    GARBAGE and OFFAL. All refuse and waste of animals,
fish, fowl, fruit, and vegetable matter, and other material or materials so
designated by the Department of Health of Montgomery County or the State of
Ohio, liquefied or otherwise, which accumulated in the use and preparation of
food for the table, that has been discarded and abandoned and is no longer of
value to the owner for ordinary purposes of domestic consumption and also
includes all refuse arising from the dealing in or storing of the substances.





      (16)    GUARD. A building component or a system of building
components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces
that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower
level.





      (17)    HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living,
sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage
or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.





      (18)    HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a
single habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet,
lavatory and bathtub or shower.





      (19)    IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious
or life-threatening injury or death at any time.





      (20)    INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a
structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.





      (21)    LABELED. Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials
to which has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of
a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other
organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic
inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and by whose label
the manufacturer attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized
standards.





      (22)    LET FOR OCCUPANCY, LET OR LEASE. To permit, provide or
offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit,
building, premise or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner
of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or
license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for
the sale of land.





      (23)    MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION. All operations of
trimming, pruning, spraying, injecting, fertilizing, treating, bracing, doing
surgery work, and cutting above or below ground.





      (24)    MOTOR VEHICLE IN AN INOPERATIVE CONDITION. Any type of
motor vehicle or motor driven vehicle used or useful for the conveyance of
persons or property, which is or appears to be in any of the following
states:  (1) unable to move under its own power (2) in a dangerous condition
due to defective or missing parts (3) in a condition generally as to be unfit
for further use as a conveyance and/or (4) not properly licensed so that it
can be legally operated on the public streets or highways.





      (25)    OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion
thereof is utilized or occupied.





      (26)    OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a
building, or having possession of a space within a building.





      (27)    OPENABLE AREA. That part of a window, skylight or door
which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to
the outdoors.





      (28)    OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control
of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.





      (29)    OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or
corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded
in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title
to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the
guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator
of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property
by a court.





      (30)    PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any
other group acting as a unit.  (Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)





      (31)   PORTABLE.  Capable of being transported or conveyed.





      (32)    PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or
public way, including any structures thereon.





      (33)    PUBLIC AREA. All pubic ways, parks, and other lands
owned or leased by the city.





      (34)    PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any fence, wall, shed, building,
structure, or any part of the aforesaid, or lot, lots, or parcel of land,
basement, cellar, sidewalk subspace, dock, wharf, or landing dock which in
its entirety or in any part thereof, by reason of condition in which the same
is permitted to be or remain, shall or may endanger health, life, limb, or
property, or cause any hurt, harm, inconvenience, discomfort, damage, or
injury to any one or more persons in the city, in any one or more of the
following particulars:





         (a)   Being a nuisance to the general health of the
community.





         (b)   Being a fire hazard.





         (c)   Being unsafe for occupancy or use on, in, upon,
about, or around the aforesaid premises.





         (d)   Being a nuisance because of long continued
vacancy, lack of reasonable or adequate maintenance of structure and/or
premises adjacent thereto, thereby depreciating the enjoyment and use of the
property in the immediate vicinity to extent that it is harmful to the
community in which the structure is situated.





      (35)    PUBLIC WAY.  Any public street, road, boulevard,
alley, sidewalk, right-of- way, or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.





      (36)    REFUSE. Only the matters which are in fact noxious or
have been refused and abandoned by the owner as worthless.





      (37)   RENTAL PROPERTY.  Shall mean any individual parcel of
land for residential use and occupancy, the facilities and appurtenances in
and on it, and the grounds, area, and facilities that is Let for Occupancy,
Let or Leased. Rental Property does not include any of the following:





         (a)   State and/or federal prisons, jails, workhouses,
and other places of incarceration or correction, and halfway houses.





         (b)   Hospitals or similar institutions.





         (c)   Hotels or motels.





         (d)   State- and/or county-sanctioned shelters for
juvenile runaways, victims of domestic violence, or homeless persons.





         (e)   State- and/or county-sanctioned foster care homes,
or community-oriented residential social service facilities.





         (f)   Any form of the word "Group Home" as defined in
Chapter 154 of the City Of West Carrollton Zoning Code.





      (38)   RENTAL UNIT.  Shall mean any dwelling, dwelling unit,
habitable space, housekeeping unit, rooming house, rooming unit or
manufactured home that is Let for Occupancy, Let or Leased.  Any residence
not occupied by the legal owner thereof shall be presumed to be a Rental Unit.





      (39)   RESPONSIBLE AGENT.  Shall mean any person or business
entity, however organized, who is appointed and authorized by an Owner to be
responsible for compliance with the requirements of this Chapter; and who
shall have the authority to receive communications, service of process,
summons, notices, invoices and other legal process on behalf of an Owner.





      (40)    ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for
lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one-
or two-family dwelling.





      (41)    ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a
single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or
living, but not for cooking purposes.





      (42)    RUBBISH. Automobile parts, refuse, scrap metal, used
building materials, waste, ashes, cans, paper, cartons, furniture,
appliances, plastic, coal, coke, rubber, leather, yard trimmings, excelsior,
mineral matter, oil of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, wire, chips,
shavings, bottles, glass, crockery, tin, wood, boxes, rags, dead weeds,
brush, tree branches, bushes, other combustible material or anything else of
an unsightly or unsanitary nature other than garbage and offal.





      (43)    SCRAP METAL. Pieces of or parts of steel, iron, tin,
zinc, copper, aluminum, or any alloy thereof, whether intact or in parts,
which has served its usefulness in its original form and can no longer be
used or is useful for its originally intended purpose. 





      (44)    STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the
prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as
a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an
act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was
legally required to do.





      (45)    STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a
portion thereof.





      (46)    TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or group,
whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion
thereof as a unit.





      (47)    TREE AND/OR SHRUBS. All woody vegetation presently or
hereafter planted on any public areas.





      (48)    TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or
urinal but not a bathtub or shower.





      (49)    USED BUILDING MATERIALS. Any material such as wood,
stone, brick, cement blocks or any composition or combination thereof used or
useful in the erection of any building or structure which has been used
previously for the erection or construction by the same person or other
persons.





      (50)    VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of
supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any
space.





      (51)    WEEDS.  All grasses, annual plants, vines, and
vegetation other than trees or shrubs provided, however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.





      (52)    WORKMANLIKE.  Executed in a skilled manner; e.g.,
generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring
adjacent work.





      (53)    YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.





         (Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09; Ord. 3545.  Passed 3-11-14;
Ord. 3596.  Passed 12-13-16.)










GENERAL REQUIREMENTS









158.15  GENERAL.




   (A)    Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of
structures, equipment and exterior property.










   (B)    Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the
structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements,
except as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not occupy as
owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a
sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of
this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit
are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part
of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they
occupy and control.










   (C)    Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and
premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure
and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting
problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.16 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.




   (A)    Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be
maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep
that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls
in a clean and sanitary condition.










   (B)    Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and
maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon.





      (1)    Exception to this requirement shall be as follows:





         (a)    For approved retention areas and reservoirs.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)










   (C)    Sidewalk, curbs and driveways. All sidewalks, curbs,
walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept
in a proper state of repair, free of grass or other vegetation, and
maintained free from hazardous conditions.  (Ord. 3545.  Passed 3-11-14.)










   (D)    Annual notice to cut noxious weeds; failure and certification
cost





      (1)    The City Manager or his/her designee shall annually,
cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the city, stating that weeds are growing on lands within the limits of the
city. Such notice shall not be required to describe the lands or to specify
the name of the owner of such property; however, such notice shall constitute
notice to any owner, lessee, agent, or tenant having charge of any land upon
which weeds are grown that the same must be cut and destroyed within five (5)
days after such publication. Such notice shall specify that weeds shall be
cut thereafter without further notice or publication in order to prevent
spreading, maturing, or exceeding eight (8) inches in height. Such notice
shall be published one time in order to constitute notice hereafter.





      (2)    When any person being the owner, lessee, agent, or
tenant having charge of the lands mentioned in division (1) hereof, fails to
comply with the notice set forth in such publication, the City Manager or
his/her designee shall cause such weeds to be cut and destroyed and may
employ the necessary labor to perform such task. All expense incurred shall,
when approved by the City Manager, be paid out of any money in the City
Treasury not otherwise appropriated.





        (3)    The City Manager or his/her designee, shall make a
written return to the County Auditor with a statement of charges for service
in cutting such weeds, together with a proper description of the premises.
Such amounts shall be entered upon the tax duplicate, shall constitute a lien
upon such lands from the date of the entry, and shall be collected as other
taxes and returned to the city with the general fund.





      (4)    In the event does not trim or remove any tree, plant,
or shrubbery, or any part thereof, in accordance with the provisions of this
section, then the City Manager or his/her designee is authorized and it is
declared to be their duty to have enforced the provisions of this section,
and to cause to be trimmed or removed such tree, plant, or shrubbery, or part
thereof, and cut and remove all grass and weeds.  (Ord. 3421.  Passed
5-26-09.)





      (5)    Whenever any tree, plant, or shrubbery, or part
thereof, or weeds and grasses are growing in any street, public place, or
upon private property contiguous to a street or sidewalk or public place, and
is trimmed or removed by the city, then, after the work is done, the city
shall give five (5) days notice, by regular mail, to the owner of such lot or
parcel of land at his last known address, to pay the cost of such trimming or
removal of trees, plants, shrubbery, grass or weeds, or parts thereof. Notice
shall be accompanied by a statement of the amount of cost incurred, including
an administrative fee as set forth in Section 37.32, Chapter 37, General Fee
Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West Carrollton, and in
the event the same is not paid within thirty (30) days after the mailing of
the notice, then such amount shall be certified to the county auditor for
collection the same as other taxes and assessments are collected.





         (Ord. 3436.  Passed 12-22-09.)










   (E)    Trees and shrubs within private and public areas.





      (1)    Purpose. It is the policy of the city to regulate and
control planting, removal, maintenance, and protection of trees and shrubs in
the public area: to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which
may result in injuries to persons using public areas of the city; to promote
and enhance the beauty of the city; to prevent damage to any public sewer or
water main, street, sidewalk, or other public property; to protect trees and
shrubs located in public areas from undesirable and unsafe planting, removal,
maintenance, and protection practices; and to guard all trees and shrubs
within the city against the spread of disease or pest. The provision of this
section shall apply: to all trees and shrubs planted in or upon private
premises which shall endanger the life, health or safety of person or
property using public area of the city.





      (2)    Powers and duties. The City Manager or his/her designee
is hereby authorized and empowered to:





         (a)    Direct and control the city street tree program
to include all planting, removal, maintenance, and protection of trees and
shrubs on public areas.





         (b)    Guard all trees and shrubs in the city so as to
prevent the spread of disease or pest and to eliminate dangerous conditions
which may affect life, health, or safety of person or property.





      (3)    Damage to trees and shrubs. No person shall in any
public area of the city: break, injure, mutilate, kill, or destroy any tree
or shrub; permit any animal under his/her control to do so; permit any fire
to injure any tree or shrub; or permit any toxic chemical to seep, drain, or
be emptied on or about any tree or shrub. During building operations the
builder shall erect suitable protective barriers around public trees and
shrubs which may be injured.





      (4)    Fastening materials to trees and shrubs. No person
shall fasten any sign, rope, wire, or other material to, around, or through
any public tree or shrub without obtaining written permission from the city,
except in emergencies such as storms or accidents, or when guying a newly
planted tree in a professional manner.





      (5)    Public utilities. Public work affecting trees or shrubs
shall be limited to the actual necessities of the services of the company and
such work shall be done in a neat and professional manner and according to
the arboricultural specifications  and standards set forth in division
(E)(11) of this section. The City Manager or his/her designee may supervise
the work performed.





      (6)    Planting, removal, maintenance, and protection of trees
and shrubs. All trees or shrubs in any public way and planted by or on behalf
of the city shall be planted, removed, maintained, and protected according to
the most recent editions of the following: "National Arborists Association
Standard for Pruning, Guying, Fertilizing, Spraying and Lightning Protection
of Shade Trees;" "American National Standards Institute (ANSI), 3133.1 -
Safety Requirements for Tree Care and Removing Trees and Cutting Brush;" and
standards set forth under division (E)(11) of this section.





      (7)    Power to plant, remove, protect, and maintain trees and
shrubs. The City Manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to
plant, remove, maintain, and protect trees and shrubs on all public areas as
may be necessary to insure safety or preserve the symmetry and beauty of such
grounds.





      (8)    Public nuisance. Any tree shrub or part thereof growing
upon private or public property which is interfering with the use of any
public area or endangers life, safety or health of persons or property in a
private or public area is declared a public nuisance.





      (9)    Abatement of nuisance.





         (a)    Trees and shrubs on public or private areas. If
the City Manager or his/her designee shall determine, with reasonable
certainty upon inspection or examination, any nuisance tree or shrub, as
herein defined, exist in or upon any public or private area in the city,
he/her shall immediately cause it to be treated, trimmed, removed, or
otherwise abated in such a manner as to destroy or prevent the spread of such
nuisance. The manner, in which the nuisance shall be abated, shall be
determined by the City Manager or his designee.





         (b)    The owner of every lot or parcel of land within
the corporate upon which a tree, plant, or any shrubbery stands with any part
thereof upon or overhanging a public street or sidewalk, shall conform to the
regulations herein provided; otherwise the city shall cause such trees to be
trimmed or cut down and removed in accordance with such regulation and assess
the cost thereof against the owner of such lot or parcel of land.





         (c)    All trees located in any public way shall be
maintained by the adjoining property owners in accordance with this section.
This duty of maintenance shall be binding upon all subsequent owners and
occupiers of the adjoining property.





            (Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)





         (d)    The City shall take the responsibility for the
maintenance of trees planted by the City on the following streets:





            1.   Miami Avenue - Central Avenue to Hydraulic
Road.





            2.   Water Tower Lane - Alex Road to Imperial Road.





            3.   S. Alex Road - Dixie Drive to Elm Street.





            4.   Central Avenue - Cedar Street to Elm Street
(North side).





            5.   N. Elm Street - Main Street to Shannon Avenue.





            6.   Royal Ridge Dr. -  S. Alex Road to Minstrel
Drive.





            7.   Alex-Bell Road - Dixie Drive to S.R. 741.





            8.   Kimberly Lane - Alex Road to Alex-Bell Road.





            9.   Bowman Lane - Alex Road to Omad Court.





            10.   E. Dixie Dr. - Cedar Street to Alex-Bell
Road.





            11.   E. Central Ave. - Alex-Bell Road to Cedar
Street.





               (Ord. 3545.  Passed 3-11-14.)





This maintenance shall include repairs of damaged curbs and sidewalks caused
by the roots of trees located in the areas listed above.  Maintenance of all
trees other than those located in the areas listed above shall be the
responsibility of the adjacent property owner, including maintenance of the
trees themselves as well as the repair of curbs and sidewalks damaged by the
roots of these trees.





            (Ord. 3479.  Passed 5-10-11.)





         (e)   The owner shall cut down and remove any tree,
plant, or shrubbery, or any part thereof, as may be necessary to provide a
clear and unobstructed view of traffic from all directions at any street
intersection, or to abate a nuisance necessary to protect the life, limb, or
property of persons, drivers of any vehicles, or pedestrians using the street
or sidewalk.





      (10)    Interference with the City Manager or his/her
designee. No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the City Manager
or his/her designee or his/her assistants in the execution or enforcement of
this section.





      (11)    Arboricultural specifications and standards. The
following specifications and standards are hereby established for the
planting, trimming and removal of trees and shrubs in the streets, parks, and
public areas of the city:





         (a)    Planting.





            1.   All trees will not be less than one inch in
diameter of trunk, at six inches above ground level.





            2.   No tree shall be planted closer than two feet
from the curb line or outer line of the sidewalk. All trees shall be planted
in line with each other and at a spacing of a minimum of 30 feet from each
other.





            3.   The following species and varieties are
prohibited for planting on the boulevards of public streets in the city:
female trees of the genus Populous; female trees of Box Elder; and Silver
Maples, Catalpas, and Willows.





            4.   No tree hereafter be planted at or within 25
feet of an intersection.





         (b)    Trimming.





            1.   All trees and shrubs, on public or private
property which have branches overhanging a public street, shall have said
branches trimmed to a clearance height of 14 feet; all trees and shrubs, on
public or private property, which have braches overhanging a public sidewalk,
shall have said branches trimmed to a clearance height of eight feet. The
City Manager or his/her designee may waive the provisions of this section for
newly planted trees if he/her determines they do not interfere public travel,
obstruct the light of any street light, or endanger public safety.





            2.   All dead wood, studs, broken branches, badly
formed branches, disease-infected and insect infested branches and branches
interfering with public travel, lighting, existing buildings, and traffic
signs shall be removed during the trimming operation, with consideration
given to the symmetry and beauty of the tree or shrub.





            3.   No tree in a public way planted by or on the
behalf of the city shall be "topped" or cut back so as to remove the trees
crown or normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where pruning standards are impractical, may be exempted from
this section by the City Manager or his designee.





         (c)    Removing.





            1.   All public trees and shrubs which are marked
for cutting shall be completely removed from the growing site and disposed of
in an authorized manner. The stumps shall be ground out to a depth suitable
for future planting of trees or turf.





            2.   All trees planted by or on the behalf of the
city and removed by abutting property owners without permission from the City
Manager or his/her designee shall be replaced by the property owner with a
tree of the same size and species.










   (F)    Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall
be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found,
they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be
injurious to human health.  After extermination, proper precautions shall be
taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation.










   (G)    Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers
shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or
other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public
or private property or that of another tenant.










   (H)    Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including
detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound
and in good repair.  (Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)










   (I)    Motor vehicles. No person shall store, place, or allow to
remain, motor vehicles in an inoperative condition, unregistered, or unfit
for further use, outside of a fully-enclosed garage or other suitable
structure on any property within the corporate limits of the city.  (Ord.
3545.  Passed 3-11-14.)





      (1)    In the event of a violation of Section 158.16(I), the
City Manager or his/her designee shall give notice to the owner, occupant or
person having charge of the premises upon which the violation occurs. The
issuance of such notice shall be as set forth in Section 158.06(B).





      (2)    If the person served with the notice as provided in
sub-division (1) of this section fails to cause the violation to cease within
five (5) days of the date upon which the notice was issued for a first
offense, or 24 hours for a second offense, or within 12 hours for any
subsequent offense, by housing the vehicle in a fully-enclosed garage or
other suitable structure or by removing the vehicle from the property, he/she
shall be subject to the penalty provided in Section 158.99.  The fact that
the vehicle is so left is prima-facie evidence of willful failure to comply
with the notice, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
and every day during or on which the violation occurs or continues. However,
no additional notice of violation is required to be given for the subsequent
days. 





      (3)    The City Manager or his/her designee is hereby
authorized to pursue removal of the vehicle as follows: 





         (a)    If a motor vehicle in an inoperative condition is
located on public property, the City Manager or his/her designee may
immediately remove or cause the removal of the vehicle.





         (b)     If a motor vehicle in an inoperative condition
is located on private property, the City Manager or his/her designee may
remove or cause the removal of the vehicle not sooner than five days after
serving notice as set forth in Section 158.06(B) of its intention to remove
or cause the removal of the vehicle.





         (c)     The City Manager or his/her designee may cause
the removal or may employ the labor, materials, and equipment necessary to
remove a motor vehicle in inoperative condition under this section.  All
expenses incurred in removing or causing the removal of a motor vehicle in
inoperative condition shall be placed upon the tax duplicate as a lien upon
the land to be collected as other taxes and returned to the City.





         (d)     The police department shall forthwith notify
the registered vehicle owner of the fact of the removal and impounding,
reasons therefore, and the place of storage.  Any person desiring to redeem
an impounded vehicle shall appear at the police department to furnish
satisfactory evidence of identity and ownership or right to possession. 
Prior to issuance of a release form, the claimant, owner, or operator shall
either pay the amount due for any fines for violations on account of which
the vehicle was impounded or, as the court may require, post a bond in an
amount set by the court, to appear to answer to such violations.  The pound
operator shall release each vehicle upon receipt of the release form and
payment of all towage and storage charges. 





         (e)     No owner or operator shall remove an impounded
vehicle from the place of storage without complying with the above
procedure.  Possession of a vehicle which has been impounded and unlawfully
taken from the place of storage, by the owner or operator, shall constitute
prima facie evidence that it was so removed by the owner or operator. 
Penalty, see Section 70.99.





      (4)     This section shall not prevent any person from
storing or keeping any collector's vehicle on private property with the
permission of the person having the right to possession of the property,
except that such vehicle must be completely screened from public view by
means of buildings, fences, year-round vegetation, terrain, or other
screening acceptable to the City.





      (5)     This section shall not apply to lawful motor vehicle
salvage dealerships or scrap metal processing facilities licensed under state
or local statute, except that those facilities must meet all applicable
screening requirements.










   (J)    Parking.  No person shall store, place or allow to remain
motor vehicles on non- approved paved surfaces.  Reference Zoning Code
Section 154.12.01 for a list of approved paved surfaces.  (Ord. 3545. 
Passed 3-11-14.)










   (K)    Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly
damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building
on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or
graffiti.





      (1)    It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore
said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair.










   (L)    Ground cover. Grass, plantings or other suitable ground cover
shall be provided to prevent soil erosion which is or may become detrimental
to the structures, lot use or adjacent lots and structures.










   (M)    Traffic markings. All traffic markings, including but not
limited to, directional arrows, lane division lines, parking space lines and
stop signs shall be maintained so as to be clearly visible and easily
recognized.










   (N)    Lighting. All lighting used to illuminate an off-street
parking or loading area shall be equipped with suitable shielding or be so
arranged as to reflect light away from adjacent lots, and to prevent a glare
at eye level on surrounding public or private property.










   (O)    Time limit for storing construction materials. Construction
materials may be placed or stored on any property when the materials are used
in later construction on the same property, provided that the construction
materials shall not remain on the property for a period of more than thirty
(30) days unless the construction using the materials has commenced; and
provided further that the materials are removed from the premises within
thirty (30) days of the completion of construction, but in no case shall the
construction materials remain on the property for a period exceeding two (2)
years for a project requiring permits or four (4) months for a project not
requiring permits. No person or persons shall move any materials so stored or
placed to another location within the city for the purpose of avoiding the
intent of this sub-section, except that any materials may be moved to another
property when the same have been sold to a bona fide purchaser for value for
the purchasers own use.   





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)










   (P)   Outside storage - occupied properties.  No owner or occupant
of any premises shall maintain or permit to be maintained, the exterior
property areas of such premises in a condition that deteriorates or debases
the appearance of the neighborhood or creates a blighting influence. 
Furniture, equipment and other items located on exterior property areas shall
be designed for outdoor use and shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
manner, all other items shall be stored within enclosed structures or
screened from the public view and from the view of neighboring properties.










   * Recommend compliance time of immediate to 5 days.  (This language to
be included in Section 158.97 Property Maintenance and Nuisance Compliance
Times.)










   (Q)   Outside storage - vacant properties.  Vacant, abandoned or
condemned premises or structures in which portable items are left stored
outside shall be placed within an enclosed structure or stored in an
organized manner behind the structure.  Items identified as rubbish shall be
abated as per the requirements outlined in Section 158.21.










   Upon a finding by the City Manager or his/her designee that portable
items have been left stored on vacant exterior properties in the city and
have not been removed or properly stored, the City Manager or his/her
designee shall cause written notice to be served upon the owner and if
different, upon the lessee, agent, or tenant having charge of the property,
premise or structure that contains portable items notifying him/her that
portable items are on exterior properties, premises, and that it must be
properly stored or removed within five (5) days of the date upon which the
notice was issued.  Service of such notice shall comply with Section 158.07.










   In the event the owner, lessee, agent or tenant having charge of the
property, premise or structure that contains portable items fails to properly
store or remove such portable items from the property within five (5) days
from service of notice to do so, the City Manager or his/her designee is
hereby authorized to have such portable items stored and to invoice the owner
for the cost incurred by the city in having such portable items stored,
including an administrative fee assessed at the current rate as set forth in
Chapter 36, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
West Carrollton.  In the event the cost are not paid within 30 days after
mailing of the invoice, then such amount shall be certified to the County
Auditor for collection, the same as other taxes or assessments are collected.










   (R)   Firewood.  The storage of firewood shall be restricted to
rear or side yard areas only, stacked in a reasonably compact orderly manner
and shall encompass no more than 200 square feet of restricted area.  (Ord.
3545.  Passed 3-11-14.)









158.17  SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS.




   (A)    Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition, and in good repair.










   (B)    Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas,
containing water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth shall be completely
surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches (1219 mm) in height above
the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the
pool. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and
self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less than 54 inches (1372
mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on
the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be
maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released
from an open position of 6 inches (152mm) from the gatepost. No existing pool
enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its
effectiveness as a safety barrier.





      (1)    Exception to this requirement shall be as follows:





         (a)    Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that
complies with ASTM 1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.





            (Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.18 EXTERIOR STRUCTURE.




   (A)    General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in
good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to
the public health, safety or welfare.










   (B)    Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but
not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim,
balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior
wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment.
Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces
repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the
building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be
maintained weather resistant and water tight.  All metal surfaces subject to
rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all
surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit
future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior
surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from
this requirement.










   (C)     Premises identification. No person shall remove, alter, or
deface any street address number or numbers properly assigned and placed on
or near a house or building or to place or retain on any house or buildings
any street address number or numbers other than those duly assigned. The
following describes placement, type and size of address numbers:





        (1)    The owner of any house or building which has an
assigned street address shall cause the assigned street address number or
numbers to be placed and continuously maintained, in a conspicuous place
either to the left, right, or immediately above the entrance way or in any
other place on the property so the street address is easily legible from the
street or other public way. If obstruction prohibits placement, the street
address number or numbers shall be placed at or near the entrance to the walk
or driveway in an appropriate place so as to be easily legible from the
street or public way. On any corner lot, the street address number or numbers
shall face the street named in the official address.





      (2)    If a house or building is set back more than 50 feet
from the street line, the street address number or numbers shall be
conspicuously displayed at or near the entrance of the walk or driveway to
the house or building in an appropriate place so as to be easily legible from
the street or public way.





      (3)    The street address number or numbers shall be Arabic
numerals not less than three inches in height, of reflective material or
lighted at night and be of a contrasting color to the background so as to be
easily legible from the street or public way.










   (D)    Structural members. All structural members shall be
maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting
the imposed dead and live loads.










   (E)    Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained
plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such
condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.










   (F)    Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes,
breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and
properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.










   (G)    Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound,
tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate
to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good
repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a
manner that creates a public nuisance.










   (H)     Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels,
terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be
maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.










   (I)    Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but
not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes,
standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be
properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and
against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials,
such as paint or similar surface treatment.










   (J)    Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior
stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto,
shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage
and capable of supporting the imposed loads.










   (K)    Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke
stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and
sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application
of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.










   (L)    Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be
firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.










   (M)    Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight,
door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather
tight.





      (1)    Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free
from cracks and holes.





      (2)    Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed
window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by
window hardware.










   (N)    Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside opening
required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food
service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food
for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall
be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh
per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door shall have a self
closing device in good working condition.





      (1)    Exception to this requirement shall be as follows: 





         (a)    Screens shall not be required where other
approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.










   (O)    Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall
be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units,
rooming units and guestrooms shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of
egress doors shall be in accordance with Section 158.42(C).










   (P)    Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be
maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage
water.










   (Q)    Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is
openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other
approved protection against the entry of rodents.










   (R)    Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling
units, room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices
designed to provide security for the occupants and property within.





      (1)    Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit,
rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be
equipped with a deadbolt lock designed to be readily openable from the side
which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or
effort and shall have a lock throw of not less than 1 inch (25 mm). Such
deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the manufactures
specifications and maintained in good working order. For the purposes of this
section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.





      (2)    Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part
within 6 feet (1828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that
provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is
rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking devices.





      (3)    Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide
access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented,
leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from
unauthorized entry.





         (Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.19  INTERIOR STRUCTURE.




   (A)    General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein
shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary
condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy
or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure
containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or
more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall
maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of
the structure and exterior property.










   (B)    Structural members. All structural members shall be
maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.










   (C)    Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows
and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition.
Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or
covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface
conditions shall be corrected.










   (D)    Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing,
balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound
condition and good repair.










   (E)    Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be
firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.










   (F)    Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well
within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being
properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the
manufacturer of the attachment hardware.  (Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.20 HANDRAILS AND GUARDRAILS.




   Handrails and guardrails shall be maintained in compliance with the
most currently adopted Building Code.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.21  RUBBISH AND GARBAGE.




   (A)    Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property,
premise, and the interior of every structure shall be free from the
accumulation of rubbish or garbage. Upon a finding by the City Manager or
his/her designee that rubbish or garbage has been placed on the exterior
property, premise and/or the interior of any structure in the city and has
not been removed, the City Manager or his/her designee shall cause written
notice to be served upon the owner and if different, upon the lessee, agent,
or tenant having charge of the property, premise or structure that contains
rubbish or garbage notifying him/her that rubbish or garbage is on exterior
properties, premises and or the interior of any structure, and that it must
be collected and removed immediately or up to five (5) days depending on the
severity of the violation.  Service of such notice shall comply with Section
158.07.





      (1)    Exception to this requirement shall be as follows:





         (a)    This section does not apply to properties,
premises or structures being used under a city building or construction
permit or license, a city permit or license, or a conditional zoning permit
or variance to operate a junk yard, scrap metal operating facility, or
similar businesses or a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of state law.










   (B)    Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall
dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish
in approved containers.





      (1)    Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied
premises shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner
of the premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.





      (2)    Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not
in operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without
first removing the doors.










   (C)    Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall
dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in
an approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers.





      (1)    Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall
supply one of the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in
each dwelling unit; an approved incinerator unit in the structure available
to the occupants in each dwelling unit; or an approved leakproof, covered,
outside garbage container.





      (2)    Containers. The operator of every establishment
producing garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized,
approved leak proof containers provided with close-fitting covers for the
storage of such materials until re moved from the premises for disposal. 
(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)










   (D)    In the event the owner, lessee, agent, or tenant having
charge of the property, premise or structure that contains rubbish or garbage
fails to remove such rubbish or garbage from the property immediately or up
to five (5) days from service of notice to do so, the City Manager or his/her
designee is hereby authorized to have such rubbish or garbage removed from
the property and to bill the owner for the cost incurred by the city in
having such rubbish or garbage removed, including an administrative fee
assessed at the current rate as set forth in Section 37.33, Chapter 37,
General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West
Carrollton. In the event the cost are not paid within 30 days after mailing
of the bill, then such amount shall be certified to the County Auditor for
collection, the same as other taxes or assessments are collected.





(Ord. 3545.  Passed 3-11-14.)









158.22  EXTERMINATION.




   (A)    Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect
and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found
shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be
injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be
taken to prevent re-infestation.










   (B)    Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.










   (C)    Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of
a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for
extermination on the premises.










   (D)    Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two
or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a
nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public
or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is
caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area
occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for extermination.










   (E)    Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible
for the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure.





      (1)    Exception to this requirement shall be as follows:





         (a)    Where the infestations are caused by defects in
the structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination.





            (Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)










LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS









158.23  GENERAL.




   (A)    Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for
occupying a structure.










   (B)    Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another
person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of
this chapter.










   (C)    Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light
and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation
complying with the Ohio Building Code or Residential Code of Ohio whichever
is applicable shall be permitted.  (Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.24  LIGHT.




   (A)    Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least
one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court.
The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8 percent of
the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure
face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than 3 feet
(914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of
the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors
nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required
minimum total window area for the room.





      (1)    Exception to this requirement shall be as follows:





         (a)    Where natural light for rooms or spaces without
exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the
unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8  percent of
the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square
feet (2.33 m2). The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor
area being served.










   (B)    Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in
residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall
be lighted at all times with at least a 60-watt standard incandescent light
bulb for each 200 square feet (19 m2) of floor area or equivalent
illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall not be greater
than 30 feet (9144 mm). In other than residential occupancies, means of
egress, including exterior means of egress stairways shall be illuminated at
all times the building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a
minimum of 1 footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads.










   (C)    Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural
or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary
conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the
appliances, equipment and fixtures.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.25 VENTILATION.




   (A)    Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least
one openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room
shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum glazed area required in
Section 158.24(A).





      (1)    Exception to this requirement shall be as follows: 





         (a)    Where rooms and spaces without openings to the
outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening
to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent of the floor area of the
interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The
ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area
being ventilated.










   (B)    Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room
shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as
required by Section 158.25(A), except that a window shall not be required in
such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a
mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge
to the outdoors and shall not be re-circulated.










   (C)    Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the certificate
of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory
unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be
present in a rooming unit or dormitory unit.





      (1)    Exception to this requirement shall be as follows:





         (a)    Where specifically approved in writing by the
code official.





         (b)    Coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be
considered cooking appliances.










   (D)    Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or
noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust
ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the
source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be re-circulated to
any space.










   (E)    Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be
independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with
the manufacturer's instructions.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.26 OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS.




   (A)    Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units,
rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be
separate from other adjoining spaces.










   (B)    Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen,
shall not be less than 7 feet (2134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall
have a clear passageway of not less than 3 feet (914 mm) between
counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls.










   (C)    Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces, hallways,
corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement
areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than 7 feet(2134mm).





      (1)    Exceptions to this requirement shall be as follows:





         (a)     In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or
girders spaced not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center and projecting not
more than 6 inches (152mm) below the required ceiling height.





         (b)     Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings
occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a
ceiling height of not less than 6 feet 8 inches (2033 mm) with not less than
6 feet 4 inches (1932 mm) of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and
similar obstructions.





         (c)    Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or
similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room,
with a clear ceiling height of at least 7 feet (2134 mm) over not less than
one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area
of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling
height of 5 feet (1524 mm) or more shall be included.










   (D)    Bedroom requirements. Every bedroom shall comply with the
following requirements.





      (1)    Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by
one person shall contain at least 70 square feet (6.5 m2) of floor area, and
every bedroom occupied by more than one person shall contain at least 50
square feet (4.6 m2) of floor area for each occupant thereof.





      (2)    Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the
only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not
serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces.





         (a)    Exception to this requirement shall be as follows:





            1.   Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.





      (3)    Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have
access to at least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through
another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at
least one water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom
or an adjacent story.





      (4)    Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces
shall not be used for sleeping purposes.





      (5)    Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the
applicable provisions of this code including, but not limited to light,
ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this
chapter; plumbing facilities and water heating facilities requirements of
this chapter; heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of
this chapter; and smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of this
Chapter.










   (E)    Overcrowding. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more
occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of Table 158.26(E).










TABLE 158.26(E)





MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS









 



 

MINIMUM AREA IN SQUARE FEET




SPACE

 
1-2 occupants
 
3-5 occupants
 
6 or more occupants


Living Room a, d
 
No requirements
 
120
 
150


Dining Room a, b
 
No requirements
 
80
 
100


Bedrooms
 
Shall comply with Section 158.26(D)



 




For SI: 1 square foot = 0.093 m2.





a.   See Section 158.26(E)(2) for combined living room/dining room spaces.





b.   See Section 158.26(E)(1) for limitations on determining the minimum
occupancy area for sleeping purposes.










      (1)    Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by
Table 158.26(E) shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the
minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply
with Section 158.26(D).





      (2)    Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room
spaces shall comply with the requirements of Table 158.26(E) if the total
area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located
so as to function as a combination living room/dining room.










   (F)    Efficiency unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an
efficiency living unit from meeting the following requirements:





      (1)   A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall
have a clear floor area of not less than 220 square feet (20.4 m2). A unit
occupied by three occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than
320 square feet (29.7m2). These required areas shall be exclusive of the
areas required by items 2 and 3.





      (2)   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking
appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of
not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming
to this code shall be provided.





      (3)   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom
containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.





      (4)   The maximum number of occupants shall be three.










   (G)    Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food
preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store,
prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner.  There shall be adequate
facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse,
including facilities for temporary storage.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)










PLUMBING FACILITIES AND





REQUIREMENTS









158.27 GENERAL.




   (A)    Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the
minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.










   (B)    Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with
these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with
the requirements of this chapter.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.28  REQUIRED FACILITIES.




   (A)    Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own
bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be
maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be
placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to
the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is
located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required
lavatory.










   (B)    Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and
bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units.










   (C)    Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are
not provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having
access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten occupants.










   (D)    Employees' facilities. A minimum of one water closet, one
lavatory and one drinking facility shall be available to employees.





      (1)    Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a
drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next
to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in
toilet rooms or bathrooms.





         (Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.29  TOILET ROOMS.




   (A)    Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and
shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the
exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common
or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.










   (B)    Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units,
rooming units or dormitory units or housekeeping units, shall have access by
traversing not more than one flight of stairs and shall have access from a
common hall or passageway.










   (C)    Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities
shall have access from within the employees' working area. The required
toilet facilities shall be located not more than one story above or below the
employees' working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not
exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 m). Employee facilities shall either be
separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities.





      (1)    Exception to this requirement shall be as follows: 





         (a)    Facilities that are required for employees in
storage structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under
the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of
500 feet (152 m) from the employees' regular working area to the facilities.










   (D)    Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet
room floor shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to
permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.30 PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND FIXTURES.




   (A)    General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed
and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions,
leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such
plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in
a safe, sanitary and functional condition.










   (B)    Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate
clearances for usage and cleaning.










   (C)    Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing
system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure
by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection,
backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar
reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to
eliminate the hazard.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.31 WATER SYSTEM.




   (A)    General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking
fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected
to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All
kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be
supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the
most current adopted Ohio Plumbing Code.










   (B)    Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from
contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located
above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink
faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left
in place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker
or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.










   (C)    Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and
maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the
fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.










   (D)    Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be
properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of
water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and
laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 110°F (43°C). A
gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room,
bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate
combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and
pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained on water heaters.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.32  SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM.




   (A)    General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to
either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.










   (B)    Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line
shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.33 STORM DRAINAGE.




   (A)    General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts
and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that
creates a public nuisance.





(Ord. 3421. Passed 5-26-09.)










MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL





REQUIREMENTS









158.34  GENERAL.




   (A)    Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the
minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.










   (B)    Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance
with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or
permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.35  HEATING FACILITIES.




   (A)    Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in
structures as required by this section.










   (B)    Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with
heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C)
in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter
outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the
International Plumbing Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide
space heating to meet the requirements of this section.





      (1)    Exception to this requirement shall be as follows:





         (a)    In months when the average temperature is above
30°F (-1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.










   (C)    Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who
rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or
guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the
occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less
than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.





      (1)    Exceptions to this requirement shall be as follows:





         (a)    When the outdoor temperature is below the winter
outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is
operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature
for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the International
Plumbing Code.





         (b)    In months when the average temperature is above
30°F (-1°C) a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.










   (D)    Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable workspaces shall be
supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C)
during the period the spaces are occupied.





   Exceptions to this requirement shall be as follows:





      1.   Processing, storage and operation areas that require
cooling or special temperature conditions.





      2.   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.










   (E)    Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures
shall be measured 3 feet (914 mm) above the floor near the center of the room
and 2 feet (610 mm) inward from the center of each exterior wall.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.36  MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.




   (A)    Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces,
solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating
appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working
condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function.










   (B)    Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment
and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent.





      (1)    Exception to this requirement shall be as follows:





         (a)    Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are
labeled for unvented operation.










   (C)    Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials
shall be maintained.










   (D)    Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning
equipment shall be maintained in effective operation.










   (E)    Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of
the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning
equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment.










   (F)    Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel
consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply
line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be
installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is
specifically approved.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.37 ELECTRICAL FACILITIES.




   (A)    Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be
provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of
this section and Section 158.38.










   (B)    Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall
serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in
accordance with the most current National Electrical Code (NEC). Dwelling
units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single phase electrical
service having a rating of not less than 100 amperes.










   (C)    Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the
electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the
structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient
receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation,
deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall
require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.38  ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.




   (A)    Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances
shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.










   (B)    Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall
contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry
area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with
a ground fault circuit interrupter.  Every bathroom shall contain at least
one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault
circuit interrupter protection.










   (C)    Lighting fixtures. Every public hall, interior stairway,
toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room
shall contain at least one electric lighting fixture.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.39 ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS.




   (A)    General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be
maintained to sustain safely all imposed loads, to operate properly, and to
be free from physical and fire hazards. The most current certificate of
inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached
to the escalator or dumbwaiter; or the certificate shall be available for
public inspection in the office of the building operator.










   (B)    Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at
least one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the
building is occupied. 





      (1)    Exception to this requirement shall be as follows:





         (a)    Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall
be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or
servicing. 
(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.40 DUCT SYSTEMS.




   (A)    General. Duct systems shall be maintained free of
obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)










FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS









158.41  GENERAL.




   (A)    Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the
minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and
exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be
provided.










   (B)    Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and
maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of
this chapter.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.42 MEANS OF EGRESS.




   (A)    General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel
shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public
way. Means of egress shall comply with the Ohio Fire Code.










   (B)    Aisles. The required width of aisles shall be in accordance
with the most current adopted Ohio Fire Code and subsequent amendments as
referenced in the Ohio Building Code shall be unobstructed.










   (C)    Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily
openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for
keys, special knowledge or effort, except where door hardware conforms to
that permitted by the most current adopted Ohio Fire Code and subsequent
amendments as referenced in the Ohio Building Code. 










   (D)    Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape and
rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the
use of keys or tools. Bars, grills, grates, or similar devices are permitted
to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum
net clear opening size complies with the most current adopted state mandated
Ohio Building Code and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the
inside without the use of a key, tool, or force greater than that which is
required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. Where bars,
grills, grates, or similar devices are installed in existing buildings, smoke
detectors shall be installed in accordance with Section 158.44.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.43 FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS.




   (A)    Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required
fire-resistance rating of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft
enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained.










   (B)    Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be
maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be
maintained in operable condition.  Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall
not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.44 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.




   (A)    General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire,
actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof
shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with
the Ohio Fire Code.










   (B)    Smoke alarms. Approved single station-smoke detectors/smoke
alarms shall be installed in existing dwelling units, congregate residences,
and hotel and lodging house guestrooms. Installation shall be in accordance
with the most current adopted Ohio Fire Code and subsequent amendments as
adopted in the Ohio Building Code and the Residential Code of Ohio.










   (C)    Power source. In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not
regulated as Group R occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive
their primary power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is
served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup.
Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be
permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for
overcurrent protection.





      (1)    Exception to this requirement shall be as follows:





         (a)    Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery
operated in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that
are not served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of
buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal
of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is
an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for
building wiring without the removal of interior finishes.










   (D)    Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required
to be installed within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and
in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be
interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will
activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly
audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening
doors closed.





      (1)    Exceptions to this requirement shall be as follows:





         (a)    Interconnection is not required in buildings
which are not undergoing alterations, repairs, or construction of any kind.





         (b)    Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required
to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the
removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless
there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide
access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.  (Ord.
3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









158.45  UNOCCUPIED, VACANT AND ABANDONED STRUCTURES.




   (A)   General.  Every foundation, exterior floor, exterior wall,
exterior window, exterior door, soffit, fascia, roof and any other area of
the exterior envelope of every unoccupied, vacant or abandoned structure
shall be maintained and kept in good repair and in such safe condition so as
to make interior areas weather tight, watertight, and rodent proof so as to
prevent the structures from becoming harbors for rats, vermin or insects, to
prevent unauthorized entry of the structures and to eliminate unsafe
conditions.










   (B)   Minimum standards for effective boarding.  The effective
boarding of a structure shall include, but not be limited to, doors, windows,
walls, roofs or other areas open to ingress or egress and weather elements. 
Such openings shall be secured by exterior grade structural panels not less
than ½ inch thick, or other material of equal strength approved by the Code
Official.  Boarding shall be neatly cut and fitted into the opening and
secured.  All boarding shall be painted to match the exterior color scheme
of the structure.










   (C)   Unsecure vacant buildings.  Whenever the Code Official finds
an unoccupied, vacant or abandoned structure open to entry, the Code Official
shall contact the owner, lessee, agent, or tenant having charge of the
property, premise or structure and notify them that the structure is open and
shall be secured.  Should the whereabouts of the owner, lessee, agent or
tenant having charge of the property, premise or structure be unknown or be
unascertainable by reasonable means or should the owner, lessee, agent or
tenant having charge of the property, premise or structure fail to secure the
open structure, the Code Official shall cause the structure to be secured at
those points of entry.  The Code Official shall be authorized to enter upon
the premises only to the extent to secure the structure.  Subsequent notice
shall include the fact that the Code Official has found it necessary to take
appropriate action to secure the structure.










   (D)   In the event the owner, lessee, agent or tenant having charge
of the property, premise or structure fails to secure the open structure or
after reasonable attempts to contact the owner, lessee, agent, or tenant
having charge of the property, premise or structure to notify them to secure
the structure have failed, the City Manager or his/her designee is hereby
authorized to have structure secured by a private contractor and to invoice
the owner for the cost incurred by the city in having such structure
secured,  including an administrative fee assessed at the current rate as
set forth in Chapter 36, General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of
the City of West Carrollton.  In the event the cost are not paid within 30
days after mailing of the invoice, then such amount shall be certified to the
County Auditor for collection, the same as other taxes or assessments are
collected.





(Ord. 3545.  Passed 3-11-14.)









158.46  GENERAL.



   (A)   The purposes of this section are to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare by establishing minimum standards and procedures
governing the maintenance, appearance, and condition of all rental housing
properties; to impose certain responsibilities and duties upon the Owner,
Responsible Agent, and Tenant and to ensure they are educated about those
responsibilities; to authorize and establish procedures for mandatory
registration and exterior inspections of rental property to ensure compliance
with the Property Maintenance Code, Zoning Code, Ohio Building Code, Ohio
Fire Code, and the Residential Code of Ohio; and to fix penalties for
violations of this section. This section is hereby declared to be remedial
and essential for the public interest, and it is intended that this section
be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose as stated herein.



 



   (B)   This section shall apply to all Rental Units and/or Rental
Property and shall also apply to all common areas within the structure(s) or
on the premises.



 



   (C)   Administration of the Residential Rental Registration &
Education Program in no way negates or eliminates the right of the Code
Official to request, be invited or to seek an administrative search warrant
to conduct an interior inspection of any Rental Unit and/or Rental Property
as provided by Section 158.04 of this Chapter.



(Ord. 3596.  Passed 12-13-16.)



 



158.47 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Owners of one or more Rental Units and/or Rental Property
located within the city of West Carrollton shall comply with all requirements
of the Montgomery County Residential Rental Property Registration program
enabled by Ohio Revised Code Chapter 5323: Residential Rental Property no
later than June 30, 2017.



 



   (B)   Owners of one or more Rental Units and/or Rental Property
located within the city of West Carrollton shall update the information
required under division (A) of this section within sixty (60) days after any
change in the information occurs, as required by Ohio Revised Code Chapter
5323.02(C).



(Ord. 3596.  Passed 12-13-16.)



 



158.48  INSPECTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   The Code Official shall inspect the exterior of all Rental
Units and/or Rental Property, as well as the interior common areas of
multi-family residential rental buildings, once every two (2) years to
determine compliance with the Property Maintenance Code, Zoning Code, Ohio
Building Code, Ohio Fire Code, and the Residential Code of Ohio.   



 



   (B)   The Code Official shall conduct all inspections in accordance
with the requirements of Section 158.04 of this code, and shall obtain
affirmative consent by the Owner, Responsible Agent, and/or Tenant to access
the front, side and rear yards of the property and the interior common areas
of multi-family residential rental buildings.  If said consent is not
granted, the Code Official may seek an administrative warrant as provided by
law to gain access to the property in order to conduct the inspection.   



 



   (C)   The Owner and Responsible Agent have no legal obligation to
obtain from any Tenant, on behalf of the Code Official, consent for the Code
Official to perform any inspection or re-inspection.



 



   (D)   A scheduled inspection or re-inspection may be rescheduled
with no less than seven (7) days prior notice to the Code Official without
incurring a re-inspection fee as provided in Section 158.50.  (Ord. 3596. 
Passed 12-13-16.)



 



158.49 NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   Within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this
ordinance, the Code Official shall issue written notification to all known
Owners of Rental Units and/or Rental Property located within the city of West
Carrollton describing the requirements of the Residential Rental Registration
& Education Program and the penalties for failing to comply with said
requirements.  This notification shall be delivered by ordinary mail to the
Owner's last known mailing address, and shall be evidenced by a certificate
of mailing.



 



   (B)   Thereafter, the Code Official shall annually cause a notice to
be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, placing
Owners of Rental Units and/or Rental Property on notice regarding the
requirements of the Residential Rental Registration & Education Program and
the penalties for failing to comply with said requirements.  The notice
shall not be required to describe the lands or to specify the name of the
Owner of said property, but shall constitute notice regarding the program to
any Owner, Responsible Agent, or Tenant having charge of any Rental Unit
and/or Rental Property which is Let for Occupancy, Let or Leased for
residential purposes.  Such notice shall be published one time in order to
constitute notice hereafter.  No further notice or publication shall be
required in order to institute appropriate action to restrain, correct or
abate a violation of this program.



 



            (C)      The Code Official shall establish an inspection
schedule identifying the month and year when all registered Rental Units
and/or Rental Property are anticipated to be inspected during the initial two
(2) year inspection period.  As soon as practicable, the Code Official shall
issue notification to all Owners and Responsible Agents by ordinary mail
and/or posting on the property as to the anticipated month and year in which
their initial inspection will be conducted.  Owners and/or Responsible
Agents shall communicate this information in writing to all Tenants as soon
as practicable after receiving notice from the Code Official.



 



   (D)   At least two (2) weeks prior to the date of the inspection of
a Rental Unit and/or Rental Property, the Code Official shall issue
notification to the Owner and Responsible Agent by ordinary mail and/or
posting on the property of the inspection date and time.  This notice shall
inform the Owner and Responsible Agent that affirmative consent is needed in
order for the Code Official to enter upon private  property, and if that
consent is not granted the Code Official may seek an administrative warrant
as provided by law to gain access to the property in order to conduct the
inspection.  Owners and/or Responsible Agents shall communicate this
information in writing to all Tenants as soon as practicable after receiving
notice from the Code Official, but no later than 72 hours prior to the
scheduled inspection time.



(Ord. 3596.  Passed 12-13-16.)



 



158.50 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Registration.  A late fee as set forth in Chapter 37 :
General Fee Schedule shall be instituted for failure to comply with the
registration requirements of Section 158.47 , and shall be paid by the Owner
or Responsible Agent who is responsible for correcting the violations. 
Notice shall be accompanied by a statement of the amount of cost incurred,
and in the event the same is not paid within thirty (30) days after the
mailing of the notice, then such amount shall be certified to the County
Auditor for collection the same as other taxes and assessments are
collected.   



 



   (B)   Inspections.



 



      (1)   Failure of an Owner, Responsible Agent, or Tenant of a
Rental Unit and/or Rental Property to appear for a scheduled inspection or
re-inspection shall result in a re-inspection fee being charged as set forth
in Section 158.13 of this code.  No Owner shall be penalized where any
inspection or re-inspection is delayed or does not occur as the result of
actions by the Tenant, provided neither party has colluded or attempted to
collude with the other to delay or prevent said inspection from being
conducted.



 



      (2)   Whenever the Code Official determines during an
inspection that one or more violations exist in a Rental Unit and/or on a
Rental Property, a notice of violation or order shall be given to the Owner
and Responsible Agent in accordance with the provisions of Section 158.07 of
this code.



 



      (3)   Failure to comply with a notice of violation or order
issued in accordance with Section 158.50(B)(2) shall result in a
re-inspection fee being assessed to the Rental Unit and/or Rental Property as
set forth in Section 158.13 of this code.  The Owner and Responsible Agent
shall also be subject to recourse pursuant to Section 158.06 of this code.



 



   (C)   Education.  An Owner or Responsible Agent of a Rental Unit
and/or Rental Property who has been issued a notice of violation or order
containing life safety violations in two successive inspections shall be
required to attend a landlord continuing education course approved by the
Code Official in consultation with rental industry representatives.  Written
verification of the completion of the continuing education course by the
Owner or Responsible Agent shall be provided to the Code Official by the
education provider. 



 



   (D)   An Owner or Responsible Agent failing to comply with any
requirement of the Residential Rental Registration & Education Program shall
also be subject to recourse pursuant to Section 158.99 of this code.



 



   (E)   A proper and timely filed appeal as provided in Section 158.51
shall stay any and all enforcement proceedings until a final decision is
rendered regarding said appeal. 



(Ord. 3596.  Passed 12-13-16.)



 



158.51 APPEAL.



   Any Owner aggrieved by the action of the Code Official in the
administration and/or enforcement of this section shall have the right to
appeal that action to the Board of Zoning Appeals in the manner prescribed in
Section 158.12 of this code.



(Ord. 3596.  Passed 12-13-16.)



 



158.52 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   An inspection is not a warranty or guarantee that there are no defects
in the Rental Unit or on the Rental Property, and the Code Official shall not
be liable to any person or entity for the condition of the Rental Unit and/or
Rental Property.



(Ord. 3596.  Passed 12-13-16.)



 



158.53 SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of the
Residential Rental Registration & Education Program shall be declared invalid
for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining
portions of the Residential Rental Registration & Education Program, which
shall remain in full force and effect.



(Ord. 3596.  Passed 12-13-16.)








158.97  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND NUISANCE COMPLIANCE TIMES*.








 




Violation

 

Section Number

 
Compliance time


Unsafe Structures & Equipment
 

158.08 (all)

 
Immediate


Emergency Measures
 

158.09 (all)

 
Immediate


Public Nuisance Declaration Process
 

158.10 (all)

 
Reference Ordinance


Demolition
 

158.11 (all)

 
Immediate to 45 days


General requirements
 

158.15 (all)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Sanitation
 

158.16(A)

 
Immediate to 5 days


Grading and Drainage
 

158.16(B)

 
15 to 30 days


Weeds and Grasses
 

158.16(D)

 
Reference Ordinance


Trees and shrubs
 

158.16(E)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Rodent harborage
 

158.16(F)

 
Immediate to 10 days


Exhaust vents
 

158.16(G)

 
10 to 30 days


Accessory structures
 

158.16(H)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Motor vehicles
 

158.16(I)

 
Reference Ordinance


Unpaved parking
 

158.16(J)

 
24 hours


Defacement of property
 

158.16(K)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Ground cover
 

158.16(L)

 
15 to 30 days


Traffic markings
 

158.16(M)

 
15 to 45 days


Lighting
 

158.16(N)

 
24 hours to 5 days


Storing  construction materials
 

158.16(O)

 
Reference Ordinance


Swimming pools
 

158.17(A)

 
Immediate to 45 days




 








 




Violation

 

Section Number

 
Compliance time


Swimming pool enclosures
 

158.17(B)

 
Immediate


Protective treatment
 

158.18(B)

 
15 to 45 days


Premises identification
 

158.18(C)

 
Immediate to 10 days


Structural members
 

158.18(D)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Foundation walls
 

158.18(E)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Exterior walls
 

158.18(F)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Roofs and drainage
 

158.18(G)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Decorative features
 

158.18(H)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Overhang extensions
 

158.18(I)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Stairways, decks, porches & balconies
 

158.18(J)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Chimneys and towers
 

158.18(K)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Handrails and guards
 

158.18(L)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Windows, skylights & door frames
 

158.18(M)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Insect screens
 

158.18(N)

 
15 to 45 days


Doors
 

158.18(O)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Basement hatchways
 

158.18(P)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Guards for basement windows
 

158.18(Q)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Building security
 

158.18(R)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Interior structures - General
 

158.19(A)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Structural members
 

158.19(B)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Interior surfaces
 

158.19(C)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Stairs and walking surfaces
 

158.19(D)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Handrails and guards
 

158.19(E)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Interior doors
 

158.19(F)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Handrails and guards
 

158.20(A)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Rubbish and garbage
 

158.21(all)

 
Reference Ordinance


Extermination
 

158.22(all)

 
Immediate to 10 days


Light, Ventilation & occupancy limitations
 

158.23(all)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Light
 

158.24(all)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Ventilation
 

158.25(all)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Occupancy limitations
 

158.26(all)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Plumbing facilities and requirements
 

158.27(all)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Required facilities
 

158.28(all)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Toilet rooms
 

158.29(all)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Plumbing systems and fixtures
 

158.30(all)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Water systems
 

158.31(all)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Sanitary drainage systems
 

158.32(all)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Storm drainage
 

158.33(all)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Mechanical and electrical requirements
 

158.34(all)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Heating facilities
 

158.35(all)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Mechanical equipment
 

158.36(all)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Electrical facilities
 

158.37(all)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Electrical equipment
 

158.38(all)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters
 

158.39(all)

 
Immediate to 30 days


Duct systems
 

158.40(all)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Fire safety requirements
 

158.41(all)

 
Immediate to 45 days




 



 


Violation

 

Section Number

 
Compliance time


Means of egress
 

158.42(all)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Fire - resistance ratings
 

158.43(all)

 
Immediate to 45 days


Fire - protection systems
 

158.44(all)

 
Immediate to 45 days








*  These are typical compliance time limits.  They can vary depending on
season, circumstance of violation, progress made by violator, extensions, etc.



(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)









REFERENCED STANDARDS









158.98  REFERENCED STANDARDS.




   This section lists the standards that are referenced in various
sections of this document. The application of the standards shall be as
specified in Section 158.02(G). The most current standard shall apply.










Standards





Residential Code of Ohio





Ohio Building Code





National Electrical Code





Ohio Fire Code





Ohio Plumbing Code





Ohio Mechanical Code





International Building Code





International Existing Building Code





International Fire Code





International Mechanical Code





International Plumbing Code





International Zoning Code










(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)










PENALTIES









158.99  PENALTY.




   Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the following penalties at the discretion
of the court.










   (A)    A first offense shall be deemed a fourth degree misdemeanor.
The court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not more than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250) but not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150), or
may impose a sentence of imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or
may impose both such a fine and sentence of imprisonment.










   (B)    A second offense (whether or not of the same section of this
chapter), occurring not sooner than one hundred eighty (180) days and not
later than two years after the occurrence of the first offense, shall be
deemed a third degree misdemeanor. The court shall impose upon the offender a
fine of not more than five hundred ($500) dollars but not less than two
hundred fifty ($250) dollars, or may impose a sentence of imprisonment for
not more than sixty (60) days, or may impose such a fine and sentence of
imprisonment.










   (C)    A third offense (whether or not of the same section of this
chapter), occurring not sooner than one hundred eighty (180) days and not
later than two years after the occurrence of the second offense, shall be
deemed a second degree misdemeanor. The court shall impose upon the offender
a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty ($750) dollars but not less than
five hundred ($500) dollars, or may impose a sentence of imprisonment for not
more than ninety (90) days, or may impose such a fine and sentence of
imprisonment.










   (D)    A fourth or any subsequent offense (whether or not of the
same section of this chapter), occurring not sooner than one hundred eighty
(180) days and not later than two years after the occurrence of the third
offense, shall be deemed a first degree misdemeanor. The court shall impose
upon the offender a fine of not more than one thousand ($1000) dollars but
not less than seven hundred fifty ($750) dollars, or may impose a sentence of
imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or may impose such a fine and
sentence of imprisonment.





(Ord. 3421.  Passed 5-26-09.)










   (E)   Pursuant to Section 158.06(E), cost incurred for actions taken
at the direction of the legal officer to restrain, correct or abate a
violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the
building, structure or premises shall be recovered as follows:










   If the owner of the property, premise or structure fails to comply with
a notice or order within the time prescribed the City Manager or his/her
designee may cause such violation(s) to be abated, either through an
available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons,
and the cost of such abatement shall be billed to the owner for the amount
incurred by the city in having such violation(s) abated, including an
administrative fee assessed at the current rate as set forth in Chapter 36,
General Fee Schedule, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of West
Carrollton.  In the event the cost are not paid within 30 days after mailing
of the bill, then such amount shall be entered upon the tax duplicate and
shall constitute a lien upon such lands from the date of the entry, and shall
be collected as other taxes and returned to the city’s general fund.





(Ord.  3545.  Passed 3-11-14.)
























CHAPTER 159
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT









Section










159.01   Comprehensive plan adopted




159.02   Bicycle Plan adopted








 



159.01  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED.




   (A)   West Carrollton Sustainable Comprehensive Plan:  Destination
Tomorrow, dated April 2009, is hereby adopted as the official comprehensive
general plan for the City.










   (B)   West Carrollton Sustainable Comprehensive Plan:  Destination
Tomorrow, dated April 2009, replaces the Comprehensive Plan adopted by
Resolution 19-94 on May 24, 1994.





(Ord. 3418.  Passed 4-28-09.)









159.02  BICYCLE PLAN ADOPTED.




   The West Carrollton Bicycle Friendly Community Action Plan, dated
January 2009, is hereby adopted as the official bicycle plan for the City of
West Carrollton.





(Ord. 3426.  Passed 8-25-09.)





























TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES









Table











         I.   FRANCHISES










         II.   EASEMENTS










         III.   VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS










         IV.   DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL










         V.   ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY










         VI.   LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY










         VII.   STREET GRADE LEVELS; STREET AND OTHER NAME CHANGES










         VIII.   ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY










         IX.   ZONING MAP CHANGES










         X.   HISTORICAL DISTRICTS










         XI.   COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AREAS










         XII.   CONTRACTS; AGREEMENTS



















TABLE I:  FRANCHISES









Ord. No.    Date     Description










29   3-27-1893   Dayton Traction Co. - Right to construct, maintain and
operate a street railroad.





34   6-6-1893   Ohio Telephone & Telegraph Co. - To erect, operate and
maintain poles and fixtures.





69   9-16-1895   Repeals Ord. 29 re Dayton Traction Co. franchise.





72   3-26-1896   Dayton Traction Co. - To construct, maintain and
operate an electric railroad.





84   4-29-01   Central Union Telephone Co. - To erect and maintain
poles and lines.





165   9-22-10   Dayton Lighting Co. - To erect poles, fixtures and 
lines to transmit electricity.





177   5-7-12   Ohio Fuel Supply Co. - To lay pipes, mains and other
appliances for conveying gas.





215   11-18-13   Cincinnati, Dayton & Toledo Traction Co. and the Ohio
Electric Railway Co. - To construct a spur track from Central Ave.





440   6-6-28   Cincinnati, Hamilton & Dayton Railway Co. - Amends
franchise in Ord. 215.





588   6-4-40   Dayton Power & Light Co. - 5-year electricity franchise.





591   6-18-40   Ohio Bell Telephone Co. - Right to construct, operate
and maintain telephone lines and service.





665   7-10-45   Dayton Power & Light Co. - 25-year electric franchise.





687   8-12-47   Ohio Bell Telephone Co. - To install and maintain
underground conduit in Locust St. and an alley north of Central Ave.





918   3-11-58   Ohio Bell Telephone Co. - To construct, operate and
maintain underground conduits, cables and appurtenances for telephone lines
and service in Zapp Rd. and U.S. 25.





921   3-25-58   Ohio Bell Telephone Co. - To construct, operate and
maintain underground conduits, cables and appurtenances for telephone lines
and service in Central Ave., Locust St., Elm St. and Lowery Ave.





1666   8-11-70   Dayton Power & Light Co. - 25-year electric franchise.





1907   5-27-75   Cable Television Franchise.





21-77   12-27-77   Dayton Power & Light Co.





2059   2-14-78   Dayton Power & Light Co.





2564   12-23-86   Dayton Power & Light Co. - Fixing prices for lighting
the streets, roads, and public places within the city for the period January
1 -December 31, 1987.





2574   1-13-87   Repealing Ch. 114 of the city code and enacting a new
Ch. 114 granting a non-exclusive cable television franchise.





Res.15-99   6-22-99   Approves request from Mediaone to transfer its
Cable TV franchise to Time Warner Entertainment Co., L.P.





3164   8-8-00   Terminates electric franchise granted to Dayton Power
and Light Co.  (Ord.  3053); grants new franchise to same co.  for 3
yrs.  (with automatic renewal of 3-yr.  periods).





3165   8-8-00   Terminates natural gas franchise granted to Ohio Fuel
Supply Co.  on 5- 7-12; grants new natural gas franchise to Dayton Power and
Light Co. for 3 yrs.  (with automatic renewal of 3-yr.  periods).





Res.  12-2010   3-23-10   Authorizes a contract with Sandy’s Towing
for the tow franchise agreement for the West Carrollton Police Department.



















TABLE II:  EASEMENTS









Ord. No.    Date     Description





300   2-4-19   Miami Conservancy District - Perpetual use of Bridge St.
for construction of an earth levee.





351   4-5-23   Miami Tablet Co. - To install and maintain a railway
track across Elm St.





466   7-26-29   Village sanitary sewer right-of-way over lands of
Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago and St. Louis Railway Co.





477   12-19-29   Village to construct Elm St. storm sewer under tracks
of Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago and St. Louis Railway Co.





552   1-19-37   Village right-of-way to pumping station over lands of
Linger Bros.





720   8-9-49   Authorizes sale of sanitary sewer easement to Empire
Homes Inc.





817   7-13-54   Moraine Paper Co. Division of West Carrollton - To
establish waste pipe line from company land to the Miami River.





852   7-26-55   Ohio Bell Telephone Co. - To construct, operate and
maintain an underground telephone and telegraph system.





1116   1-9-62   Village to install sanitary sewer under right-of-way of
NYC R.R. Co. and Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago and St. Louis Railway Co.





1122   3-27-62   Village to erect earthen embankment and 36 inch storm
tile on premises of Bond, Leiwig and Good.





1433   7-11-67   Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago and St. Louis Railway
Co. - For ingress and egress easement.





1473   12-12-67   Woody's Market, Inc. and Woody's Properties, Inc. -
To construct and maintain a building over East Dixie Dr. between lots 1439
and 1430.





2439   5-8-84   City to vacate the public utility easement on the
boundary between lots 4192 and 4188, and the public utility easement on the
boundary between lots 4188 and 4186 within Elmwood Park, Section 2.





Res. 16-87   4-28-87   Authorizes City Manager to sign an easement
agreement with the State of Ohio for the installation of a 24-inch gravity
flow sanitary sewer line along West Central Avenue between Weir Street and
the wastewater treatment plant.





2813   7-23-91   Appropriating an easement in property for the purpose
of constructing a sanitary sewer in the city.





2814   7-23-91   Appropriating an easement in certain property for the
purpose of constructing a water line in the city.





Res. 26-91   6-25-91   Declaring intent of the city to appropriate an
easement for construction of a sanitary sewer by the city.





Res. 27-91   6-25-91   Declaring intent of the city to appropriate an
easement for construction of a water line in the city.





2891   2-1-93   City to vacate a utility easement located at 524
Maplehill Drive along the common lot line between lots 1306 and 1307.





3281   11-23-04   Authorizes grant of access easement by City to El
Meson Restaurante for ingress/egress to parking  lot on El Meson’s
property; allows closing curb cuts on Central Ave and E. Dixie Dr.





3507      3-13-12   Extinguishing rights to an easement for ingress
and egress located at 801 E. Central Avenue, City Lot Number 4515, which
provides access from Alex-Bell Road to 833 E. Central Avenue, City Lot Number
3833.





3508      3-27-12   Entering into a cross-access easement agreement
with 801 E. Central Avenue LLC for ingress and egress between property
located at 833 E. Central Avenue and property located at 801 E. Central
Avenue.



















TABLE III:  VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS









Ord. No.    Date     Description





91   6-30-02   Part of Bridge St.





92   6-30-02   Part of Friend St.





93   6-30-02   Part of Smith St.





94   6-30-02   Part of Walnut St.





95   6-30-02   Part of Mill St.





148   9-15-08   Alley 16.5 feet wide running along south side of Lots
71 through 85, extending from Smith to Elm Sts.





423   10-3-27   An unnamed street beginning at a stake near Pease Mill
(Oxford Miami Paper Co. property).





461   6-4-29   Part of an unnamed street adjacent to and NW of Lots 98
through 102 of Binkley's Addition.





469   9-17-29   Portion of first alley north from Howe Ave. extending
west from Locust St. to Howe Ave.





827   11-9-54   First alley east of Alexandersville-Bellbrook Rd. and
East Dixie Dr. between Lots 1 and 2 of Apple -Gross-Fox Plat and to the rear
of Lots 2 and 3 to a point 16 feet west of Lot 3.





1036   6-28-60   First 12 feet alley north from
Alexandersville-Bellbrook Rd. running SE from S. Dixie Dr. for 89.5 feet
between Lots 1421 and 1422; 12 feet alley running NE 203.3 feet from the SE
end of the first alley and adjacent to rear lot lines of Lots 1421 through
1427; 10 feet alley running NW 182.5 feet from the NE end of the second alley
to S. Dixie Dr., and adjacent to NE side of Lot 1427.





1042   7-12-60   Landview Ave. from Gibbons Rd. to Savoy Ave.





1095   10-24-61   8 feet alley east of Lots 467, 468, 476, 477 and 564
through 568.





1152   12-11-62   Alley from Zapp Ave. west to Stadium Ave. along Lots
1405 and 1407 through 1411.





1564   11-2-68   Alley commencing at intersection of easterly line of
Elm St., thence along southerly right-of-way line of the Penn-Central
Railroad to the easterly line of Lot 477.





1587   2-11-69   Third St. beginning at north side of E. Dixie Dr. and
running north 61.57 feet.





1693   4-27-71   A portion of Orchard Hill Dr., from the eastern
right-of-way line of Ridgecrest Dr. for a distance of approximately 230 feet
measured to the westerly right-of-way line of King Richard Pk.





1687   5-25-71   A portion of Moraine Blvd. from the northwest
right-of-way line of Sheffield Rd. to the southeast property line of the
Penn-Central Railroad.





1799   7-24-73   A portion of the right-of-way of old Alex Rd. abutting
Lot No. 1460 and Lot. No. 1434 in the city.





1810   10-9-73   A portion of Progress Rd.





1938   12-9-75   A portion of Orchard Hill Dr. immediately north of
Wilson Park approximately 41 feet.





1960   3-23-76   A portion of Alex-Bell Rd.





1964   3-23-76   A portion of Progress Rd. west of Alex Rd.





2049   10-11-77   A portion of South Moraine Blvd.





2082   5-9-78   Alley commencing east of Elm St. and extending from
Pierce St., northwest to the vacated alley south of and adjacent to the New
York Central Railroad.





2124   5-8-79   A portion of Rusby Avenue from Locust Street to Elm
Street





2496   4-23-85   A portion of Sheffield Road between PT lot 2521 to the
west and PT lot 2521 to the east within South Moraine Plat Section 2, with
the easement 20 feet in width retained.





2518   7-23-85   A portion of an alley which lies south of lots 1414,
1413, 1412, and 1385 within the Andrew Evert Plat, south of lot 1382 within
the John Taylor Plat and north of PT lot 1460, with the public utility
easement to the width and length of the alley retained.





2655   5-10-88   An alley located between West Central Avenue and West
Main Street, connecting Miami Avenue and Squire Street, with a public utility
easement to the width and length of said alley retained.





Res. 9-91   4-23-91   Establishing a fee for processing petitions to
vacate streets, alleys and utility easements.





2817   9-10-91   A portion of Alex-Bell Road between East Dixie Drive
and Central Avenue along the east line of the abandoned Miami and Erie Canal
Lands and west lines of the lots 1429 and 1430.





2864   9-8-92   A portion of Alexandersville Road from the south
right-of-way line of East Dixie Drive south to within approximately 50 feet
of the south lines of city lots 1466 and 1438.





2865   9-8-92   The portion of Miami Avenue between Farmersville-West
Carrollton Road and Evergreen Cemetery, being adjacent to city lot numbers A,
PT I, II, III and PT 4185.





2877   10-27-92   Portions of Cottage Avenue, Smith Street and Walnut
Street between Miami Avenue and North Elm Street, with a public utility
easement to the width and length of said roads being retained.





3106   11-24-98   Portion of Old Farmersville-West Carrollton Rd. 
between Hydraulic Rd.  and the Great Miami River.





3436      12-22-09   Amending Res. 9-91; fees for processing
petitions to vacate streets, alleys and utility easements.





3454      9-28-10   Two sections of East Blossom Hill Road east of
South Elm Street, abutting Hintermeister Park and Harry Russell School
property.



















TABLE IV:  DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL









Ord. No.       Date           Description





303   6-3-19   Plat of Alonzo Michael (0.89 acres).





317   5-18-20   Plat of Ray Peirce addition (5.55 acres).





324   10-19-20   Plat of Henry Zapp heirs addition (3.58 acres).





419   8-1-27   Plat of American Envelope Co. addition (7.76 acres).





425   9-6-27   Plat of W.E. Shade No. 1 addition (3.62 acres).





453   1-2-29   Plat of Jacob Ely's Clover Leaf addition.





455   1-8-29   Plat of Henry Binkley's addition.





511   9-1-31   Accepts deed from board of education conveying a strip
to be used for highway purposes.





577   7-5-39   Plat of Mutual Federal Savings and Loan Assn. (3.78
acres).





894   5-11-57   Opening the existing alleyway running perpendicular to
Miami Ave. behind Lots 65, 66 and 67 and along the side of Lot 48.





1051   11-8-60   Plat of Orchard Hill Construction Co. No. 1
(dedication of Windsor Ave. from Gibbons Rd. to Savoy Ave., Gibbons Rd.,
Enxing Ave. and Astor Ave.).





1052   12-27-60   Plat of Mitchell Subdivision Section 1 through 4
(dedication of Shade Dr., Richie Dr., Risley Dr., Cottage Ave. from Cedar St.
to Hydraulic Rd., and Cedar St. from Cottage to Catherine Aves.).





1053   12-13-60   Plat of Orchard Hill Subdivision 6, 8 and 9
(dedication of Skyview Dr., Upland Circle, Upland Dr., Maple Hill Dr. from
Skyview Dr. to Cherry Blossom Place, Peach Orchard Dr. from Skyview Dr. 200
feet east, and Cherry Blossom Dr. from Skyview Dr. 200 feet east).





1099   11-14-61   Plat of Orchard Hill Construction Co. No. 1
(dedication of Windsor Ct., Savoy Ave. and Landview Ave.).





1100   11-14-61   Plat of Orchard Hill Estates Section 9 (dedication of
Maple Hill Dr. north 3 lots from Cherry Blossom Place, Cherry Blossom Place,
Cherry Blossom Dr. and Peach Orchard Dr. from Cherry Blossom Dr. to Blossom
Hill Rd.).





1144A   10-9-62   Accepting Redington Ct. and north half of Gibbons Rd.
from Lot 1711 to Lot 1693; accepting Savoy Ave. from Gibbons Rd. to Redington
Park, Vickers Place from Savoy Ave. to Redington Park, and north half of
Gibbons Rd. from Elm St. to Lot 1720.





1213   8-13-63   Accepts Trina Dr. and Terrace Ct.





1232   1-28-64   Accepting Glenada Ct. and north half of Gibbons Rd.
from Lot 1784 to Lot 1769.





1262A   10-27-64   Accepting Randy Dr., De-De Ct., Hillhaven Dr. from
Orchard Hill Dr. north and east 561.37 feet, Orchard Hill Dr. from
Alexandersville Rd. east 934.92 feet, and east side of Alexandersville Rd.
from Grantland Terrace Section 1 south 1122.42 feet.





1369   6-23-66   Dedication of Progress Rd.





1383   8-16-66   Dedication of Elementary Dr.





1385   7-26-66   Plat of Clearview Development Co. Section 1, Plat 1
(dedication of portions of Alexandersville Rd. and Orchard Hill Dr.).





1529   7-9-68   Accepts streets in Carrollton Manor Plat, Section 1.





1530   7-9-68   Accepts streets in Carrollton Manor Plat, Sections 2A
and 2B.





1569   11-26-68   Accepts streets in Carrollton Manor Plat, Section 3.





1586   2-11-69   Accepts streets in Delshire Plat, Sections 2 and 3.





1614   10-14-69   Accepts streets in Carrollton Manor Plat, Section 4.





1619   11-11-69   Accepts streets in Camellia Terrace, Section 2.





2046   10-27-77   Accepts streets in Sherwood Forest Plat, Section 12-B.





2047   10-27-77   Accepts streets in Sherwood Forest Plat, Section 14.





2048   10-27-77   Accepts streets in Sherwood Forest Plat, Section 14-A.





2598   7-14-87   Acceptance and dedication of alley located between
Central Avenue and Main Street, connecting Miami Avenue and Squire Street.





2990   9-26-95   Accepting Mars Hill Drive and other public improvement
for the Union Hill Apartments Subdivision.














TABLE V:  ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY









Ord. No.    Date     Description





80   3-12-1900   Authorizes sale of part of Lot 70 on Elm St.





81   4-16-1900   Authorizes deed to property authorized to be sold by
Ord. 80.





345   10-2-22   Accepts deed from board of education for land at NW
corner of Cedar St. and Central Ave.





391   4-6-25   Accepts deed from Young for 8 feet strip adjacent and
parallel to north line of Riverside addition.





472   10-1-29   Accepts deed from Harry Zimmerman conveying his dower
interest in the Kindleberg's 4 acre tract.





569   12-6-38   Accepts deeds for opening and extension of certain
streets; Frank & Susie Campbell deed to extend Elm St., Locust St. and Rusby
Ave.; James D. Owen Eby deed to extend Elm St.; Jacob Eby deed to extend
Cottage Ave. and Elm St.; James Eby deed to extend Cottage and Miami Aves.;
Susie Campbell deed to extend Miami Ave., Cottage Ave. and Smith St.;
Bloomershine deed to extend Smith St., Cottage Ave. and Walnut St.;
Sallenberger deed to extend Cottage Ave.; Owen Eby deed to extend Walnut St.,
Cottage Ave. and Elm St.





644   12-28-43   Authorizes execution of option to purchase Andrews
property at NW corner of Central Ave. and Locust St.





783   4-8-52   Appropriation to widen Squire Ave.





878   8-14-56   Authorizes quit claim deed to federal government for a
post office at NE corner of Locust St. and E. Central Ave.





906   12-10-57   Releasing certain lands (0.105 acres) near SE corner
of Lot 51 to construct a street.





993   7-28-59   Authorizes sale of 0.188 acres being part of Section
21, Twp. 1, Range 6.





1005   11-10-59   Appropriation of 5.998 acres in Section 27, Twp. 1,
Range 6 for construction of sewage disposal plant.





1022   3-8-60   Authorize sale of 0.188 acres being part of Section 21,
Twp. 1, Range 6.





1047   8-9-60   Authorizes purchase of 2 parcels (1.385 and 0.188
acres) from Walter E. Shade.





1050   11-8-60   Accepting deed from board of education and dedicating
Kimberly Lane.





1112   12-12-61   Authorizes transfer of 2.922 acres of state canal
lands to the village.





1117   2-13-62   Authorizes sale of 0.188 acres on Elm St.





1126   4-17-62   Authorizes transfer of 0.197 acres of state canal
lands to the village.





1146   9-11-62   Repeals Ord. 1126.





1202   5-28-63   Authorizes transfer to the village of state canal
lands (parcels 9813-5052, 9810.00, 9812.08, 9813.0004 and 9825-2084).





1250   7-28-64   Authorizes purchase of Lots 346 through 350 from
Leonard Mills.





1371   6-28-66   Amends Ord. 1202 modifying legal description of Canal
land parcel 9813-5052.





1428   4-11-67   Amends Ord. 1202 modifying legal description of Canal
land parcel 9813-5052; Repeals Res. 1371.





1451   7-18-67   Authorizes purchase from McKinney of 0.833 acres at
3700 Miamisburg - Centerville Rd.





1479   12-26-67   Releases claim to 0.278 acres of state canal lands;
amends Ord. 1202.





1488   1-23-68   Releases claim to 11,760 sq. ft. of state canal lands;
amends Ord. 1202.





1502   4-9-68   Releases claim to portion of state canal lands; amends
Ord. 1202.





1503   4-9-68   Releases claim to 13,600 square feet of state canal
lands; amends Ord. 1202.





1504   4-9-68   Releases claim to 0.25 acres of state canal lands;
amends Ord. 1202.





1505   4-9-68   Releases claim to 11,760 square feet of state canal
lands; amends Ord. 1202.





1506   4-9-68   Releases claim to 6,336 square feet of state canal
lands; amends Ord. 1202.





1515   5-14-68   Releases claim to portion of state canal lands; amends
Ord. 1202.





1516   5-14-68   Releases claim to 8,000 square feet of state canal
lands; amends Ord. 1202.





1554   8-27-68   Releases claim to 5,500 square feet (Plat 216 of H.C.
Baldwin Survey) of state canal lands as set forth in city application dated
and filed May, 1963, pursuant to Ord. 1202.





Res. 1566   11-12-68   Amends application to state of May, 1963, to
acquire certain canal lands deleting 0.195 acre.





1590   2-25-69   Purchase of 2 parcels totaling 1.616 acres from Walter
E. Shade.





1595   4-8-69   Purchase of 2 parcels from state department of public
works.





Res. 11-69   7-8-69   Revises application of May, 1963, to acquire
certain canal lands from the state by deleting 25,500 square feet.





1605   8-26-69   Purchase to widen Zapp Ave.





1616   1-28-69   Appropriation to widen Alex Rd.





1618   11-11-69   Appropriation to widen Alex Rd.





Res. 6-70   2-10-70   Revises application of May, 1963, to acquire
certain canal lands from the state by deleting 4,243 square feet.





Res. 14-70   4-28-70   Authorizes application to transfer state canal
land parcel No. M&M-MON-9831.7378 containing 0.094 acres.





1668   9-22-70   Authorization of purchase of Lot N. 3,108.





1964   4-19-76   Appropriate to the public use the legal interest
required for certain real property being the parcels recited hereinafter for
the project M-IN06(3), known as East Dixie Dr.





1988   11-23-76   Appropriate property for new municipal building.





1989   11-23-76   Appropriate property for new municipal building.





1999   3-1-77   Purchase property for park (Donnington Dr.).





Res. 11-77   8-9-77   Transfer ownership of certain canal lands from
State of Ohio to city.





Res. 6-78   2-28-78   Authorizes application to transfer state canal
lands to the city.





2081   5-9-78   Appropriate land for expansion of sewage treatment
plant.





2101   11-14-78   Sale of 2 parcels of real estate, no longer needed
for municipal purpose, at the corner of Skyview Dr. and Ironwood Dr.





2224   9-23-80   Authorizing the sale of lot 3120 of the consecutive
lot numbers of the city.





2314   4-13-82   Authorizing the purchase of a parcel of real estate
containing approximately 7.6047 acres to be used by the city for a
recreational park.





2334   6-22-82   Appropriate certain property to correct or alleviate
dangerous traffic problems by extending Marina Dr. to Central Ave.





Res. 10-83   5-10-83   Authorizing purchase of land in lot 33 of the
Revised Plat of the city, for use as a public parking lot.





2432   4-10-84   Authorizing the purchase of land at 32 North Elm
Street in accordance with plans for Phase II of the Carrollton Center project.





2478   12-11-84   Authorizing the purchase of a parcel of real estate
located at 12 East Main Street to develop a parking lot for Phase II of the
Carrollton Center project.





2482   12-26-84   Authorizing the purchase of a parcel of real estate
owned by Bank One, Dayton to develop a parking lot for Phase II of the
Carrollton Center project.





2596   6-23-87   Authorizing the purchase of  certain property in the
city as part of the city's West Central Avenue Redevelopment Project.





2597   6-23-87   Authorizing the purchase of certain property in the
city as part of the city's West Central Avenue Redevelopment Project.





2653   3-22-88   Authorizing the purchase of a parcel of real estate
located at 323 East Central Avenue.





2660   5-10-88   Appropriating two parcels of property located in the
city for the public purpose of constructing storage facilities.





Res. 14-90   3-27-90   Appropriating three parcels of property for
construction of public parks and playgrounds.





2750   5-8-90   Appropriating three parcels of property located in the
city for the public purpose of constructing public playgrounds and parks.





2801   5-14-91   Exchange of real property with the Evergreen Cemetry
Association in order to provide soccer fields for the city.





2812   7-23-91   Appropriating the fee simple interest in property for
the purpose of improving Infirmary Road in the city.





Res. 1-92   1-14-92   Appropriating property to provide parking areas
for the West Carrollton Soccer Complex and Harmon Fields in the city.





2848   2-11-92   Appropriating the fee simple interest in property to
provide parking areas for the West Carrollton Soccer Complex and Harmon Field
in the city.





2911   11-9-93   Appropriating property for the improvement of
Alex-Bell Road.





2951   7-12-94   Approving the reconveyance of a portion of a parcel of
real estate previously conveyed to the city, correcting an error in the legal
description thereof.





2958   10-11-94   Appropriating property for the improvement of the
Hydraulic Road Bikeway.





3156   2-8-00   Appropriates Lot No.  1 of revised number of lots on
City plat.





3190   8-28-01   Appropriates part of Lot 2504 for improvement of Miami
and Erie Canal Park near Marina Drive bikeway.





3225   11-26-02   Authorizes purchase agreement for real estate parcel
at corner of Liberty Lane and Alex Rd. for construction of YMCA.





Res. 8-08   3-25-08   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a
contract for the purchase of four parcels of property totaling 6 acres plus
or minus from the estate of Woody Bowman for the purpose of economic
redevelopment.





Res. 19-09   7-14-09   Accepting donation of property at 509 West
Central Ave. from Loisman Cook.










Res. 24-09   9-8-09      Authorizing sale of .0643 acres of property
at 505 N. Burns Ave.










Res. 25-09   9-8-09      Authorizing purchase of .3489 acres of
property at 130 and 132 N. Smith St.










3429      10-27-09   Authorizing sale of 0.058 acres of property at
505 N. Burns Ave.





Res. 22-2010   5-11-10   Authorizes contract for the purchase of
16.5904 acres of land, at 7080 Alex Road, commonly known as the Lyons
Property.





Res. 27-2010   6-22-10   Authorizes contract for the purchase of
property at 214 North Alex Road, for the purpose of economic development and
to provide additional access to City property located on Bowman Lane.





Res. 28-2010   6-22-10   Authorizes contract for the purchase of
property at 218 North Alex Road, for the purpose of economic development and
to provide additional access to City property located on Bowman Lane.





Res. 43-2010   12-14-10   Authorizes contract for the purchase of
property at 833 East Central Avenue for the purpose of economic development.





Res. 46-2010   12-28-10   Authorizes contract for the purchase of
property along West Central Avenue, South Elm Street and South Smith Street
commonly known as the Fraser Paper Site for the purpose of community safety
and economic development.





Res. 45-2012   12-18-12   Authorizes accepting the donation of 5.3496
acres of property at 1450 South Elm Street.





3530      8-13-13   Authorizes the sale and temporary lease of 955
East Dixie Drive to the Ohio Department of Transportation.





Res. 26-2014   5-27-14   Authorizes the City Manager to accept
the”Donation” of 29 acres of property at 4000 Hydraulic Road.





3545      6-10-14   Authorizes the City Manager to enter into a
contract with Community Concepts, Inc. for the sale of 27-29, 31-33 and 35-37
West Pease Avenue, being City Lot Nos. 181, 182 and 183, respectively.





3547      7-22-14   Authorizes the City Manager to enter into an
agreement with Dayton Ohio Habitat for Humanity, Inc. for the donation of a
building lot at 34 E. Pease Avenue, being City Lot No. 131, for the purpose
of constructing one single-family owner-occupied residence.





3552      12-9-14   Authorizes the City Manager to enter into an
agreement with Miami Valley In-Ovations, Inc. for the conveyance of property
owned by the City at 204 W. Main Street, being City Lot No. 19, in exchange
for property owned by Miami Valley In-Ovations, Inc. at 1644 Silver Bugle
Lane, being City Lot Nos. 4046 and 4047, for the immediate purpose of
constructing one single-family residence at 204 W. Main Street.





3554      11-25-14   Authorizes the City Manager to enter into a
contract with Nathanael and Katie Carmack for the sale of 325 Applehill Drive.





Res.  12-2015   1-27-15   Authorizes the City Manager to enter into a
contract for the purchase of .1618 acres of property located at 233-235 W.
Pease Avenue, being City Lot No. 196, for the purpose of community
redevelopment.





3578      3-22-16   Authorizes agreement with Habitat for Humanity
of Greater Dayton, Inc., for the donation of a building lot at 24 W. Pease
Avenue, being City Lot No. 207, for the purpose of constructing one
single-family, owner-occupied residence.





3579      3-22-16   Authorizes agreement with Habitat for Humanity
of Greater Dayton Inc., for the donation of a building lot at 213-215 W.
Pease Avenue, being City Lot No. 193, for the purpose of constructing one
single-family, owner-occupied residence.





3580      3-22-16   Authorizes agreement with Habitat for Humanity
of Greater Dayton, Inc., for the donation of a building lot at 233-235 W.
Pease Avenue, being City Lot No. 196, for the purpose of constructing one
single- family, owner-occupied residence.





3585      4-26-16   Authorizes contract for the sale of a parcel of
real estate owned by the City of West Carrollton and located at the corner of
Skyview Drive and Ironwood Drive, being part of City Lot No. 876, which is no
longer needed for any municipal purpose.




Res.



  22-2016   9-27-16   Authorizing a purchase agreement to acquire
1.016 plus or minus acres of property at One South Elm Street.



 



Res.




  11-2017   4-11-17   Authorizing the City Manager to assume the
obligations of Driftwood Ventures, IV, LLC under that certain real estate
purchase agreement dated October 13, 2016, as amended.





Res.





  16-2018   2-27-18   Authorizing the City Manager to purchase
approximately 0.2 acres of property located at the northeast corner of the
intersection of W. Central Avenue and N. Miami Avenue.


































TABLE VI:  LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY









Ord. No.     Date    Description





347   11-20-22   Authorizes lease from the state of part of Miami and
Erie Canal property for park and amusement purposes.





434   2-20-28   Authorizes acceptance of permit from the state to use
certain canal property for park and amusement purposes.





486   4-1-30   Authorizes lease of certain land of Oxford Miami Paper
Co.





560   12-7-37   Authorizes lease renewal for canal lands.





617   5-5-42   Authorizes lease of 0.4 acre from Oxford Miami Paper Co.
for public parking lot purposes.





1113   12-12-61   Authorizes lease with state for 4 parcels of Miami
and Erie Canal lands.





1146   9-11-62   Authorizes cancellation of Canal Lease 337.





Res. 5-69   3-25-69   Lease of 2 parcels being part of abandoned canal
lands from the state department of public works for use as a public park.





2206   4-22-80   Authorizes the lease of a portion of the city well
field for use as a parking lot.





Res. 37-95   9-12-95   Affirming the name of Burns Avenue as the
official name for the public street located between E. Central Avenue and N.
Alex Road.





Res. 20-2009   7-27-09   Authorizes 2 Canal Land Leases with State of
Ohio at former Frazier Paper site.





Res.  14-2017   4-25-17   Authorizing an agreement with Adventures on
the Great Miami to lease the City owned property at 5641 Marina Drive for the
purpose of operating a canoe and kayak livery.



















TABLE VII:  STREET GRADE LEVELS; STREET AND OTHER NAME CHANGES









Ord. No.     Date     Description





36   6-20-1893   Grade of Main St. from Poplar to Bridge Sts.





37   6-20-1893   Grade of Locust St. from Central Ave. to Main St.





38   6-20-1893   Grade of Bridge St. from Central Ave. to Main St.





39   6-20-1893   Grade of Elm St. from Central Ave. to Main St.





40   6-20-1893   Grade of Smith St. from Central Ave. to Main St.





41   6-20-1893   Grade of Central Ave. from Poplar to Bridge Sts.





42   6-20-1893   Grade of Walnut St. from Central Ave. to Main St.





43   6-20-1893   Grade of Peace Ave. from Poplar to Elm Sts.





78   6-28-1897   Grade of Central Ave. from Elm to Burns Sts.





83   11-12-1900   Grade of Central Ave. from Burns to Cedar Sts.





108   11-2-03   Repeals grade Ords. 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 78 and
83.





109   3-7-04   Grade of Central Ave. from Cedar to Bridge Sts.





110   3-7-04   Grade of Main St. from east corporation line to Bridge
St.





151   1-19-09   Grade on north side of Central Ave. from Cedar St. to
east corporation line.





179   5-7-12   Grade of Elm St. from the bridge crossing the Miami and
Erie Canal to the Cincinnati and Springfield Railway Co. right-of-way.





272   9-10-15   Grade of Central Ave. from Ohio Electric Railway tracks
to a point 400 feet west of Cedar St.





327   2-16-21   Naming Michael Lane.





353   7-2-23   Grade of Elm St. from 50 feet south of Central Ave. to a
point 148.5 feet south.





378   7-21-24   Name change: Bridge St. to Miami Ave.





576   6-6-39   Grade of Katherine Ave. from Burns Ave. to County Rd.





637   5-11-43   Designating and naming East Dixie Drive, Bellbrook Rd.,
Alexandersville Rd. and Zapp Ave.





752   6-12-51   Grade of Maplehill Dr.





753   6-12-51   Grade of Elmview Circle.





754   6-12-51   Grade of Maplehill Circle.





964   2-10-59   Grimes Rd., from Elm St. west to its terminus, to
Gibbons Rd.





1353   4-26-66   Name change: Azalia Rd. to Mayrose Dr., and Hyacinth
Dr. to Cosmos Dr.





1365   6-28-66   Name change; Alexandersville Rd., from E. Dixie Dr. to
State Route 725, to Alex Rd.





1558   9-24-68   Naming Crossover St. and Marina Dr.





1608   9-23-69   Name changes:  Zapp Ave. and Hydraulic Rd. to Alex
Rd.; E. Dixie Dr. to E. Central Ave.; E. Central Ave. to E. Central Lane;
Alexandersville-Bellbrook Rd. to Alex-Bell Rd.





1785   6-12-73   Name change:  A portion of Old Alex Rd. to Alex Ct.





1917   7-8-75   Name change: Orchard Hill Dr. between Huncke Rd. and
Elm St.; to Wilson Park Dr.





1927   8-26-75   Name change: Orchard Hill Rd. west of Elm St. to
Little Ct.





1932   10-14-75   Name change: from Nyetha Dr. to Cherokee Dr.





2200   4-22-80   Name change:  Miamisburg Centerville Rd. between Alex
Rd. and Sidneywood Dr. to Watertower Ln.





2202   4-22-80   Name change:  Public portion of Villa South Dr. to
Bluff Pl.





2217   8-26-80   Grade of old U.S. 25 from the pavement change north of
Woody's northbound 1.24 mile to S.R. 741 southbound from State Rd. 741, 0.76
of a mile.





2221   9-9-80   Naming several streets:





      (1)     The connector road between East Central Ave. and East
Dixie Dr. shall be known as Handle St.





      (2)     The southern extension of Locust St. to the railroad
tracks shall be known as South Locust St.





      (3)     The access road to the municipal pool shall be known
as Pool Ln.





      (4)     The access road surrounding the civic center from
Central Ave. around the civic center to Elm St. shall be known as Slonaker Dr.





2231   12-23-80   Name change:  East Dixie Dr. in the vicinity of 903
to 955 East Dixie Dr. to East Dixie Ln.





2232   1-22-81   Naming a street:  The connector street between East
Central Ave. and East Dixie Dr. in the vicinity of 955 East Dixie Dr. shall
be known as Hile St.





2602   7-28-87   Name change:  From Action Road to Gargrave Road.





Res. 4-88   1-12-88   Name change:  Grant Farm Park to Hintermeister
Park.





3226   11-26-02   Naming a street: Public street west of Civic Center
between S. Locust St. and S. Elm St. shall be known as Slonaker Dr.





Res. 8-2006   3-14-06   Name change:  From Marina Drive to Veterans
Way.





Res. 17-2009   6-23-09   Name change:  Main St. between Cedar St. and
Pease Ave. designated Frush Way.










Res. 32-2009   10-27-09   Name change:  Elm St. between Main St. and
Central Ave. designated B.H. Kokenge Way.





3511      6-12-12   Street name change:





            (a)   Crossover St., Exeter Rd., and portion of E.
Dixie Drive to Manchester Road.





            (b)   Portion of E. Central Ave. to E. Dixie Drive.





            (c)   Eliminating these names:





               E. Dixie Lane





               Hile Street





         Necessitated by Exit 47 Reconstruction Project.




Res. 24-2016   10-11-16   Designating a portion of North Elm Street as
“Kokenge Way” in honor of the Kokenge Family.




Res. 18-2018   3-13-18   Designating a portion of Slonaker Avenue as
“Officer Fred Beard Way”.




 



















TABLE VIII:  ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY









Ord. No.    Date     Description





30   6-20-1893   Authorizes annexation of land situated in Sections 21,
22 and 27, Twp. 1, Range 6 (near the intersection of Central Ave. and waste
way from Miami Canal to Great Miami River).





64   8-27-1894   Authorizes annexation of land in Section 21, Twp. 1,
Range 6 (near the intersection of Central Ave. and waste way from Miami Canal
to Great Miami River).





153   5-18-09   Authorizes annexation of land in Section 21, Twp. 1,
Range 6 (near present NW corporation line).





295   6-18-18   Authorizes annexation of part of Sections 21 and 22,
Twp. 1, Range 6 (near intersection of present south corporation limits and
Smith St.).





301   3-18-19   Authorizes annexation of part of Sections 21 and 22,
Twp. 1, Range 6 (near intersection of present corporation limit and Lowery
tract).





399   8-3-25   Authorizes annexation of land near intersection of Smith
St. and SE corporation line.  7.76 acres.





604   8-26-41   Authorizes annexation of part of Sections 15, 16, 21
and 22, Twp. 1, Range 6 (95.25 acres near intersection of NE corporation line
and NYC Railway right-of-way).





615   3-24-42   Accepts annexation authorized by Ord. 604.





719   6-28-49   Annexation application of Orville M. Southard for
Orchard Hill Estates Plat Section 2.





723   10-25-49   Accepts annexation application of Orville M. Southard
for Orchard Hill Estates Plat Section 2.





737   6-27-50   Accepting annexaton application of Orville M. Southard
et al for 26.72 acres being a part of Section 21, Twp. 1, Range 6.





765   10-9-51   Accepting annexation application of Orville M. Southard
et al for 85.54 acres being parts of Sections 20 and 21, Twp. 1, Range 6.





825   10-12-54   Adopting Orville M. Southard petition for annexation
filed Oct. 12, 1954.





862   1-10-56   Acepting annexation application of Louis E. Tracy, as
agent for Petitioners, for 453.95 acres in Sections 15 and 21, Twp. 1, Range
6.





868   2-28-56   Authorizing annexation of 1916.03 acres being parts of
Sections 9, 10, 14, 15 and 16.





880   10-9-56   Accepting annexation application of Orville M. Southard
et al for 46 acres being a part of Section 20, Twp. 1, Range 6.





944   8-12-58   Accepting annexation application of Stachler for 47.32
acres in Section 14, Twp. 1, Range 6.





1176   4-30-63   Accepting annexation application of Carlson W. Bogan
et al for 95.35 acres in Section 20, Twp. 1, Range 6.





1210   7-31-63   Authorizes annexation of 295 acres being parts of
Sections 13 and 14, Twp. 1, Range 6.





1214   8-20-63   Corrects legal description for annexation of 295 acres
authorized by Ord. 1210.





1219   9-18-63   Authorizes annexation of 320 acres being parts of
Section 13 and 14, Twp. 1, Range 6.





1226   11-12-63   Repeals Ord. 1219.





1260   9-8-64   Authorizes annexation of 96.436 acres being part of
Section 15, Twp. 1, Range 6.





1300   5-11-65   Accepting annexation applica-tion of Louis E. Tracy
for 96.436 acres in Section 15, Twp. 1, Range 6.





1349   3-22-66   Accepting annexation applica-tion of Harry W. Myers et
al for 545.1 acres in Sections 13, 14, 19 and 20, Twp. 1, Range 6.





1355   4-12-66   Authorizes commencement of annexation proceedings for
Hydraulic Rd. from existing corporation line at Burns St. eastward to Zapp
Ave.





1388   9-15-66   Accepting annexation applica-tion of P. Daniel Fedders
(agent for Robert J. Hackett) for 104.036 acres in Sections 14 and 15, Twp.
1, Range 6.





1390   9-15-66   Accepting annexation applica-tion of Louis E. Tracy
for Hydraulic Rd. from the existing corporation line at Burns St. to Zapp
Ave. 5.0 acres.





1415   2-14-67   Accepting annexation applica-tion of Frank Pennington
et al for 7.4 acres in Section 20, Twp. 1, Range 6.





143l   4-11-67   Expresses council intention to accept pending
annexation application for 338.2 acres.





1459   10-5-67   Accepts annexation application of P. Daniel Fedders
for 338.2 acres in Sections 15 and 16, Twp. 1, Range 6.





1460   10-10-67   Accepts annexation application of P. Daniel Fedders
for 338.2 acres in Sections 15 and 16, Twp. 1, Range 6; repeals Ord. 1459.





146l   11-14-67   Releases claim to 18,512 sq. ft. of state canal
lands; amends Ord. 1202.





1523   6-25-68   Annexation application of Clement V. Jacobs, agent for
etitioners, for 110.1 acres being part of Sections 20 and 21, Twp. 1, Range 6
MRS.





1672   11-10-70   Drake - 6.3 acres.





1680   12-22-70   Orchard Hill Boundary Adj. .754 acres.





2242   6-23-81   Authorizes annexation of 1595 acres, more or less
situated in Sections 29 and 30, town 1, range 6 east; Sections 35 and 36,
town 3, range 5 east; Sections 16, 21, 22, 26, 27, and 28, town 1, range 6
MRS; Section 2, town 2, range 5 east Miami Township, and Sections 24, 25, and
26, town 3, range 5 east, Jefferson Township.





Res. 22-2001   9-25-01   Accepts annexation of 33.339 acres west of
Upper River Rd.  and south of corporation line, from Miami Twp.  to the
City.





Res. 16-2002   5-28-02   Accepts annexation of 83.365 acres along south
side of Farmersville - W.  Carrollton Rd., 200 ft.  west of CSX RR
crossing, from Miami Twp.  to the City.














TABLE IX:  ZONING MAP CHANGES









Ord. No.     Date     Case No.    Description





1247   5-26-64   A-102   Two parcels (18.18 and 0.285 acres) being
parts of Lots 1166 and 1616 from R-2 to M-l District.





1249   6-9-64   A-103   Lots 47 through 51, 57 through 59 and 165
through 176 from R-3 to B-l District.





1257   9-8-64      Amending the zoning map by adding territory
annexed by Ord.1176.





1272   12-8-64   A-105   Lots 1380 and 1381 from B-l to B-2
Districts.





1273   12-8-64   A-104   2.405 acres at intersection of Gibbons and
Alexandersville Rds. from R-2 to R-2 Districts.





1340   1-11-66   A-107   33.114 acres on Heincke Rd. from R-1 to R-2
Districts.





1354   4-12-66   A-109   0.334 acres on Central Ave. from B-l to B-2
Districts.





1357   4-26-66   A-108   Parcel 1 (3.554 acres) on Zapp Ave. from
R-2 to R-3 Districts; Parcel 2 consisting of Lot 1454 and parts of Lots 1465,
1399 and 1400 (10.843 acres) from R-2 to M-1 Districts.





1362   5-10-66      Amends description of Parcel 2 in Ord. 1357 to
consist of 14.397 acres.





1378   7-15-66   A-110   64.716 acres at intersection of Orchard
Hill Dr. and Alexandersville Rd. from Twp. R-1 and R-2 Districts to village
R-3 District; 115.253 acres from Twp. R-1 and R-2 to village R-l Districts; 2
acres from Twp. R-1 to village B-1 Districts; 22.118 acres from Twp. R-1 and
R-2 to village B-2 Districts.





1399   11-22-66   A-111   Lots 2174, 2257 and 2258 zoned M-1; Lots
2290 through 2293 and 2295 through 2305 zoned B-2; 200 feet off north portion
of Lot 2258 zoned R-2; Lots 2175, 2252, 2259 through 2289, 2294 and 2306
zoned R-1.





1403   12-13-66   A-113   11.334 acres in Sections 14 and 15 zoned
R-2 District; 27.242 acres zoned R-3 District; 44.995 acres zoned B-1
District.





1404   12-13-66   A-112   Lots 103 through 108 and 205 through 211
from R-3 to B-1 Districts.





1486   1-23-68   A-116   Lots 2384 through 2389 zoned R-1 District.





1499   3-26-68   A-118   Lots 2519 and 2520 from Twp. R-3 to city M
Districts.





1500   3-26-68   A-121   200 feet strip on north side of Lot 2258
from R-2 to M Districts.





1517   5-28-58   A-122   Strip of canal land from Zapp Ave. east to
old corporation line from R-2 to B-1 Districts.





1519   7-9-68   A-123   Parcels 27, 28, 29, 31 and 32 of Allen's
Subdivision and 1/2 of Lot 12 (2.6837 acres) on north side Central Ave.
between Squire St. and Miami Ave. from B-l to B-2 Districts.





1520   6-11-68   A-119   Rezoning a strip of land on Springboro Pike
from Twp. R-3 to city R-3 District.





1539   7-23-68   A-114   Lots 109 through 114 known as the 1/2 block
bounded by an alley on the north, by Elm St. on the west, by Main St. on the
south and Locust St. on the east, from R-3 to B-1 District.





1557   9-24-68   A-124   Lots 3116, 3117 and 3125 through 3166 from
county A-l to city R-2 District; Lots 3118 through 3124 from county A-1 to
city MDistrict; Lots 3167 through 3205 from county R-1-A to city R-1 District.





1568   11-26-68   A-127   Lots 1452 and 1453 from B-1 to MDistrict.





1585   1-28-69   A-128   Lots 3206, 3207, 3208, 3213 through 3241
and parts of Lots 2253, 2254, 2256, 3209, 3211 and 3212 from R-1 to R-2
District.





1603   9-9-69      Lots 2524, 2525, 2526, 2531, 2532, 2533, 2529,
2530, 2887, 2888 and 2889 from county B-1 to city B-1 District; Lot 2527 from
county B-2 to city B-2 District; Lot 2528 from county M-1 to M District; Lots
2519 and 2520 to remain city M District; Lots 2534 and 2535 to remain city
R-3 District; Lots 3061 through 3064 and 3029 through 3040 are excluded; Lot
2886 and part of Lot 2524 and Lots 3009, 3025, 3026, 3028, 3027, 3058, 3059
and 3066 from county zoning to city R-3 District.





1613   10-14-69   A-129   Lots 2499, 3063 and 3064 from county
zoning to city R-4 District; Lots 2500, 2503 through 2511, parts of Lot 2512,
Lots 2513 through 2517 and Lot 3062 from county zoning to city B-2 District;
Lots 2501, 2502, and 3029 through 3040 from county zoning to city M District.





1629   1-20-70   A-131   Part of Lot 2253 (0.532 acres) from R-3 to
B-1 District.





1644   5-26-70   A-135   Skyview Estates Plat from R-1 to R-3
District.





1654   7-13-70   A-133   Portion of the Alverda S. Fitzgerald land
from R-1 to R-3 District.





1655   7-13-70   A-133   Portion of the Alverda S. Fitzgerald land
from R-1 to B-1 District.





1665   8-25-70   A-130   Rezoning Lots Nos. 1399 and 1400 and part
of Lots Nos. 1454 and 1465 from an M to a B-2 zoning district.





1678   12-8-70   A-137   Rezoning Lot No. 591 from a R-2 to a B-1
zoning district.





1727   3-14-72   A-139   Part of Lot No. 1460 from an M to a B-1
zoning district.





1728   4-11-72   A-140   Rezoning Lot No. 1435 and a strip of land
46 feet in width contiguous to the south side of Lot No. 1435, from a B-1 to
a B-2 zoning district.





1701   5-9-72   A-143   Rezoning 2 parcels of land being part of Lot
No. 2253, from a R-3 to a B-1 zoning district.





1751   12-26-72   A-145   Rezoning a 50.7 acre tract of real estate
located at the northeast corner of Alex Rd. and Miamisburg-Centerville Rd.,
from an R-1 to an R-3, B-2 and M zoning district.





1766   1-23-73   A-149   Rezoning Lot No. 2534 from an R-3 to a B-1
zoning district.





1776   4-10-73   A-150   Rezoning a 0.684 acre tract of real estate
located in Sherwood Forest, from an R-2 to an R-3 zoning district.





1951   2-24-76   A-154   Rezoning lots No. 2632, 2633, and 2634,
from an R-2 to an O-R zoning district.





1968   5-11-76   A-158   Rezoning property located at 3051 Alex-Bell
Rd. from an R-2 to an O-R zoning district.





1977   6-22-76   A-159   Rezoning a portion of city Lot No. 2524
located north of Holes Creek, from a B-2 to an M-1 zoning district.





1985   9-28-76   A-160   Rezoning the northeastern most portion of
city Lot No. 1465 from an R-4 to a B-2 zoning district.





1992   1-13-77   A-161   Rezoning Lots Nos. 111, 112, 113, 114, and
115 from B-1 to O district.





2032   6-28-77   M-162   Rezoning Lot No. 2841 from R-2 to O-R.





2037   7-26-77   A-163   Rezoning Lots Nos. 2953 through 3001 from
M-2 to R-2 district.





2061   2-28-78   M-164   Rezone Lot No. 3812 and unplatted 13.700
acre tract within Progress Center from M-1 to B-2.   





2098   9-26-78      Rezone 5-1/4 acres at the southwest corner of
Michael Ln. and Locust St. and Michael Ln. an alley north of Cottage Ave.
from R-2 to R-5.





2099   9-26-78      Rezone Lot No. 458, 134 S. Elm St. from R-2 to
M-1.





2131   5-22-79   M-79-1   Rezoning the rear portion of the lot
located at the north-east corner of Alex Road at Central Avenue from an R-4
to B-2.





2191   3-11-80   PUD-80-1   Rezoning a tract of approximately 20.5
acres along Red Bluff Drive from R-4 to PUD.





2225   10-14-80   P-PUD-80-2   Rezoning a parcel of real estate
containing approxi-mately 28.21 acres with 900 feet of frontage along the
west side of Indian Trail in the city from an R-4 to PUD.





2257   4-28-81   M-81-2   Rezoning lots 4095 and 4096 from B-1 to
R-4.





2258   4-28-81   P-PUD-81-81   Rezoning a parcel of real estate
containing approximately 16.1 acres with 580 foot frontage along the east
side of Alex Road at its intersection with Elm Street from O-R to R-PUD.





2298   12-22-81   M-81-6   Rezoning a parcel of real estate
containing approximately 2.1 acres of land located directly behind M and M
Precision in Progress Industrial Park and being part of lot 2258 from B-2 to
M-1.





2305   1-26-82   M-81-8   Rezoning a .20 acre tract of land located
at 143 South Elm Street from R-2 to O-R.





2330   7-13-82      Amending the zoning map to provide zoning
districts for approximately 1,595 acres of land annexed to the city.





2335   7-13-82   M-82-3   Rezoning city lot numbers 1437 and 3063
from R-MHP to M-1.





Res. 14-82   7-13-82      The year 2000 Land Use Map is amended to
include light industrial recommended land use for city lots 1436, 1437, 3063,
3064, and PT 2517.





2368   4-26-83      Rezoning a 21.3 acre tract, located at the
northeast corner of Alex Road and Watertower Lane; consisting of lots 2294
and 2288; from B-2, O, and R-4 to M-1.





2371   4-12-83   M-83-2   Rezoning lots 1440 and 2499 from R-MHP to
R-MHP-1.





2422   1-24-84      Rezoning a 2.1 acre tract, consisting of lots 9
through 16, located at the northwest corner of Weir Street and Short Street,
from R-2 to R-3.





2445   6-26-84      Rezoning lots 4018 through 4020, 4023 through
4027, 4036 through 4051, 4055, 4057 through 4071, 4139 through 4144, 4151
through 4155, 4158 through 4162, 4333 through 4339, and 4341 through 4356,
from R-4 to R-PUD.





2447   7-10-84      Rezoning a 16.08-acre portion of lot 2271,
located to the northwest of Indian Trail, from R-PUD to R-5.





2448   7-10-84      Rezoning part of lot 2525 and all of lot 2526,
located along the west side of State Route 741, from B-2 to M-2.





2471   11-27-84      Rezoning lots 549 through 562 from R-5 to R-4.





2508   6-11-85      Rezoning a 14.101 - acre parcel of land located
along Alex Road within Progress Center Industrial Park including lot 3812 and
part lot 2258 from B-2 to M-1.





2515   7-9-85      Rezoning a 2.078-acre portion of city lot 2531
located along Springboro Pike behind Dayton Sports Center from B-2 to M-1.





Res. 13-86   11-25-86   P-PUD-86-2   Approving preliminary revised
PUD.





2579   3-10-87      Rezoning lots 1441, 1444, 1450, 1451, 1452,
1453, and PT 1449 from R-MHP-1 to B-2.





2652   4-12-88      Rezoning a 16.08 acre portion of lot 2271
located to the northwest of Indian Trail from R-5 to R-PUD.





2672   9-27-88      Rezoning certain areas in the northern,
northwestern, and western protions of the city near the Great Miami River
from LD TO LD-1.





2722   1-23-90      Rezoning lot numbers 3862, 3863, PT 2256 and PT
2265 from B-2 to B-2/SPI-2.





2786   2-12-91      Rezoning lot number PT 1460 from M-1 to B-2.





2745   2-11-92      Rezoning lot numbers 2635 to 2639, 2671 to 2675,
2793, 2794 and 2890 to 2901 from R-2 to R-2/SPI-1, Springboro Pike Business
District Overlay.





2866   11-24-92      Rezoning lot numbers 3862, 3863, PT 2256 and PT
2265 from B-2 to B-2/SPI-2.





2867   10-27-92      Rezoning lot numbers 3917 to 3922 and 3924 to
3929 from R-4 to R-1.





2989   10-24-95      Rezoning the remaining portion of Part Lot 4204
from LD-1 to M-2.





         Rezoning Lot 4216 from LD-1 to M-2.





         Rezoning Lot 4214 from LD-1 to B-2.





3010   4-9-96      Rezoning Lot 1465 PT, specifically Parcel
Identification Numbers K-48-01-11-26, 113, 114, 115, 124, 138, and 144 from
B-2 to B-2/SPI-4.





3021   7-23-96      Rezoning property located on Redbluff Drive
being City Lot No. 4121 from R-4, Multi-Family Residential to R-PUD,
Residential Planned Unit Development.





3137   7-13-99      City Lots 4521-4523 (Alex Tower Shopping Center
and Business Park) from M-1 Industrial Park to M-1/SPI-5 Industrial
Park/Special Interest District.





3203   1-22-02      Property at 1000 and 1100 E.  Central Ave. 
(City Lots 4005 and 2500) from B-2 General Commercial to M-1 Industrial Park
District.





3204   2-12-02      Property at 5174 Farmersville West Carrollton
Rd.  (33.339 acres) in Miami Twp.  from FP Flood Plain (Miami Twp.)  to
M-3 Rural Manufacturing District.





3220   9-24-02      Property at 5400 Farmersville West Carrollton
Rd. (83.365 acres) from I-2 General Industrial (Miami Twp.) to M-3 Rural
Manufacturing District.





3306   9-27-05      Boundaries of “CC” City Center District
expanded; requested by Exit 47 Redevelopment Study Oversight Committee.





3332   3-27-07      Properties in and near West Carrollton Central
Business District at Central Ave. and Elm St. from M-1 Business Park, M-2
Manufacturing and R-2 Single Family Residential to R-1 Single Family
Residential and PUD Planned Unit Development District.





3453      7-13-10         The block bordered by N. Smith
Street, W. Pease Avenue, N. Walnut Street, and W. Main Street from R-4
Multiple- Family Residential to R-2 Single-Family Residential District.





3476   4-12-11         The block bordered by S. Elm Street,
Pierce Street, and the railroad tracks, including 128-134 S. Elm Street, 9-17
Pierce Street, and 43-51 Pierce Street, from M-1 Business Park to Planned
Unit Development District PUD 06-1.



















TABLE X:  HISTORICAL DISTRICTS









Ord. No.       Date       Description





Res. 23-80   10-14-80   Establishing the area bounded by Cedar Street
to the east, Central Avenue to the south, the alley to the north, and the
side lot line between 113 and 121 East Central Avenue to the west as a local
historical district.














TABLE XI:  COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AREAS









Ord.,Res.No.   Date     Description





Res. 6-83   2-8-83   Part of lots 2294, 2288, 2289, and 3638 to be
designated as Community Reinvestment Area Number 2.





Res. 5-84   2-14-84   Index 25; consisting of lots 1055, 1057, 1059,
1061, 1063, 1065, 1067, 1069, 1071, 1073, PT1074, and 410l; to be designated
as Community Reinvestment Area Number 3.





Res. 8-86   8-12-86   Establishing and describing the boundaries of
Community Reinvestment Area Number 4, and designating a housing officer to
administer the program.





Res. 33-89   12-26-89   Establishing and describing the boundaries of
Community Reinvestment Area Number 5, and designating a housing officer to
administer the program.





Res. 26-90   8-14-90   Establishing and describing the boundaries of
Community Reinvestment Area Number 6, and designating a housing officer to
administer the program.





Res. 19-91   5-28-91   Establishing and describing the boundaries of a
Community Reinvestment Area and designating a housing officer to administer
the program.





Res. 32-91   8-13-91   Expanding the boundaries of Community
Reinvestment Area Number 6.





Res. 15-92   7-14-92   Expanding the boundaries of Community
Reinvestment Area Number 1.





Res. 26-94   7-12-94   Expanding the boundaries of Community
Reinvestment Area Number 1.





Res. 27-94   7-12-94   Expanding the boundaries of Community
Reinvestment Area Number 2.





Res. 28-94   7-12-94   Amending the requirements of Community
Reinvestment Area Number 4 by deleting Section 4 of Resolution 8-86, passed
August 12, 1986.





Res. 29-94   7-12-94   Amending Resolution 33-89, passed December 26,
1989, concerning the directives for Community Reinvestment Area Number 5.





Res. 30-94   7-12-94   Expanding the boundaries of Community
Reinvestment Area Number 6, and amending Resolution 26-90, passed August 14,
1990.





Res. 31-94   7-12-94   Expanding the boundaries of Community
Reinvestment Area Number 7, and amending Resolution 19-91, passed May 28,
1991.





Res.  8-08   3-25-08   Accepting the report of the Community
Reinvestment Area Housing Council (CRAHC) concerning the status of certain
properties currently receiving tax exemptions.














TABLE XII: CONTRACTS; AGREEMENTS









Ord. No.    Date     Description





2519   8-13-85   Authorizing the City Manager to enter an agreement
with the Miami Valley Cable Council on behalf of the city along with other
municipalities in developing and administering written examinations for use
in testing potential police officers and developing and administering a
physical fitness test for use in recruitment.





Res. 11-85   9-24-85   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an
agreement with the City of Dayton to use the services of the Dayton Board of
Building Appeals.





Ord. 2526   12-10-85   Authorizing execution of an agreement with Gould
Inc. for financing for the acquisition of equipment for use at an industrial
facility within the boundaries of the city to be owned by Gould Inc. or its
nominee.





Res. 1-86   1-14-86   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an
agreement with the Board of County Commissioners of Montgomery County for a
Community Development Block Grant for the west Central Avenue Redevelopment
Project.





Res. 15-86   10-28-86   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an
agreement with the Board of County Commissioners of Montgomery County for a
Community Development Block Grant for the West Central Avenue Redevelopment
Project.





Res. 25-87   10-13-87   Authorizing City Manager to enter into
contractual agreement with Montgomery County for purpose of administering the
Community Development Block Grant Program.





Res. 8-88   2-9-88   Approval of final plan entitled Dayton and
Montgomery County E-911 Implementation Plan (3rd Draft -12/22/87).





2694   12-27-88   Authorizing City Manager to enter into a contract for
the purchase of a parcel of real estate owned by the Board of Education.





2701   2-14-89   Authorizing City Manager to enter into a contract for
the sale of a parcel of real estate owned by the city.





2703   4-11-89   Authorizing City Manager to enter into a contract with
the Industrial Commission of Ohio to create coverage for Workers'
compensation for supervised community service work.





2704   4-11-89   Authorizing City Manager to enter into an agreement
with the Miamisburg municipal court to participate in a community service
work program.





2715   7-11-89   Authorizing City Manager to enter an agreement with
the West Carrollton's Mayor's court to participate in a community service
work program.





Res. 34-89   11-28-89   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a
contract for electric lighting services for use on public grounds and streets
in the city, for a period of 48 months commencing 1-1-90.





Res. 23-90   7-10-90   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an
agreement with Montgomery County to administer the Community Development
Block Grant Program.





Res. 35-90   11-27-90   Authorizing an agreement with the various
municipal corporations and townships for the formation of the Miami Valley
Emergency Management Authority.





2727   12-12-89   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an
agreement with the Northern Ohio Patrolmen's Benevolent Association.





Res. 15-91   5-28-91   Authorizing West Carrollton's participation in
the Montgomery County Economic Development/ Government Equity Program.





Res. 24-91   6-25-91   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an
agreement to provide a supplementary tap fee and protection for Eskco, Inc.
for installing and paying for a sanitary sewer along the north side of
Liberty Lane.





Res. 34-91   10-22-91   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an
agreement with the Dayton Power and Light Co. for placing utility poles in
the right-of-way of Infirmary Rd.





Res. 9-92   3-10-92   Authorizing the city's participation in the
Montgomery County Economic Development/ Government Equity Program.





2912-     -93   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an
agreement with the West Carrollton Independent Employees' Association. 
(Repeals Ord. 2791, passed 2-12-91)





Res. 36-93   12-14-93   Adopting the City of West Carrollton Flexible
Benefits Plan, and authorizing the City Manager to sign a service agreement
with AFLAC.





Res. 13-94   5-10-94   Authorizing the city's participation in the
Miami Valley Risk Management Association's workers' compensation group rating
plan for 1995.





Res. 32-94   8-9-94   Authorizing the city to become a member of the
Ohio Benefits Cooperative, Inc.





Res. 41-94   11-8-94   Authorizing the City Manager to sign an
agreement for the city's participation in the Miami Valley Fire/EMS Alliance.





Res. 31-95   6-13-95   Authorizing the city's participation in the
Miami Valley Risk Management Association's Worker's Compensation Group Rating
Plan for 1996.





Res. 17-96   5-28-96   Authorizing the signing of a settlement
agreement with the Cardington Road Landfill Coalition and Montgomery County
Board of County Commissioners.





Res. 20-96   6-11-96   Authorizing the city's participation in the
Miami Valley Risk Management Association's Worker's Compensation Group Rating
Plan for 1997.





Res. 26-96   8-13-96   Authorizing the City Manager to submit a project
application and execute a contract for obtaining a grant from Issue 2 funds
allocated to this area of the state for infrastructure improvements on Alex
Road.





Res. 27-96   8-13-96   Authorizing the City Manager to submit a project
application and execute a contract for obtaining a grant from Issue 2 funds
allocated to this area of the state for infrastructure improvements to the
State Route 725 water line.





Res. 28-96   8-13-96   Authorizing the City Manager to submit a project
application and execute a contract for obtaining a grant from Issue 2 funds
allocated to this area of the state for infrastructure improvements to
replace a water main in the West Lowery area.





Res. 29-96   8-27-96   Authorizing the City Manager to execute a
contract for obtaining a grant from the Miami Valley Regional Transit
Authority (RTA) Community Grant Program to landscape the park-n-ride lot at
300 E. Central Avenue.





3026   9-24-96   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an
agreement with the Fraternal Order of Police, Ohio Labor Council, Inc.
representing police officers and dispatchers.





3035   11-12-96   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an
agreement with the West Carrollton Independent Employees' Association
representing the Service Department and Parks and Recreation Department.





Res. 21-97   5-27-97   Authorizing the city's participation in the
Miami Valley Risk Management Association's Workers' Compensation Group Rating
Plan for 1998.





Res. 37-97   11-11-97   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an
agreement for street lighting services for use on public grounds and streets
in the city for a period of 60 months commencing January 1, 1998, and
expiring on December 31, 2002.






























PARALLEL REFERENCES









References to Revised Code of Ohio










References to 1970 Code










References to Ordinances










References to Resolutions














REFERENCES TO REVISED CODE OF OHIO









         R.C. SEC.                    CODE SECTION










   1.01    10.01 





   1.02   10.02 





   1.05(A)   130.01 





   1.14   10.03 





   1.15   10.03 





   1.23   10.05 





   1.50   10.07 





   1.57   10.04 





   1.58   10.04 





   1.59   10.02 





   9.66   135.02





   102.03(G), (H), (I)   135.04





   Ch. 119   72.70





   119.01 - 119.13   72.97





   Ch. 135   32.28





   135.14   32.27





   306.30   72.97





   306.35   130.01





   306.54   72.97





   309.06   135.03





   313.12 - 313.16   72.45





   519.01   139.04





   701.01   10.02 





   711.01 - 735.26   154.98





   713.01 - 713.05   154.10





   715.47   134.05





   715.50   31.07





   731.56 - 731.59   33.07





   733.621   135.03





   737.021   70.20





   737.022   70.20





   737.051   33.17





   757.03   33.57





   901.51   133.21





   955.16   89.12





   959.01   90.03





   959.02   90.04





   959.03   90.04





   959.13   90.05





   1301.01   130.01





   1349.16   133.10





   1531.01   139.04





   Ch. 1713   137.05










         R.C. SEC.                    CODE SECTION





   2151.011   131.05, 137.05





   2151.02   131.05





   2151.03   136.16





   2151.031   136.16





   2151.355   139.07





   2151.421   136.16





   2301.374   72.45





   Ch. 2506   117.08, 156.23





   Ch. 2711   144.87





   2739.04   131.02 





   2739.12   131.02





   2901.01   130.01, 130.10, 139.02





   2901.02   130.02 





   2901.03   130.03





   2901.04   130.04





   2901.05   130.01





   2901.13   130.05





   2901.21   130.06





   2901.22   130.07





   2901.23   130.08





   2901.24   130.09





   2903.04   70.99





   2903.05   136.01, 136.02





   2903.06   70.99





   2903.07   70.99, 136.02





   2903.08   136.02, 136.03





   2903.11   136.02, 136.03(C)





   2903.12   136.02, 136.03





   2903.13   136.02, 136.03





   2903.14   136.04





   2903.16   136.03(C)





   2903.22   136.06





   2903.31   136.15





   2905.03   136.07





   2905.12     136.09





   Ch. 2907   117.04, 117.06





   2907.01   137.01





   2907.02   137.03





   2907.03   137.03





   2907.04   137.02, 137.03





   2907.05   137.03





   2907.06   137.03





   2907.07   133.05, 137.04





   2907.08   137.05





   2907.09   137.06





   2907.12   137.03





   2907.23   137.07





   2907.24   137.08





   2907.25   137.09





   2907.31   137.10, 137.11





   2907.311   137.14





   2907.32   137.11





   2907.33   137.12





   2907.35   137.13





   2909.01   139.04





   2909.03   130.99, 133.03





   2909.06   130.99, 133.04





   2911.21   133.06





   2911.32   133.18










         R.C. SEC.                    CODE SECTION





   2913.01   130.10, 133.01, 130.99





   2913.02   133.07





   2913.03   133.08





   2913.04   133.09





   2913.11   133.10





   2913.21   133.11





   2913.33   113.12





   2913.40   135.01





   2913.41   133.13





   2913.42   133.14





   2913.43   133.15





   2913.44   131.07





   2913.45   133.16





   2913.47   131.01, 133.01





   2913.51   133.17





   2913.61   133.19





   2913.71   133.07, 133.20





   Ch. 2915   130.01, 132.09





   2915.01   132.01





   2915.02   132.03





   2915.03   132.04





   2915.04   132.05





   2915.05   132.06





   2915.07   132.09, 132.11





   2915.07 - 2915.11   132.11





   2915.08   132.01, 132.09





   2915.09   132.08, 132.09, 132.11





   2915.10   132.09, 132.11





   2915.11   132.09, 132.10, 132.11





   2915.12   132.11





   2917.03   138.01





   2917.04   138.02





   2917.11   138.03





   2917.12   138.04





   2917.13   138.05





   2917.21   136.10





   2917.31   138.06





   2917.32   138.07





   2921.01   135.01





   2921.13   135.02





   2921.14   136.16





   2921.21   131.01





   2921.22   131.02





   2921.23   131.03





   2921.31   131.04





   2921.32   131.05





   2921.33   131.06





   2921.331   70.05





   2921.42   135.03





   2921.421   135.03





   2921.43   135.04





   2921.44   135.05





   2921.45   135.06





   2923.02   130.12





   2923.03   130.13





   2923.11   130.10, 131.06, 135.02, 139.01, 139.02





   2923.12   139.02





   2923.15   139.03





   2923.16   139.04





   2923.19   139.05





   2923.20   139.06





   2923.211   139.07





   Ch. 2925   130.01





   2925.01   72.45, 138.03





   2925.03   136.12, 136.14





   2925.11   136.12





   2925.31   136.13





   2925.38   136.12, 136.13





   2927.21   89.11





   2929.11   136.12





   2929.13   136.12





   2929.14   136.12





   2929.18   136.12, 136.14





   2929.181   136.12





   2929.21   70.99, 110.99, 130.99





   2929.22   130.11, 136.12





   2929.23   70.99(A), 130.99





   2929.28   130.99





   2929.31   130.14





   2929.51   130.10





   2929.71   139.02










         R.C. SEC.                    CODE SECTION





   2930.01(A)   130.11





   2930.12 - 2930.17   130.11





   2935.041   133.23





   2935.28   130.15





   2935.36   130.10, 130.11





   2945.37   135.01





   2945.371   135.01





   2945.38   135.01





   2945.39   135.01





   2945.40   135.01





   2945.44   136.09





   2947.061   130.10





   2950.01   130.10





   2951.02   72.43, 130.10





   2951.04   130.10





   Ch. 2967   130.10





   2967.19   130.10





   2967.193   130.10





   2967.27   130.10





   3113.31   130.02





   3301.07(D)   137.05





   Ch. 3332   137.05





   3345.031   137.05





   Ch. 3381   33.56, 33.58, 33.59





   3381.16   33.60, 33.61





   3517.01   135.04
   3701.143   72.45
   3701.82   134.01
   3701.99   134.01
   3715.01   136.14
   Ch.  3719   131.01, 136.12
   3719.01   72.45, 130.01, 141.01
   3719.011   72.45
   3719.21   136.12, 136.14
   3719.41   136.12
   3733.01   156.05, 156.31
   Ch. 3734   130.12
   3734.01   55.16
   3734.023   55.16
   3734.026   55.17
   3734.18   130.12
   3735.31   130.01
   3737.82   134.01, 139.02
   3743.01   139.02
   3743.02 - 3743.08   139.08
   3743.15 - 3743.21   139.08
   3743.40   139.08
   3743.44   139.08
   3743.45   139.08
   3743.50 - 3743.55   139.08, 139.09
   3743.54   139.09
   3743.65   139.08
   3743.80   139.08
   3767.29   134.02
   3781.10   134.01
   3781.111   73.04
   Ch, 3793   70.99(A)
   3793.02   70.99(A)
   3793.06   131.02
   3793.10   70.99(A)
   4115.01 - 4115.16   54.01










         R.C. SEC.                    CODE SECTION










   Ch. 4301   91.05
   4301.01   91.01
   4301.22   91.02, 91.03
   4301.62   91.04, 91.07
   4301.63   91.02
   4301.637   91.06
   4301.64   91.04
   4301.69   91.02
   4301.99   91.07, 91.99
   4301.99(B)   91.04(B)
   Ch. 4303   91.05, 91.06(C)
   4501.01   72.942, 72.110, 130.15, 133.07
   Ch. 4503   72.63
   4503.04(K)   72.110
   4503.042   72.110





   4503.10   77.02. 77.04
   4503.103   72.63(B)
   4503.11   72.63
   4503.12   72.65
   4503.173   72.63(B)
   4503.182   72.63
   4503.19   72.63
   4503.191   72.63
   4503.21   72.63
   4503.22   133.20
   4503.233   70.99
   4503.234   70.99
   4503.235   70.99
   4503.24   91.07
   4503.41   72.63(B), 73.04
   4503.43   72.63(B)
   4503.44   73.04
   4503.46   72.63(B)
   4503.49   70.01
   4504.172   77.01
   4504.06   77.01
   4505.01 - 4505.21   72.62
   4505.07   133.20
   4505.99   70.99
   Ch. 4506   72.55(A)
   4506.01   72.111
   4506.10   72.61(A)(2)
   4506.16   70.99(A),(3), (A)(8)(b), 72.45(P)
   Ch. 4507   70.99(a)(8)(b), 72.45(P), 74.27
   4507.01   133.20
   4507.01 - 4507.30   72.60
   4507.01 - 4507.39   72.59
   4507.02   72.55. 72.56. 72.61
   4507.021   72.51
   4507.03   72.55
   4507.04   72.55
   4507.05   72.55, 72.57
   4507.14   72.55, 72.61(A)(2)
   4507.16   70.99, 72.43, 72.51. 72.61, 136.02
   4507.162(D)   70.99(A)
   4507.30   72.58
   4507.33   72.59
   4507.35   72.60
   4507.50   133.10
   4507.55   72.45
   4507.99   70.99(A)(5), (A)(8), (A)(10)
   Ch. 4509   72.61
   4509.101   72.61, 135.02
   4509.102   135.02
   4509.45   72.61
   4509.99   70.99(A)(5)
   4511.01   70.01, 70.05(D), 74.26, 74.27, 72.42, 76.01,
      91.07, 139.04






   R.C. SEC.   CODE SECTION










   4511.03   72.20





   4511.04   70.08





   4511.05   70.09





   4511.051   70.10





   4511.09   70.22, 72.79, 72.016





   4511.11(E)   70.99





   4511.12   71.05





   4511.13   71.07





   4511.131   71.08





   4511.132   71.13, 74.01(A)





   4511.14   71.09





   4511.15   71.10





   4511.16   71.11





   4511.17   71.12





   4511.18   70.99





   4511.19   70.99, 72.45





   4511.191   70.99, 72.45, 72.61, 136.02





   4511.193   72.45





   4511.196   72.45, 72.61





   4511.20   72.46





   4511.201   72.46





   4511.202   72.36(A)





   4511.21   72.47





   4511.211   71.11





   4511.212   72.47





   4511.22   72.48





   4511.23   72.49





   4511.24   72.50





   4511.25   72.01





   4511.251   72.51





   4511.26   72.02





   4511.27   72.03





   4511.28   72.04





   4511.29   72.05





   4511.30   72.06





   4511.31   72.07





   4511.32   72.32





   4511.33   72.08





   4511.34   72.09





   4511.35   72.33





   4511.36   72.10





   4511.37   72.12





   4511.38   72.13





   4511.39   72.14





   4511.40   72.15





   4511.41   72.16





   4511.42   72.17





   4511.43   72.18, 72.19





   4511.431   72.23





   4511.432   71.11





   4511.44   72.22





   4511.441   74.07





   4511.45   72.21










   R.C. SEC.   CODE SECTION










   4511.451   72.24





   4511.452   74.08





   4511.46   74.01





   4511.47   74.02





   4511.48   74.03





   4511.481   74.09





   4511.49   74.04





   4511.50   74.05





   4511.51   74.06





   4511.511   74.10





   4511.52   74.15





   4511.521   74.27, 76.02





   4511.53   74.16





   4511.54   74.17





   4511.55   74.18, 74.21





   4511.56   74.19





   4511.60   72.31





   4511.61   72.26





   4511.62   72.25





   4511.65   71.06





   4511.66   73.12





   4511.661   73.07





   4511.67   73.01





   4511.68   73.03





   4511.69   73.04





   4511.70   72.27, 73.08





   4511.701   72.40





   4511.71   72.28





   4511.711   72.38





   4511.712   72.35





   4511.72   72.29





   4511.73   72.30





   4511.74   71.01





   4511.75   72.39





   4511.772   72.941





   4511.79   72.111





   4511.81(G)   72.42





   4511.83   72.43





   4511.84   72.943





   4511.98   70.99





   4511.99   70.02, 70.99, 71.01, 72.25(C), 72.36(C), 72.43(D)





      72.941, 73.04





   4513.02   72.70





   4513.021   72.70





   4513.03   72.71





   4513.04   72.71, 72.72





   4513.05   72.73





   4513.06   72.74





   4513.07   72.75





   4513.071   72.93





   4513.08   72.76





   4513.09   72.77





   4513.10   72.78















   R.C. SEC.   CODE SECTION










   4513.11   72.79





   4513.12   72.80





   4513.13   72.81





   4513.14   72.82





   4513.15   72.83





   4513.16   72.84





   4513.17   72.85





   4513.171   72.85





   4513.19   72.86





   4513.20   72.87





   4513.21   72.88





   4513.22   72.89





   4513.23   72.90





   4513.24   72.91





   4513.263   72.942





   4513.263(A)(2)   74.06(E)(1)





   4513.263(E)   72.942





   4513.263(F)   72.942





   4513.28   72.106





   4513.29   72.100





   4513.30   72.92





   4513.31   72.103





   4513.32   72.101





   4513.33   72.105





   4513.36   70.065





   4513.361   135.07





   4513.37   72.71





   4513.63   70.12, 70.13





   4513.64   70.13





   4513.99   70.99, 72.942, 135.07





   4519.01   70.01, 74.16





   4519.44   72.120





   4519.99   70.99, 72.45





   4549.02   72.66





   4549.021   72.67





   4549.03   72.68





   4549.05   70.07





   4549.08   72.65





   4549.11   72.63





   4549.12   72.63





   4549.99   70.99





   Ch. 4715   136.12





   4723.56   136.12





   Ch. 4729   136.12





   4729.02   72.45





   Ch. 4731   72.942





   Ch. 4734   72.942





   4931.30   136.11





   4999.02   75.02





   Ch. 5120   130.10





   5120.17   130.10





   5145.11   130.10





   5147.30   135.01





   Ch. 5149   130.10





   5511.02   72.03





   5577.01 - 5577.14   72.105





   5577.05   72.97





   5577.11   72.99





   5589.08   72.104





   5727.01   72.101














REFERENCES TO 1970 CODE









                  1970 CODE SEC.                    1977
CODE SEC.










   101.01   10.01 





   101.02   10.02 





   101.03   10.03 





   101.04   10.04 





   101.05   10.05 





   101.06   10.06 





   101.07   10.07 





   101.99   10.99 





   105.01   30.01 





   105.02   30.02 





   105.03   30.03 





   105.04   30.04 





   105.05   30.05 





   105.06   30.06 





   105.07   30.07 





   121.01   31.01 





   121.02   31.02 





   123.01   31.05 





   123.02   31.06 





   123.03   31.07 





   131.01   32.01 





   131.02   32.02 





   131.03   32.03 





   131.04   32.04 





   131.05   32.05 





   131.06   32.06 





   133.01   32.10 





   133.02   32.11 





   133.03   32.12 





   133.04   32.13 





   133.05   32.14 





   133.06   32.15 





   135.01   33.01 





   135.02   33.02 





   135.03   33.03 





   135.04   33.04 





   135.05   33.05 





   135.06   33.06 





   135.07   33.07 





   135.08    33.08 





   137.01    33.10 





   137.02    33.11 





   137.03    33.12 










                    1970 CODE SEC.                  1977
CODE SEC.










   137.04    33.13 





   137.05    33.14 





   137.06    33.15 





   137.07    33.16 





   137.08    33.17 





   139.01    33.20 





   139.02   33.22 





   139.03   33.23 





   139.04   33.24 





   139.05   33.25 





   139.06   33.26 





   139.07   33.27 





   141.01   33.09 





   141.02   33.31 





   141.03   33.32 





   145.01   33.35 





   153.01   34.01 





   153.02   34.02 





   153.03   34.03 





   153.04   34.04 





   153.05   34.05 





   153.06   34.06 





   153.07   34.07 





   153.08   34.08 





   153.09   34.09 





   153.10   34.10 





   153.11   34.11 





   153.12   34.12 





   153.13   34.13 





   153.14   34.14 





   153.15   34.15 





   155.01   34.20 





   521.01   75.01 





   521.02   75.02 





   521.03   75.03 





   523.01   90.01 





   523.02   90.02 





   523.03   90.03 





   523.04   90.04 





   523.05   90.05 





   523.06   90.06 





   523.07   90.07 





   523.08   90.08 





   523.09   90.09 





   523.10   90.10 





   523.11   90.11 





   525.01   91.01 





   525.02   91.02 





   525.03   91.03 





   525.04   91.04 





   525.05   91.05 










                    1970 CODE SEC.                  1977
CODE SEC.










   525.06   91.06 





   525.07   91.07 





   525.10   91.99 





   715.01   110.01 





   725.01   112.01 





   725.02   112.02 





   725.03   112.03 





   725.04   112.04 





   725.05   112.05 





   725.06   112.06 





   725.07   112.07 





   725.08   112.08 





   725.09   112.09 





   725.10   112.10 





   725.99   112.99 





   903.01   92.01 





   903.02   92.02 





   903.04   92.04 





   903.05   92.05 





   903.06   92.06 





   903.07   92.07 





   903.08   92.08 





   903.09   92.09 





   903.10   92.10 





   903.11   92.11 





   903.12   92.12 





   903.13   92.13 





   903.14   92.14 





   903.15   92.15 





   903.16   92.16 





   903.17   92.17 





   903.18   92.18 





   903.99   92.99 





   915.01   52.01 





   915.02   52.02 





   915.03   52.03 





   915.04   52.04 





   915.99   52.99 





   931.01   53.01 





   931.021   53.02 





   931.03   53.03 





   931.04   53.04 





   931.06   53.06 





   931.07   53.08 





   931.99   53.99 





   933.02   93.02 





   933.03   93.03 





   933.04   93.04 





   1301.01   150.01 





   1301.02   150.02 










                      1970 CODE SEC.                1977
CODE SEC.










   1301.03   150.03 





   1301.04   150.04 





   1305.01   150.05 





   1305.02   150.06 





   1311.01   150.10 





   1311.02   150.11 





   1311.03   150.12 





   1311.04   150.13 





   1311.05   150.14 





   1311.06   150.15 





   1313.01   150.20 





   1313.02   150.21 





   1313.03   150.22 





   1313.04   150.23 





   1313.05   150.24 





   1313.06   150.25 





   1313.07   150.26 





   1313.08   150.27 





   1313.09   150.28 





   1313.10   150.29 





   1313.11   150.30 





   1313.12   150.31 





   1313.13   150.32 





   1315.01   150.35





   1315.02   150.36





   1315.03   150.37





   1315.04   150.38





   1315.05   150.39





   1315.99   150.99





   1317.01   150.40 





   1317.02   150.41 





   1317.03   150.42 





   1317.04   150.43 





   1317.05   150.44 





   1317.06   150.45 





   1317.07   150.46 





   1317.08   150.47 





   1317.09   150.48 





   1317.10   150.49 





   1317.11   150.50 





   1317.12   150.51 





   1317.13   150.52 





   1317.14   150.53 





   1317.15   150.54 





   1317.16   150.55 





   1317.17   150.56 





   1317.18   150.57 





   1317.19   150.58 





   1319.01   150.60 





   1319.02   150.61 





   1319.04   150.63





   1319.05   150.64





   1319.07   150.66





   1319.08   150.67





   1319.09   150.68





   1321.01   150.70





   1323.06   150.80














REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES









ORD. NO.     DATE     CODE SECTION





977   5-26-59   152.01





1186   4-23-63   154.172





1664   5-11-70   75.04, 75.05,75.99





1707   11-23-71   33.45 - 33.50





1742   8-31-72   150.62





1743   8-31-72   150.65





1746   5-22-72   72.41





1763   1-23-73   150.40, 150.55





1765   2-13-73   34.21





1777   4-10-73   33.40





1790   6-12-73   34.21





1803   8-28-73   50.01, 50.04, 50.06 - 50.27, 50.99





1805   9-25-73   51.01 - 51.16, 51.99





1809   10-9-73   50.01, 50.04, 50.06 - 50.27, 50.99





1812   11-13-73   51.17





1826   2-26-74   113.01 - 113.99





1831   3-12-74   95.01, 95.02





1839   4-23-74   130.01 - 130.99, 131.01 - 131.07, 132.01 - 132.11,
133.01 133.23, 134.01 - 134.09, 135.01, 135.03 - 135.06, 136.01 - 136.07,
136.09 - 136.13, 137.01 - 137.09, 137.11 - 137.13, 138.01 - 138.07, 139.01 -
139.07, 139.10





1843   5-14-74   91.08





1880   1-14-75   154.01 - 154.199





1907   5-27-75   114.01 - 114.68, 114.70, 114.71, 114.75 - 114.96





1909   5-27-75   150.07





1940   12-11-75   92.20, 92.99





1959   3-23-76   92.19, 154.01





1969   5-11-76   154.28





1970   5-11-76   154.181





1971   5-25-76   72.102, 72.103





1981   7-13-76   154.68, 154.89, 154.101, 154.110, 154.111, 154.120,
154.121, 154.130, 154.131, 154.140, 154.141, 154.150, 154.151, 154.181





1984   9-14-76   154.181





1986   10-26-76   50.03, 50.05





1990   11-23-76   154.182





1996   2-10-77   154.179





2033   7-26-77   74.26





2034   7-26-77   91.08





2049   10-11-77   T.S.O. III





2051   11-22-77   34.35 - 34.41





2052   11-22-77   34.42










ORD. NO.    DATE       CODE SECTION





2054   12-14-77   150.01





2056   1-24-78   95.10 - 95.21, 95.99





2059   2-14-78   T.S.O. I





2060   2-14-78   154.28





2061   2-28-78   T.S.O. IX





2079   4-25-78   72.25





2080   4-25-78   73.05,  73.13





2081   5-9-78   T.S.O. V





2082   5-9-78   T.S.O. III





2097   9-26-78   154.101, 154.181, 154.184





2098   9-26-78   T.S.O. IX





2099   9-26-78   T.S.O. IX





2101   11-14-78   T.S.O. V





2116   2-27-79   50.03





2121   3-27-79   50.03





2122   4-10-79   50.03





2124   5-8-79   T.S.O. III





2125   5-8-79   72.39, 72.391 72.392





2126   5-8-79   31.05





2131   5-22-79   T.S.O. IX





2132   5-22-79   154.42





2134   6-12-79   51.12





2140   6-26-79   51.99





2145   7-10-79   152.01





2154   8-28-79   33.01, 33.22, 33.23





2156   9-11-79   155.01 - 155.99





2160   9-25-79   90.02, 90.08





2162   10-9-79   154.39, 154.181





2170   12-11-79   150.60 - 150.69





2186   2-26-80   70.99 (A)(4)





2191   3-11-80       T.S.O. IX





2193   2-26-80   34.06





2194   3-11-80   150.01 - 150.09





2200   4-22-80       T.S.O. VII





2201   4-8-80   72.97





2202   4-22-80       T.S.O. VII





2206   4-22-80       T.S.O. VI





2209   6-10-80   51.11





2210   6-10-80   139.11





2212   6-25-80   154.29





2214   7-22-80   150.85, 150.86





2216   8-26-80   154.69





2217   8-26-80       T.S.O. VII





2219   8-26-80       Charter 1.01, 3.02, 4.13, 4.16, 5.02, 5.03,
7.10, 9.05, 10.01, 10.02, 10.05, 12.06





2221   9-9-80         T.S.O. VII





2224   9-23-80       T.S.O. V





2225   10-14-80       T.S.O. IX





2227   11-11-80       Ch. 151










ORD. NO.    DATE       CODE SECTION





2231   12-23-80       T.S.O. VII





2232   1-22-81       T.S.O. VII





2233   12-23-80       Ch. 54





2237   1-13-81   150.01





2242   6-23-81       T.S.O. VIII





2245   3-10-81   50.28





2246   3-10-81   50.07





2247   3-10-81   51.02, 51.03





2252   3-10-81   10.08, 50.07





2256   4-28-81   154.38





2257   4-28-81       T.S.O. IX





2258   4-28-81       T.S.O. IX





2261   6-9-81   72.55





2262   6-9-81   74.26





2266   6-9-81   74.27





2267   6-9-81   74.16





2269   6-23-81   34.38





2271   7-28-81   154.49, 154.181





2272   7-28-81       Ch. 53





2274   8-11-81   150.01, 150.05





2276   7-28-81   139.11





2278   8-25-81       Ch. 156





2291   10-27-81   30.01 - 30.07, 31.01 - 31.02, 32.01 - 32.06, 32.10 -
32.15, 33.01 - 33.17, 33.20 - 33.27, 33.30 - 33.32, 33.40 - 33.41, 33.70 -
33.71, 33.80 - 33.81, 34.20, 34.21





2293   11-10-81   70.99





2297   12-22-81   34.01 - 34.15, 34.20, 34.21, 34.32





2298   11-22-81       T.S.O. IX





2305   1-26-82       T.S.O. IX





2306   2-23-82       154.02 - 154.99





2308   2-23-82   50.03





2314   4-13-82       T.S.O. V





2315   3-23-82   156.31





2318   6-8-82         Ch. 115





2327   7-13-82   154.17-1 - 154.26-1, 154.17-2 - 154.26-2





2330   7-13-82   T.S.O. IX





2332   6-22-82   134.06





2334   6-22-82   T.S.O. V





2335   7-13-82   T.S.O. IX





2345   9-14-82   91.01, 91.02, 91.06, 81.07, 91.99





2349   10-12-82   51.11





2353   12-14-82   73.04





2354   12-14-82   50.16, 50.30





2357   5-10-83   Ch. 89





2360   1-25-83   152.01





2362   2-8-83         Ch. 110





2364   2-8-83   132.06, 133.07, 133.10, 133.11, 133.17, 133.19, 139.02





2368   4-26-83       T.S.O. IX





2369   4-12-83   154.81, 154.82, 154.83, 154.87










ORD. NO.    DATE       CODE SECTION





2370   4-12-83   154.77-1 - 154.85-1





2371   4-12-83   T.S.O. IX





2376   4-12-83   70.99, 72.36, 72.45, 72.46





2393   7-12-83   51.02, 51.03





2397   7-12-83   154.180





2399   8-9-83   154.184





2404   8-23-83   Adopting Ordinance





2407   8-9-83   Ch. 76





2408   9-13-83   154.181





2409   9-13-83   154.181





2410   9-27-83   154.12





2415   11-22-83   154.48





2416   6-26-84   154.179





2422   1-24-84   T.S.O. IX





2423   1-10-84   154.85-1





2424   1-10-84   154.80





2426   1-10-84   150.07





2429   3-27-84   32.125





2432   4-10-84   T.S.O. V





2436   4-24-84         Ch. 141





2439   5-8-84       T.S.O. II





2445   6-26-84         T.S.O. IX





2446   7-10-84   154.69, 154.131, 154.141, 154.151, 154.181





2447   7-10-84         T.S.O. IX





2448   7-10-84         T.S.O. IX





2451   7-10-84   150.03(G), 150.03(H)





2452   8-14-84   154.18-1 - 154.22-3, 154.179, 154.181





2453   8-14-84   154.12(B)





2454   8-28-84   150.80





2460   9-4-84   90.12





2463   9-11-84   34.04





2465   9-11-84         Ch. 96





2466   9-24-84         Ch. 56





2468   10-9-84         Adopting Ordinance





2469   10-23-84   56.04(B)(2)





2471   11-27-84       T.S.O. IX





2476   11-27-84   134.08(C)





2477   11-27-84   71.01





2478   12-11-84       T.S.O. V





2480   12-26-84       T.S.O. V





2491   2-26-85   154.99





2496   4-23-85         T.S.O. III





2506   5-14-85         Ch. 151





2508   6-11-85         T.S.O. IX





2509   6-11-85   150.01 - 150.045, 150.07





2510   6-25-85   53.03





2515   7-9-85       T.S.O. IX





2516   7-23-85         Ch. 111





2518   7-23-85         T.S.O. III





2519   8-13-85   T.S.O. XII










ORD. NO.    DATE       CODE SECTION





2520   8-27-85   150.69.1





2522   8-27-85   154.04





2526   12-10-85   T.S.O. XII





2546   5-27-86   150.07





2547   5-27-86   150.05





2555   8-12-86   150.025





2557   9-9-86   154.01





2558   8-26-86   70.99(A), 71.07, 71.09, 72.39, 72.40, 72.63, 72.941,
72.942, 72.97, 89.11, 91.07, 130.01, 133.01, 133.07, 134.01





2560   10-14-86   138.08





2564   12-23-86   T.S.O. I





2573   1-13-87   32.10, 32.11





2574   1-13-87   114.01, 114.08, 114.94 -114.97





2578   2-24-87   Adopting Ordinance





2579   3-10-87   T.S.O. IX





2580   2-24-87   150.01





2581   3-10-87   51.19 - 51.23





2582   3-24-87   156.01 - 156.32, 156.99





2586   4-14-87   T.S.O. XII





2587   4-28-87   34.21





2589   5-26-87   156.33 - 156.40, Appendix





2596   6-23-87   T.S.O. V





2597   6-23-87   T.S.O. V





2598   7-14-87   T.S.O. IV





2602   7-28-87   T.S.O. VII





2609   8-11-87   93.02, 93.99





2610   8-11-87   93.05





2613   8-25-87   110.02, 110.03, 110.99





2614   8-25-87   93.05





2615   9-8-87   72.47





2620   11-10-87   154.29, 154.181





2623   12-8-87   Ch. 142





2624   4-26-88   Adopting Ordinance





2627   12-22-87   34.21 - 34.31, 34.33, 34.34, 34.342





2639   1-26-88   154.01, 154.184





2640   1-26-88   70.01, 73.12





2641   1-12-88   154.80-1, 154.82-1, 154.85-1





2651   7-12-88   154.01, 154.19-1, 154.19-2, 154.181





2652   4-12-88   T.S.O. IX





2653   3-22-88   T.S.O. V





2655   5-10-88   T.S.O. III





2658   5-24-88   51.02, 51.03





2659   5-24-88   Ch. 77





2660   5-10-88   T.S.O. V





2670   9-27-88   154.159-1 - 154.168-1





2671   9-27-88   154.26-1





2672   9-27-88   T.S.O. IX










ORD. NO.    DATE       CODE SECTION





2674   9-27-88   157.01





2675   10-11-88   50.01





2677   10-25-88   72.102





2684   12-27-88   34.215, 34.22 - 34.31, 34.33, 34.34, 34.342





2691   12-27-88   93.01





2692   1-10-89   150.70, 150.80





2693   1-10-89   33.18





2694   12-27-88   T.S.O. XII





2695   6-13-89   154.01, 154.178-1, - 154.178-5





2696   1-24-89   150.01 - 150.99





2700   2-14-89   32.07





2701   2-14-89   T.S.O. XII





2702   2-28-89   154.184





2703   4-11-89   T.S.O. XII





2704   4-11-89   T.S.O. XII





2713   6-19-89   73.14





2715   7-11-89   T.S.O. XII





2716   7-25-89   Charter, § 4.14





2722   1-23-90   T.S.O. IX





2725   12-26-89   Ch. 158





2726   11-14-89   Adopting Ordinance





2727   12-12-89   T.S.O. XII





2739   2-13-90   154.182





2742   3-13-90   150.01





2743   3-13-90   150.025





2745   2-11-92   T.S.O. IX





2747   3-27-90   158.04





2748   4-24-90   53.01, 53.10





2749   4-24-90   Adopting Ordinance





2750   5-8-90   T.S.O. V





2758   7-10-90   154.18-1, 154.20-1, 154.21-1





2759   7-10-90   150.69.1





2760   7-10-90   154.179, 154.183





2761   6-26-90   156.23, 156.39





2763   7-24-90   31.05





2766   9-11-90   154.12





2768   1-22-91   154.184





2769   10-23-90   154.01, 154.179





2786   2-12-91   T.S.O. IX





2788   2-26-91   10.09





2794   4-23-91   Ch. 56





2795   4-9-91   93.02





2798   4-14-91   50.07





2801   5-14-91   T.S.O. V





2802   5-28-91   Ch. 55





2803   5-28-91   157.01










ORD. NO.    DATE       CODE SECTION





2804   5-28-91   10.08





2810   7-23-91   154.01, 154.179, 154.180





2812   7-23-91   T.S.O. V





2813   7-23-91   T.S.O. II





2814   7-23-91   T.S.O. II





2816   8-13-91   154.12





2817   9-10-91   T.S.O. III





2822   9-10-91   Adopting Ordinance





2825   10-8-91   70.03





2829   11-26-91   31.05





2833   12-30-91   154.98





2847   1-28-92   32.10





2848   2-11-92   T.S.O. V





2850   2-25-92   50.03





2853   3-24-92   158.03





2854   4-14-92   154.01, 154.38, 154.39, 154.48, 154.181, 154.184





2856   4-14-92   34.344





2864   9-8-92   T.S.O. III





2865   9-8-92   T.S.O. III





2866   11-24-92   T.S.O. IX





2867   10-27-92   T.S.O. IX





2875   9-22-92   156.39





2876   9-22-92   157.01





2877   10-27-92   T.S.O. III





2879   11-24-92   50.03





2890   2-9-93   150.60, 150.60.1, 150.61 - 150.63, 150.63.1, 150.64





2891   2-1-93   T.S.O. II





2892   2-23-93   153.01 - 153.03, 153.04 - 153.13, 153.14 - 153.22,
153.23 - 153.28, 153.99





2893   4-27-93   Adopting Ordinance





2894   3-9-93   34.444





2908   10-5-93   152.01





2909   10-5-93   154.01, 154.19-1.1, 154.19-2.1, 154.29.1, 154.39.1,
154.49.1, 154.59.1, 154.69.1, 154.79.1, 154.80-1, 154.90.1, 154.101.1,
154.111.1, 154.121.1, 154.131.1, 154.141.1, 154.151.1, 154.161.1,
154.161-1.1, 154.171.1, 154.179, 154.184





2910   10-5-93   31.05





2911   11-9-93   T.S.O. V





2912    -  -93   T.S.O. XII





2913   12-28-93   34.215, 34.22 - 34.31, 34.33, 34.34, 34.342





2923   1-25-94   92.03





2924   1-25-94   150.01 - 150.09





2927   2-8-94   117.01 - 117.10, 117.99





2929   3-8-94   53.10





2938   4-26-94   110.01, 110.02





2939   4-26-94   158.01 - 158.05, 158.99





2940   4-26-94   154.13





2943   5-24-94   154.01, 154.39, 154.181





2947   7-12-94   93.02





2950   7-12-94   139.08





2951   7-12-94   T.S.O. V










ORD. NO.    DATE       CODE SECTION





2952   9-27-94   150.60.1





2953   9-13-94   158.03





2954   9-13-94   89.12





2955   9-27-94   34.26, 34.28





2956   9-27-94   Adopting Ordinance





2957   10-25-94   139.12





2958   10-11-94   T.S.O. V





2960   10-25-94   72.42





2961   11-22-94   154.01, 154.179





2962   11-22-94   154.08, 154.13, 154.14





2964   11-22-94   50.02





2973   4-11-95   32.25 - 32.39





2979   5-9-95   153.06, 153.13





2980   5-9-95   70.99





2982   7-11-95   150.70 - 150.81, 150.99





2983   6-27-95   Ch. 158





2986   7-25-95   Charter 6.02, 9.01, 10.01, 10.02, 11.01, 11.04





2989   10-24-95   T.S.O. IX





2990   9-26-95   T.S.O. IV





2993   11-14-95   Adopting Ordinance





3002   12-12-95   34.215, 34.22 - 34.31, 34.33, 34.34, 34.342





3010   4-9-96   T.S.O. IX





3017   7-9-96   154.39, 154.181





3021   7-23-96   T.S.O. IX





3024   9-10-96   Adopting Ordinance





3026   9-24-96   T.S.O. XII





3028   9-24-96   150.01, 150.03





3030   10-22-96   154.67 - 154.76





3031   10-22-96   154.184





3032   10-22-96   154.90, 154.181





3034   11-26-96   Ch. 94





3035   11-12-96   T.S.O. XII





3038   12-30-96   34.215 - 34.31, 34.33, 34.34, 34.342





3045   1-14-97   34.215, 34.22





3047   3-11-97   154.68, 154.89, 154.100, 154.110, 154.120, 154.130,
154.140, 154.150, 154.170, 154.179, 154.181





3049   3-11-97   157.01





3057   6-24-97   34.345





3059   7-22-97   Ch. 151





3060   8-26-97   138.08





3063   9-23-97   154.01, 154.39, 154.49, 154.59, 154.69, 154.79,
154.79-1, 154.90, 154.101, 154.111, 154.121, 154.131, 154.141, 154.151,
154.161, 154.161-1, 154.171, 154.179, 154.181, 154.186





3069   12-30-97   34.215 - 34.31, 34.33 - 34.342





3079   1-27-98   154.98, 154.178-5





3082   2-24-98   154.01, 154.26-2, 154.36, 154.184, 154.185





3083   2-10-98   150.01 - 150.09





3084   2-10-98   Ch. 158





3085   2-24-98   33.19





3089   3-10-98   150.03





3091   4-28-98   158.03










ORD. NO.    DATE       CODE SECTION





3092   6-9-98   154.01





3105   11-10-98   154.36.1 to 154.36.8





3121   12-22-98   156.01 to 156.99





3122   1-26-99   90.07





3124   2-9-99   154.179





3125   2-9-99   154.180





3127   2-9-99   150.01





3130   5-25-99   154.89, 154.90, 154.100, 154.101, 154.110, 154.111,
154.120, 154.121, 154.130, 154.131, 154.140, 154.141, 154.150, 154.151,
154.181





3131   6-8-99   154.181





3132   6-8-99   154.12, 154.181





3133   6-8-99   154.29





3135   6-22-99   154.179





3144   10-26-99   72.107





3147   12-28-99   34.215 to 34.31, 34.33, 34.34, 34.342





3166   8-8-00   97.01 to 97.06, 97.99





3169   11-28-00   150.01 to 150.09





3170   3-13-01   154.184





3171   12-28-00   94.01 to 94.27





3174   12-28-00   34.215 to 34.342





3182   3-13-01   34.255





3184   4-24-01   158.01 to 158.99





3188   7-24-01   33.19





3191   10-23-01   33.47





3192   11-27-01   150.87 to 150.93





3193   12-11-01   150.01 to 150.09





3194   12-11-01   Repeals 31.05





3197   12-27-01   34.215 to 34.31, 34.33, 34.34, 34.342





3206   2-26-02   50.02





3210   5-14-02   90.01





3211   5-14-02   90.06





3215   7-23-02   138.08





3217   8-27-02   34.24





3229   12-30-02   34.215 to 34.31, 34.33, 34.34, 34.342





3237   2-11-03   53.01, 53.02, 53.06, 53.11 to 53.13





3242   5-27-03   115.01, 115.99





3245   6-24-03   72.45





3248   9-9-03   154.02.01 to 154.16.09





3250   10-14-03   153.10, 153.12





3251   11-11-03   94.01 to 94.27





3254   12-30-03   34.215 to 34.342





3261   2-10-04   156.01 to 156.99





3262   2-24-04   92.03





3268   5-11-04   98.01





3274   7-13-04   154.16.01





3277   7-27-04   93.01










ORD. NO.    DATE       CODE SECTION





3280   10-26-04   156.01 to 156.06





3284   12-28-04   34.22 to 34.25, 34.26 to 34.31, 34.33, 34.34, 34.342





3288   2-8-05   150.01 to 150.09





3289   2-8-05   158.01 to 158.99





3298   6-14-05   154.10.471 to 154.10.477





3300   6-14-05   50.02





3301   6-14-05   50.03





3309   11-8-05   154.10.003, 154.10.622, 154.10.652





3310   11-22-05   53.01, 53.09, 53.10





3314   12-27-05   34.22 to 34.25, 34.26 to 34.31, 34.33, 34.34, 34.342





3308   3-28-06   153.01 to 153.18





3324   4-11-06   93.04, 93.05, 150.80, 150.81, 158.02





3329   5-23-06   150.025, 150.04, 150.06, 150.09, 150.71





3331   11-28-06   158.06





3336   12-26-06   34.22, 34.23, 34.28 to 34.31, 34.33, 34.34, 34.342





3345   5-22-07   150.07





3346   7-10-07   150.05, 150.06, 150.61





3347   7-10-07   157.01





3348   7-10-07   10.08





3349   8-14-07   51.11





3350   8-14-07   50.12





3351   8-14-07   157.01





3352   8-14-07   156.39(B)





3353   8-14-07   50.07





3354   8-14-07   51.02





3355   8-14-07   51.03





3358   11-13-07   118.01 to 118.12, 118.99





3382   4-8-08   50.03





3384   4-22-08   154.10.476(A)(5)





3386   5-27-08   33.19





3387   7-8-08   72.130 to 72.133





3389   8-26-08   36.01 to 36.13





3400   12-9-08   154.10.473





3401   12-23-08   38.01 to 38.29





3402   12-23-08   Ch. 38  Fee Schedule





3404   1-27-09   150.69.1





3415   2-10-09   94.27





3418   4-28-09   159.01





3419   4-28-09   154.10.093, 154.10.113, 154.10.134, 154.10.312,
154.10.362, 154.10.412, 154.10.433, 154.10.463, 154.10.478, 154.10.613,
154.10.663, 154.17.01





3421   5-26-09   158.01 to 158.46, 158.98, 158.99, Repeals 93.01 to
93.05, 93.99, 150.75 to 150.81, 150.86 to 150.92





3422   6-9-09   72.130(c), (d)





3426   8-25-09   159.02





3434   12-22-09   Repeals Chapter 38





3435   12-22-09   37.01 to 37.34





3436   12-22-09   10.08, 10.99, 50.02, 50.03, 50.07, 50.12, 50.28,
50.99, 51.02, 51.03, 51.11, 53.09, 53.10, 53.12, 56.04, 70.13, 89.04, 92.03,
98.01, 110.02, 112.06, 115.99, 150.05 to 150.07, 150.25, 150.61, 156.39(B),
157.01, 158.09(E), 158.11(I), 158.13, 158.16(D)(5), 158.21(D)





3437   12-22-09   Chapter 37 Ed. Note





3438   1-26-10   154.10.629





3441   1-26-10   154.04.01(F)





3443   2-23-10   Chapter 37 Ed. Note, 37.03





3445   3-9-10   Chapter 37 Ed. Note, 37.14





3449      5-11-10   154.16.10





3452      7-13-10   154.05.03(E), 154.05.06(C)(1), 154.05.08(D), (E)





3459      11-9-10   154.02.01, 154.11.02, repeals 150.60 to 150.69.1





3460      11-9-10   154.16.08





3466      12-14-10   94.02(A)(1), 94.05(G)





3474      2-22-11   37.01 to 37.34





3475   4-12-11   37.35, 154.10.352(N), 154.10.402(S), 154.10.422(H)(H),
154.10.452(S), 154.10.473(A)(36), 154.10.602(Q), 154.10.622(R),
154.10.652(R), 154.16.11, repeals 154.02.01, 154.10.453(D), 154.10.623(G),
154.10.653(H), 154.16.08(J)





3477   4-12-11   154.10.133(M), 154.10.479, 154.14.01(G)





3479   5-10-11   158.16(E)(9)(d)





3480   7-12-11   153.01 to 153.21





3481   7-12-11   37.35





3495   12-27-11   72.130(C), (D)





3500   1-10-12   143.01 to 143.05, 143.99





3502   1-10-12   158.09(F), 158.10(C), 158.12





3504   2-14-12   37.01 to 37.03, 37.08 to 37.35





3506      3-13-12   153.03(T), 153.05, Appendix D, 153.08(b)(9),
153.09(d)(2), (5), (8), (f)(2), 153.11(h), 153.14 (b)(14), (f), (g), 153.99





3510      5-22-12   33.19(a)





3511      6-12-12   T.S.O. VII





3516      10-23-12   154.05.03(C)





3523      1-22-13   94.02, 94.04, 94.19, 94.27





3524      3-12-13   37.01 to 37.35





3525      3-12-13   Chap. 37, Editor’s Note





3526      6-11-13   153.03, 153.08, 153.09,





            153.11, 153.12, 153.14,





            Appendix A, G





3527      6-11-13   153.03, 153.08, 153.11,





            Appendix H





3528      6-25-13   154.14.01





3533      10-8-13   90.01 to 90.18;





            Repeals Ch. 89





3540      12-10-13   33.19





3542      1-14-14   151.01, 151.02, 151.99





3544      2-25-14   37.01 to 37.35





3545      3-11-14   158.06, 158.14, 158.16,





            158.21, 158.45, 158.99





3546      7-8-14      91.08





3557      2-25-15   37.01 to 37.35





3559      4-28-15   153.01 to 153.21





3562      6-9-15      90.01 to 90.03





3567      8-25-15   154.02.01, 154.10.402(o), (r),





            154.10.422(DD), (HH),





            154.10.423(I), 154.10.452





            (P), (R), 154.10.473(A),





            154.16.12





3572      11-24-15   94.5.01 to 94.5.20,





            94.5.201, 94.5.97 to 94.5.99





3575      1-26-16   139.01(R), 139.11(D), (E)





3576      3-8-16      37.36





3577      3-9-16      37.01 to 37.35





3581      3-22-16   37.29(A)(1)





3587   6-28-16   53.01 to 53.13, 53.99





3591   10-11-16   154.02.01, 154.10.423, 154.10.603





3592   10-11-16   154.02.01, 154.10.003,





      154.10.422, 154.10.423,





      154.10.602, 154.10.603,





      154.10.622, 154.10.652





3596   12-13-16   37.36, 158.14,





      158.46 to 158.53,





3601   1-10-17   34.21 to 34.31,





      34.33, 34.34, 34.342





3602   1-24-17   94.19, 94.27, 194.5.05





3603   2-28-17   37.01 to 37.37





3615   9-12-17   154.10.607, 154.10.627, 154.10.657





3616   9-12-17   154.17.01, 154.10.633





3617   10-24-17   119.01, 119.02, 119.99





3622   12-19-17   153.01 to 153.22





3628   2-27-18   37.01 to 37.37





3629   2-27-18   94.6 to 94.6.99





3630   3-27-18   117.01 to 117.10





3631   4-10-18   37.38









 























REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS









RES. NO.    DATE       CODE SECTION





11-77   8-9-77   T.S.O. V





21-77   12-27-77   T.S.O. I





6-78   2-28-78   T.S.O. V





20-80   8-12-80   33.55 - 33.61





23-80   10-14-80   T.S.O. X





14-82   7-13-82   T.S.O. IX





3-83   1-11-83   33.100 - 33.102





6-83   2-8-83   T.S.O. XI





7-83   3-8-83   95.03





10-83   5-10-83   T.S.O. V





5-84   2-14-84   T.S.O. XI





11-85   9-24-85   T.S.O. XIII





12-85   10-8-85   33.61





16-85   11-26-85   34.341





1-86   1-14-86   T.S.O. XII





5-86   4-8-86   34.343





8-86   8-12-86   T.S.O. XI





12-86   11-25-86   T.S.O. IX





15-86   10-28-86   T.S.O. XII





16-87   4-28-87   T.S.O. II





19-87   7-14-87   53.09





25-87   10-13-87   T.S.O. XII





4-88   1-12-88   T.S.O. VII





5-88   1-26-88   95.30





8-88   2-9-88   T.S.O. XII





23-89   8-8-89   50.29





33-89   12-26-89   T.S.O. XI





34-89   11-28-89   T.S.O. XII





14-90   3-27-90   T.S.O. V





23-90   7-10-90   T.S.O. XII





26-90   8-14-90   T.S.O. XI





34-90   12-11-90   33.110 - 33.113





35-90   11-27-90   T.S.O. XII





40-90   12-27-90   95.01





6-91   3-12-91   95.30





9-91   4-23-91   T.S.O. II





15-91   5-28-91   T.S.O. XII





17-91   5-28-91   70.02





19-91   5-28-91   T.S.O. XI





24-91   6-25-91   T.S.O. XII





32-91   8-13-91   T.S.O. XI





34-91   10-22-91   T.S.O. XII





1-92   1-14-92   T.S.O. V










RES. NO.    DATE       CODE SECTION





3-92   1-14-92   95.30





9-92   3-10-92   T.S.O. XII





15-92   7-14-92   T.S.O. XI





6-93   3-9-93   95.30





7-93   4-13-93   95.01





34-93    - -   55.15 - 55.18, 55.99





36-93   12-14-93   T.S.O. XII





6-94   2-8-94   95.01





7-94   2-8-94   95.30





13-94   5-10-94   T.S.O. XII





19-94   5-24-94   Ch. 159





26-94   7-12-94   T.S.O. XI





27-94   7-12-94   T.S.O. XI





28-94   7-12-94   T.S.O. XI





29-94   7-12-94   T.S.O. XI





30-94   7-12-94   T.S.O. XI





31-94   7-12-94   T.S.O. XI





32-94   8-9-94   T.S.O. XII





39-94   10-25-94   33.120 - 33.124





41-94   11-8-94   T.S.O. XII





15-95   3-14-95   95.30





31-95   6-13-95   T.S.O. XII





37-95   9-12-95   T.S.O. VII





17-96   5-28-96   T.S.O. XII





20-96   6-11-96   T.S.O. XII





26-96   8-13-96   T.S.O. XII





27-96   8-13-96   T.S.O. XII





28-96   8-13-96   T.S.O. XII





29-96   8-27-96   T.S.O. XII





12-97   3-25-97   95.30





21-97   5-27-97   T.S.O. XII





22-97   5-27-97   33.130 - 33.134





29-97   8-12-97   154.13





37-97   11-11-97   T.S.O. XII





3-99   1-26-99   95.30





24-2000   10-24-00   53.09





4-2001   2-27-01   95.30





8-2002   2-26-02   95.30





5-2004   2-24-04   95.30





7-2004   3-9-04   95.01





3-2005   2-8-05   95.01





5-2005   2-22-05   95.30





5-2006   2-28-06   95.03





14-2006   5-9-06   33.135 to 33.138





20-2006   6-27-06   95.30





16-2007   10-23-07   35.01 to 35.06





8-2009   4-28-09   39.01 to 39.08





24-2012   6-26-12   Ch. 94 Editor’s Note





45-2012   12-18-12   T.S.O. V





2-2013   1-22-13   94.02



SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
FOR
THE CITY OF
WEST CARROLLTON, OHIO
1979
Amended 1981, 1983, 2010
i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
Preamble ................................................................................................................1
TITLE, SCOPE, AND JURISDICTION
152.02 Title........................................................................................................1
152.03 Administration .......................................................................................1
152.04 Jurisdiction.............................................................................................1
152.05 Relation to Other Laws ..........................................................................1
152.06 Planned Unit Developments Encouraged; Regulations may
Be Modified ...........................................................................................1
152.07 Amendments ..........................................................................................1
152.08 Separability ............................................................................................1
DEFINITIONS
152.10 Definitions..............................................................................................2
THE PRELIMINARY PLAT
152.30 Preapplication Meeting ..........................................................................9
152.31 Preapplication Sketch Content...............................................................9
152.32 Preapplication Plat Required..................................................................9
152.33 Application for Approval.......................................................................9
152.34 Preliminary Plat Form..........................................................................10
152.35 Preliminary Plat Contents ....................................................................10
152.36 Filing....................................................................................................11
152.37 Public Hearing .....................................................................................12
152.38 Approval of Preliminary Plat ...............................................................12
152.39 Approval Period...................................................................................12
THE FINAL PLAT
152.40 Final Plat Required ..............................................................................13
152.41 Application for Approval of the Final Plat ..........................................13
152.42 Regulations Concerning Improvements...............................................13
152.43 Final Plat Form ....................................................................................14
152.44 Final Plat Contents...............................................................................14
152.45 Supplementary Information .................................................................15
152.46 Filing....................................................................................................16
152.47 Approval of Final Plat..........................................................................16
152.48 Transmittal of Copies and Recording ..................................................16
152.49 File Copies ...........................................................................................16
152.50 Plat Void if Revised After Approval ...................................................16
152.51 Minor Subdivisions..............................................................................16
152.52 Administrative Approval of Subdivision Replats for Lot
Combinations…………………………………………………………17
ii
SECTION TITLE PAGE
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
152.55 General Statement................................................................................18
152.56 Conformity to Development Plans and Zoning ...................................18
152.57 Suitability of Land ...............................................................................18
152.58 Street Design........................................................................................18
152.59 Street Design Standards for Cul-de-sacs and
Loop Type Local Streets..............................................................19
152.60 Street Design Standards for all Local Streets
Except Cul-de-sacs and Loop Type Streets ................................19
152.61 Collector Street Design Standards .......................................................19
152.62 Official Thoroughfare Design Standards .............................................19
152.63 Horizontal Alignment ..........................................................................23
152.64 Vertical Alignment...............................................................................23
152.65 Intersection Design Standards..............................................................23
152.66 Special Street Types.............................................................................25
152.67 Streets for Commercial Subdivisions...................................................25
152.68 Streets for Industrial Subdivisions.......................................................25
152.69 Sidewalks .............................................................................................26
152.70 Blocks ..................................................................................................26
152.71 Lots ......................................................................................................26
152.72 Easements ............................................................................................27
152.73 Physical Considerations .......................................................................28
152.74 Floodplain ............................................................................................28
152.75 Public Open Spaces and Sites ..............................................................28
152.76 Park Land Dedication or Fee in Lieu of Land .....................................29
152.77 Wheelchair Ramps ...............................................................................30
REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS
152.80 Guarantee for Installation of Improvements ........................................31
152.81 Construction Procedure and Materials.................................................32
152.82 Monuments, Markers, and Pins ...........................................................32
152.83 Street Improvements ............................................................................33
152.84 Street Width .........................................................................................33
152.85 Street Subgrade ....................................................................................33
152.86 Street Base Course ...............................................................................33
152.87 Street Surface Course...........................................................................33
152.88 Portland Cement Concrete Pavement ..................................................33
152.89 Full-Depth Asphalt Pavement..............................................................33
152.90 Street Curbs and gutters .......................................................................33
152.91 Sidewalks .............................................................................................33
152.92 Driveways ............................................................................................34
152.93 Street Name Signs and Street Naming.................................................34
152.94 Street and Walkway Lighting ..............................................................34
152.95 Street Trees ..........................................................................................34
152.96 Water Supply Improvements ...............................................................34
152.97 Fire Protection......................................................................................35
152.98 Sanitary Sewer Improvements .............................................................35
iii
SECTION TITLE PAGE
152.99 Drainage Improvements.......................................................................36
152.100 Storm Sewers and Storm Water Drainage ...........................................37
152.101 Culverts and Bridges............................................................................37
152.102 Electric, Gas, and Telephone Improvements .......................................37
152.103 Over-size and Off-site Improvements..................................................38
152.104 Cost of Over-size Improvements .........................................................38
152.105 Extensions to Boundaries.....................................................................38
152.106 Off-site Extensions...............................................................................38
152.107 Final Inspection....................................................................................38
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
152.110 Flood Hazard Areas .............................................................................39
REVISIONS – ENFORCEMENT
152.130 Recording of Plat .................................................................................40
152.131 Revision of Plat After Approval ..........................................................40
152.132 Sale of Land Within Subdivisions .......................................................40
152.133 Schedule of Fees, Charges, and Expenses ...........................................40
152.134 Penalties ...............................................................................................40
152.135 Variances..............................................................................................41
152.136 Appeal ..................................................................................................41
ENACTMENT
152.140 Effective Date ......................................................................................42
TITLE, SCOPE, AND JURISDICTION
152.02 – TITLE
These regulations shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the “Subdivision Regulations of the City of West Carrollton, Ohio.” And shall hereinafter be referred to as “these regulations.”
152.03 – ADMINISTRATION
These regulations shall be administered by the City Planning Commission.
152.04 – JURISDICTION
These regulations shall be applicable to all subdivisions of land within the City. The City Planning Commission shall have the power of final approval of the plats.
152.05 – RELATION TO OTHER LAWS
The provisions of these regulations shall supplement any and all laws of the State of Ohio, ordinances of the City or any and all rules and regulations promulgated by authority of such law or ordinance relating to the purpose and scope of these regulations. Whenever the requirements of these regulations are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, or resolutions, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standard shall govern except as provided in Section 152.06 of these regulations.
152.06 – PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS ENCOURAGED; REGULTIONS MAY BE MODIFIED
The Planned Unit Development approach to development is encouraged. These regulations may be modified by the degree necessary to accomplish the objectives and standards required for the planned unit development in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance. Nothing within this section, however, shall exempt the developer from the requirements of subdivision plat approval as specified in Section 152.30 - .39 of these regulations.
152.07 – AMENDMENTS
These regulations may be amended only after public hearings and other requirements as specified in the appropriate sections of the Ohio Revised Code.
152.08 – SEPARABILITY
If, for any reason, any clause, sentence, paragraph or other part of these regulations should be decided by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect the validity of these regulations as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so held to be invalid.
- 2 -
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 152.10 - DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
A. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual.
B. The present tense includes the future tense, and the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
C. The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is a permissive requirement, and the word "should" is a preferred requirement.
D. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended", "designed", or "arranged to be used" or "occupied".
E. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel".
Alley: See Thoroughfare.
Block: A parcel of land bounded on all sides by a street or streets.
Building Line: See Setback Line.
Comprehensive Plan: See Zoning Ordinance.
Corner Lot: See Lot Types.
Covenant: A written promise or pledge.
Crosswalk: A ten (10) foot wide right-of-way, publicly owned, cutting across a block in order to provide pedestrian access to an adjacent street or property.
Cul-de-Sac: See Thoroughfare.
Culvert: A transverse drain that channels under a bridge, street, or driveway.
Dead-end Street: See Thoroughfare.
- 3 -
Density: A unit of measurement; the number of dwelling units per acre of land.
A. Gross Density - the number of dwelling units per acre of total land to be developed.
B. Net Density - the number of dwelling units per acre of land when the acreage involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses.
Density, Low Residential: Land to be utilized for residential purposes, including public housing and industrialized units, which does not exceed one (1) dwelling unit per gross acre.
Density, Medium-low Residential: Land to be utilized for residential purposes, including public housing and industrialized units, which does not exceed four (4) dwelling units per gross acre. For the purpose of street design requirements, the medium-low density residential classification shall be considered as medium density.
Density, Medium Residential: Land to be utilized for residential purposes, including public housing and industrialized units, which does not exceed nine (9) dwelling units per gross acre.
Density, Medium-high Residential: Land to be utilized for residential purposes, including public housing and industrialized units, which does not exceed fifteen (15) dwelling units per gross acre. For the purposes of street design requirements, the medium-high density residential classification shall be considered as high density.
Density, High Residential: Land to be utilized for residential purposes, including public housing and industrialized units, which does not exceed thirty-two (32) dwelling units per gross acre.
Developer: Any individual, subdivider, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under these regulations to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for another.
Dwelling Unit: See Zoning Ordinance.
Dwelling Unit, Elderly: A building occupied or constructed to be occupied by a family or families of which one spouse is over the age of 60.
Easement: Authorization by a property owner for the use of another, and for a specified purpose, or any designated part of his property.
Engineer: Any person registered to practice professional engineering by the State Board of Registration as specified in Section 4733.14 of the Ohio Revised Code.
Highway Director: The director of the Ohio Department of Transportation.
Improvements: Street pavement or resurfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, storm drains, street lights, flood control and drainage facilities, utility lines, landscaping, and other related matters normally associated with the development of raw land into building sites.
4
Location Map: See Vicinity Map.
Lot: See Zoning Ordinance.
Lot Coverage: That percent of a lot which, when viewed from directly above, would be covered by a structure or structures, or any part thereof, excluding projecting roof eaves.
Lot Frontage: See Zoning Ordinance.
Lot, Minimum Area of: See Zoning Ordinance.
Lot of Record: See Zoning Ordinance.
Lot Types: Terminology used in these regulations with reference to corner lots, interior lots, and through lots is as follows:
A. A corner lot is defined as a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
B. An interior lot is a lot other than a corner lot with only one (1) frontage on a street.
C. A through lot is a lot other than a corner lot with frontage onmore than one (1) street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as double frontage lots.
D. A reversed frontage lot is a lot on which frontage is at right angles to the general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot.
Major Thoroughfare Plan: The Comprehensive Plan adopted by the City Planning Commission indicating the general location recommended for arterial, collector, and local thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the City.
Minor Subdivision: A division of a parcel of land not within a platted subdivision that does not create an additional building lot and which is for the transfer of land between adjoining property owners.
Monuments: Permanent concrete or iron markers used to establish definitely all lines of the plat of a subdivision, including all lot corners, boundary lines and corners, and points of change in street alignment.
Open Space: An area open to the sky which may be on the same lot with a building. The area may include, along with the natural environmental features, swimming pools, tennis courts, any other recreation facilities that the Planning Commission deems permissive. Streets, structures for habitation, and the like shall not be included.
5
Out Lot: Property shown on a subdivision plat outside the boundaries of the land which is to be developed and which is to be excluded from the development of the subdivision.
Pad: A building site prepared by artificial means, including, but not limited to, grading, excavation, or filling, or any combination thereof.
Parking Space, Off-Street: See Zoning Ordinance.
Performance Bond or Surety Bond: An agreement by a subdivider or developer with the City for the amount of the estimated construction cost, guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements according to plans and specifications within the time prescribed by the subdivider's agreement. Letters of credit shall not be accepted by the City in lieu of a performance bond or surety bond.
Planned Unit Development: See Zoning Ordinance.
Planning Commission: The Planning Commission of the City of West Carrollton.
Plat: The map, drawing, or chart on which the developer's plan of subdivision (preliminary) is presented to the City Planning Commission for approval and, after such approval, to the county recorder (final) for recording.
Public Way: An alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel, ditch, easement, expressway, freeway, highway, land, parkway, right-of-way, road, sidewalk, street, subway, tunnel, viaduct, walk or other ways in which the general public or a public entity have a right, or which are dedicated, whether improved or not.
Right-of-way: A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks lighting, and drainage facilities, and may include special features (required by the topography or treatment) such as grade separation, landscaped areas, viaducts, and bridges.
Setback Line: See Zoning Ordinance.
Sewers, Central or Group: An approved sewage disposal system which provides a collection network and disposal system and central sewage treatment facility for a single development, community, or region.
Sewers, On-site: A septic tank or similar installation on any individual lot which utilizes an aerobic bacteriological process or equally satisfactory process for the elimination of sewage and provides for the proper and safe disposal of the effluent, subject to the approval of health and sanitation officials having jurisdiction.
Sidewalk: That portion of the road right-of-way outside the roadway, which is improved for the use of pedestrian traffic. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of 4 feet in width. See "Walkway".
6
Subdivider: See Developer.
Subdivision:
A. The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as contiguous units on the last preceding tax roll, into two (2) or more parcels, sites, or lots any one of which is less than five (5) acres for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, provided, however, that the division or partition of land into parcels of more than five (5) acres not involving any new streets or easements of access, and the sale or exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners, where such sale or exchange does not create additional building site, shall be exempted; or
B. The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential, commercial, or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the division or allocation of land for the opening, widening, or extension of any street or streets except private streets serving industrial structures; the division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners, occupants, or lease holders, or as easements for the extension and maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage or other public facilities. (See Minor Subdivision)
Surveyor: Any person registered in the State of Ohio to practice surveying.
Terrain Classification: Terrain within the entire area of the preliminary plat is classified as level, rolling, hilly, or hillside for street design purposes. The classifications are as follows:
A. "Level" is that land which has a cross slope range of four (4) percent or less;
B. "Rolling" is that land which has a cross slope range of more than four (4) percent but not more than eight (8) percent;
C. "Hilly" is that land which has a cross slope range of more than eight (8) percent but not more than fifteen (15) percent;
D. "Hillside" is that land which has a cross slope range of more than fifteen (15) percent.
Thoroughfare, Street or Road: The full width between property lines bounding every public way of whatever nature, with a part thereof to be used for vehicular traffic and designated as follows:
A. Alley: A minor street used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties abutting on another street.
B. Arterial Street: A general term denoting a highway primarily for through traffic, carrying heavy loads and large volume of traffic, usually on a continuous route.
7
C. Collector Street: A thoroughfare, whether within a residential, industrial, commercial, or other type of development, which primarily carries traffic from local streets to arterial streets, including the principle entrance and circulation routes within residential subdivisions.
D. Cul-de-Sac: A local street of relatively short length with one (1) end open to traffic and the other end terminating in a vehicular turnaround.
E. Dead-end Street: A street temporarily having only one (1) outlet for vehicular traffic and intended to be extended or continued in the future.
F. Local Street: A street primarily for providing access to residential, commercial, or other abutting property.
G. Loop Street: A type of local street, each end of which terminates at an intersection with the same arterial or collector street, and whose principle radius points of the one hundred and eighty (180) degree system of turns are not more than one thousand (1,000) feet from said arterial or collector street, nor normally more than six hundred (600) feet from each other.
H. Marginal Access Street: A local or collector street, parallel and adjacent to an arterial or collector street providing access to abutting properties and protection from arterial or collector streets. (also called Frontage Street)
I. Private Street: A street that is not dedicated to the City. Private streets shall be constructed to the same standards and specifications as are required for public streets.
J. Public Access Easements: An easement over private property granting to the general public the right of access, and authorizing the City to regulate traffic and enforce maintenance thereon for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare. These easements shall be constructed to the same standards and specifications as are required for public streets.
Through Lot: See Lot Types
Variance: A variance is a modification of the strict terms of the relevant regulations where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
Vicinity Map: A drawing located on the plat which sets forth by dimensions or other means the relationship of the proposed subdivision or use to other nearby developments, landmarks, community facilities and services within the area to better locate and orient the area in question.
8
Walkway: A dedicated public way, four (4) feet or more in width, for pedestrian use only, whether along the side of a road or not.
Watershed: The drainage basin in which the subdivision drains or that land whose drainage is affected by the subdivision.
Yard: See Zoning Ordinance.
9
THE PRELIMINARY PLAT
152.30 - PREAPPLICATION MEETING
The subdivider is encouraged to meet with the City Planning Commission or its designated representative prior to submitting the preliminary plat. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss early and informally the purpose and effect of these regulations and the criteria and standards contained therein, and to familiarize the developer with the Comprehensive Plan, the Major Thoroughfare Plan, the Parks and Open Space Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, and the drainage, sewerage, and water systems for the City of West Carrollton, Ohio.
152.31 - PREAPPLICATION SKETCH CONTENT
The subdivider may submit to the City Planning Commission a sketch plan, legibly drawn at a suitable scale and containing the following information:
A. The proposed subdivision in relation to existing community facilities, thoroughfares, and other transportation modes, shopping centers, manufacturing establishments, residential developments and existing natural and man-made features such as soil types, vegetation, contours, and utilities in the neighboring area.
B. The layout and acreage of streets, lots, and any non-residential sites such as commercial, manufacturing, school or recreational uses within the proposed subdivision.
C. The location of utilities in the proposed subdivision, if available, or of the locations of the nearest sources for water and public facilities for the disposal of sewage and storm water.
D. The scale and title of the subdivision, and north arrow, and the date.
E. Name, address, and phone number of owners and developer.
152.32 - PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIRED
The subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision which shall conform with the requirements set forth in Sections 152.33 to .39 inclusive. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a qualified registered engineer or surveyor.
152.33 - APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL
An application in writing for the approval of the preliminary plat, five (5) copies of the preliminary plat, and the supplementary information specified in Sections 152.34 to l52.36 inclusive, and the appropriate fee shall be submitted to the City Planning Commission.
10
152.34 - PRELIMINARY PLAT FORM
The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch.
152.35 - PRELIMINARY PLAT CONTENTS
A. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information:
1. Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in the City.
2. Location by section, range, and township or other surveys.
3. Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner, subdivider, and professional engineer and registered surveyor who prepared the plant, and the appropriate registration numbers and seals.
4. Date of survey.
5. Scale of the plat, north point.
6. Boundaries of the subdivision and its acreage.
7. Names of adjacent subdivisions, owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land, and the location of their boundary lines.
8. Locations, widths, and names of existing streets, railroad rights-of-way, easements, parks, permanent buildings, and corporation and township lines; location of wooded areas and other significant topographic and natural features within and adjacent to the plat for a minimum distance of two hundred (200) feet.
9. Zoning classification of the tract and adjoining properties and a description of proposed zoning changes, if any.
10. Existing contours at an interval of not greater than two (2) feet if the slope of the ground is ten (10) percent or less; and not greater than five (5) feet where the slope is more than (10) percent.
11. Existing sewers, water lines, culverts and other underground structures, and power transmission poles and lines, within and adjacent to the tract.
12. Proposed location, names, and widths of streets and easements.
13. Building setback lines with dimensions.
11
14. Location and dimensions of all proposed utility and sewer lines, showing their connections with the existing system.
15. All thoroughfares as shown on the Major Thoroughfare Plan wherever they traverse the plat.
16. Layout, numbers, and approximate dimensions of each lot. When a lot is located on a curved street or when side lot lines are not at ninety (90) degree angles, the width at the property line shall be as shown.
17. Parcels of land in acres to be reserved for public use or to be reserved by covenant for residents of the subdivision.
18. A vicinity map at a scale of not less than one thousand (1,000) feet to the inch shall be shown on, or accompany, the preliminary plat. This map shall show all existing subdivisions, roads, and tract lines and the nearest existing thoroughfares. It shall also show the most advantageous connections between the roads in the proposed subdivisions and those of the neighboring areas.
19. All pages of the plan should be numbered and the cover page should contain the proposed name and an index of pages.
B. The following information shall be supplied in addition to the requirements in Section 152.35 (A):
1. Statement of proposed use of lots, giving type and number of dwelling units and type of business or industry.
2. Location and approximate dimensions of all existing buildings.
3. For commercial and industrial development, the location, dimensions, and approximate grade of proposed parking and loading areas, alleys, pedestrian walks, streets, and the points of vehicular ingress and egress to the development.
4. Description of proposed covenants and restrictions.
5. In a letter accompanying the request for approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall state the type of sewage disposal he proposed to use.
152.36 - FILING
The preliminary plat shall be considered officially filed on the day it is received by the City Planning Commission and shall be so dated. A filing fee shall be charged, as indicated in Section 152.132.
12
152.37 - PUBLIC HEARING
The City Planning Commission on its own initiative or upon petition by a citizen or a neighboring property owner may, prior to acting on a preliminary plat of a subdivision, hold a public hearing thereon at such time and upon such notice as the Commission may designate.
152.38 - APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
The City Planning Commission shall forward copies of the preliminary plat to such officials and agencies as may be necessary for the purpose of study and recommendation. These shall include at least the City Engineer and the City Utilities Department. After receipt of reports from such officials and agencies, the City Planning Commission shall determine whether the preliminary plat shall be approved, approved with modifications or disapproved. If a plat is disapproved, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in writing. The City Planning Commission shall act on the preliminary plat within thirty (30) days after filing unless such time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. When a preliminary plat has been approved by the City Planning Commission, the chairman shall sign all copies and return one (1) to the subdivider for compliance with final approval requirements. Approval of the preliminary plat shall be conditional upon compliance with all other applicable statutes and ordinances of the City.
152.39 - APPROVAL PERIOD
The preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of twelve (12) months. Approval of a final plat for a section shall extend the approval period for an additional twelve (12) months.
13
THE FINAL PLAT
152.40 - FINAL PLAT REQUIRED
The subdivider, having received approval of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, shall submit a final plat of the subdivision and drawings and specifications of the improvements required therein. The final plat shall have incorporated all changes in the preliminary plat required by the Planning Commission. Otherwise it shall conform to the preliminary plat, and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at that time. The final plat and the supplementary information shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer or registered surveyor.
152.41 - APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF THE FINAL PLAT
Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted to the Commission. This application shall consist of a completed form as provided by the Commission, copies of the plat, supplementary information and the appropriate fee.
152.42 - REGULATIONS CONCERNING IMPROVEMENTS
The following rules apply to subdivision improvements and performance guarantees:
A. The final plat drawings and specifications of improvements shall be a set of construction drawings, general block grading plans, utility plans prepared by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Ohio.
B. The plans shall indicate typical sections, plans and profile views, construction details and estimates of quantities. All typical sections and major engineering details to be used on any particular street shall be approved in advance by the City Engineer before completion of the plans.
C. Prior to the granting of approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall have installed the minimum required improvements, or shall have furnished a surety certified check or bond, for the amount of the estimated construction cost of the ultimate installation.
D. Before the surety is accepted, it shall be approved by the proper administrative officials.
E. The improvements shall be constructed within a reasonable time as determined by the City Engineer, but not to exceed two (2) years. If not developed within two (2) years, an extension may be granted or the surety check or bond will be forfeited.
14
F. All required subdivision improvements shall be maintained in a satisfactory condition by the subdivider during any interim period between this construction and final approval and acceptance by the City.
G The City Council may release not more than ninety (90) percent of the amount of the surety upon the completion of a portion of the subdivision improvements prior to final acceptance of the subdivision. The amount of the remaining surety is to be negotiated and is contingent upon the amount and quality of installed improvements.
152.43 - FINAL PLAT FORM
The final plat shall be legibly drawn in waterproof ink on tracing cloth or other material of equal permanence. It shall be drawn at a scale not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, and shall be one or more sheets 24 x 36 inches in size. If more than one (1) sheet is needed, each sheet shall be numbered and the relation of one sheet to another clearly shown.
152.44 - FINAL PLAT CONTENTS
The final plat shall contain the following information:
A. Name of the subdivision, location by section, range and township, or by other survey number; date, north point, scale, and acreage to hundredths of acre, and deed book and page reference (or microfiche number).
B. Name and address of the subdividers, and the registered professional engineer and/or registered surveyor who prepared the plat and the appropriate registration numbers and seals.
C. Plat boundaries, based on accurate traverse, with angular and lineal dimensions. All dimensions, both lineal and angular shall be determined by an accurate control survey in the field which must balance and close within the limit of one in ten thousand (10,000).
D. Bearings and distances to nearest established street lines or other recognized permanent monuments.
E. Exact location, rights-of-way, and names of all streets within and adjoining the plat, and building setback lines.
F. Radii, internal angles, points of curvature, tangent bearings, lengths of arcs, of all applicable streets within the plat area.
G. All easements and rights-of-way provided for public services or utilities.
H. All lot numbers and lines with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths. When lots are located on a curve, the lot width at the building setback line shall be shown.
15
I. Accurate location and description of all monuments and pins.
J. Accurate outlines of areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, or any area to be reserved for the common use of all property owners. The use and accurate boundary locations shall be shown for each parcel of land to be dedicated.
K. All restrictions and covenants shall be shown on the final plat.
L. Certification by a registered surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him and that the monuments shown thereon exist as located and that all dimension details are correct.
M. Acknowledgement of the owner or owners to the plat and restrictions, including dedications to public use of all streets, alleys, parks or other open spaces shown thereon and the granting of required easements, as shall be indicated by the following statement on the plat tracing: "Easements shown on this plat are for the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, replacement or removal of water, gas, sewer, electric, telephone or other utilities or services, and for the express privilege of removing any and all trees or other obstructions to the free use of said utilities and for providing of ingress and egress to the property for said purposes, and are to be maintained as such forever".
N. The names of record of all abutting tracts with their deed book and page reference (or microfiche number) and the plat book reference of all abutting plats.
O. All section lines, corporation limits, township and county lines shall be accurately documented and located on the plat and their names entered thereon.
P. Above the space provided for the signatures of the Commission's Chairman and Secretary, the following sentences shall be provided: "Approved this ___________________ day of _______________, 20______ by the Planning Commission of the City of West Carrollton, Ohio. If not recorded by the _________________ day of __________________, 20____, this approval shall be null and void."
152.45 - SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
The following information shall be supplied in addition to the requirements in Section 152.44:
A. If a zoning change is involved, certification from the Zoning Inspector shall be required indicating that the change has been approved and is in effect.
B. Certification shall be required showing that all required improvements have been either installed and approved by the proper officials or agencies, or that a bond or other surety has been furnished assuring the installation and initial maintenance of the required improvements.
16
152.46 - FILING
The final plat shall be filed with the Planning Commission not later than twelve (12) months after the date of approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise the preliminary plat will be considered void unless an extension is requested by the developer and granted in writing by the Planning Commission.
152.47 - APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT
The Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat within thirty (30) days after it has been filed. Failure of the Commission to act upon the final plat within such time shall be deemed as approval of the plat. If the plat is disapproved, the grounds for the disapproval shall be stated in the records of the Commission and a copy of said record shall be forwarded to the subdivider.
152.48 - TRANSMITTAL OF COPIES AND RECORDING
When the final plat has been approved by the Planning Commission, the original tracing shall be returned to the subdivider, for filing with the County Recorder after all necessary certificates are received. The plat shall be recorded within sixty (60) days of Commission approval. Plats not so recorded within sixty (60) days of Commission approval shall become void and must be resubmitted for Commission approval.
152.49 - FILE COPIES
The subdivider shall submit one reproducible tracing and two (2) prints of the final plat to the Community Development Department within thirty (30) days after recording the plat. No building permits shall be issued until this requirement is satisfied.
152.50 - PLAT VOID IF REVISED AFTER APPROVAL
No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any Record Plan after approval has been given by the Planning Commission. All revisions will require Commission approval. In the event that any such Record Plan is recorded without complying with this requirement, the same shall be considered null and void and the Commission shall institute proceedings to have the Plan stricken from the records of the County Recorder.
152.51 - MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
Approval without a plat of a minor subdivision may be granted by the properly designated representative of the Planning Commission if the proposed division of a parcel of land meets all of the following conditions:
A. The proposed subdivision is located along an existing public road and involves no opening, widening, or extension of any street or road.
B. The proposed parcel division does not create an additional building lot.
C. The property is not located within a platted subdivision.
17
D. The proposed subdivision is not contrary to applicable subdivision or zoning regulations.
E. The property has been surveyed and a survey sheet on a Montgomery County Surveyors Record and legal description of the property is submitted with the application.
F. If the subdivision cannot be served by public sewer and water, approval by the Montgomery County Combined General Health District shall be submitted. If the subdivision can be served by public sewer and water, a statement shall be submitted from the proper authority that the tap-in is permitted.
G. Approval by Montgomery County that all County requirements for instruments of conveyance are met.
If approval is given under these provisions, the Commission's representative shall approve such proposed division and, upon presentation of a conveyance for said parcel, shall stamp "No Plat Required: Approved by the City of West Carrollton" and the authorized representative of the Commission shall sign the conveyance. The Commission's designated representative may refer any minor subdivision to the Planning Commission for their action in cases where there are any special or unusual conditions.
152.52 – ADMININISTRATIVE APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION REPLATS FOR LOT
COMBINATION
The designated representative of the Planning Commission may approve on behalf of the Planning Commission subdivision replats within platted subdivisions where no additional building lots are created if the proposal meets all of the following conditions:
A. Administrative approval shall only be granted for re-combinations of land and consolidation of lots. In no case shall administrative approval be granted where additional building lots would be created.
B. Submission of a Final Subdivision Plat as required by these regulations.
C. Review and approval by appropriate agencies shall be conducted and the proposed replat shall be in conformance with all applicable zoning and subdivision regulations.
D. If all requirements are met, the designated representative of the Planning Commission shall approve and sign the subdivision replat on behalf of the Planning Commission.
E. The designated representative of the Planning Commission may refer any subdivision replat for lot combination to the Planning Commission for their action in cases where there are any special or unusual conditions.
18
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
152.55 - GENERAL STATEMENT
The regulations in Sections 152.56 to 152.76, inclusive, shall control the manner in which streets, lots, and other elements of a subdivision are arranged on the land. These design controls shall help insure convenient and safe streets, creation of useable lots, provision of space for public utilities, and reservation of land for recreational uses. The planning of attractive and functional neighborhoods shall be promoted, minimizing the undesirable features of unplanned, haphazard growth.
The Planning Commission has the responsibility for reviewing the design of each future subdivision early in its design development. The Commission shall insure that all of the requirements of Sections 152.56 to 152.76, inclusive, are met.
152.56 - CONFORMITY TO DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND ZONING
The arrangement, character, width, and location of all thoroughfares or extensions thereof shall conform with the City's Major Thoroughfare Plan. Thoroughfares not contained in the aforementioned plan shall conform to the recommendation of the Planning Commission based upon the design standards set forth in Sections 152.57 to 152.68, inclusive. In addition, no final plat of land within the area in which an existing zoning ordinance is in effect shall be approved unless it conforms with such ordinance.
152.57 - SUITABILITY OF LAND
If the Planning Commission finds that the land proposed to be subdivided is unsuitable for subdivision development due to flooding, bad drainage, topography, inadequate water supply, and other such conditions which may endanger health, life, or property; and, if from investigations conducted by the public agencies concerned, it is determined that in the best interest of the public the land should not be developed for the purpose proposed, the Commission shall not approve the land for subdivision unless adequate methods are advanced by the subdivider for solving the problems that will be created by the development of the land.
152.58 - STREET DESIGN
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade construction, and location of all streets shall conform to the Major Thoroughfare Plan for the City of West Carrollton, or subsequent amendments thereto, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, and public convenience and safety; and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. The street pattern shall discourage through traffic in the interior of a subdivision. The subdivider shall provide within the boundaries of the subdivision plat the necessary right-of-way for the widening, continuance, or alignment of such streets in conformity with the Major Thoroughfare Plan.
19
152.59 - STREET DESIGN STANDARDS FOR CUL-DE-SACS AND LOOP TYPE LOCAL STREETS
The design and improvement standards contained herein are minimums for cul-de-sacs and loop type local streets in residential subdivisions. All such streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with standards as specified in Table l.
152.60 - STREET DESIGN STANDARDS FOR ALL LOCAL STREETS EXCEPT CUL-DE-
SACS AND LOOP TYPE STREETS
The design and improvement standards contained herein are minimums for all local type streets, except cul-de-sacs and loop type streets, in residential subdivisions. All such streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards as specified in Table 2.
152.61 - COLLECTOR STREET DESIGN STANDARDS
The design and improvement standards contained herein are minimums for all collector streets. All such streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards as specified in Table 3.
152.62 - OFFICIAL THOROUGHFARE DESIGN STANDARDS
A. The design standards of and the required improvements to arterial streets and roads are contained in Table 4. Construction design criteria on these streets are not specified in these regulations but are to be determined by the City Engineer when and if such a street abuts or crosses the proposed subdivision. Certain improvements may be waived after review and approval by the Planning Commission. In all cases right-of-way dedications shall be required
B. The subdivider shall be responsible for all required improvements, including the required pavement width measured back to back of curb on an undivided street. On a divided street, the subdivider shall be responsible for the sidewalk, one curb, one-half (l/2) of the required pavement measured from back of curb to back of curb and storm drainage.
C. When developing along one side of an existing street or roadway which is included in the Major Thoroughfare Plan, the subdivider shall be responsible for one (1) sidewalk, one (1) curb, pavement widening to thoroughfare width of his side, all necessary adjustments to existing pavement, and storm drainage for the street in accordance with an agreement with the City. Where sight distance or other engineering requirements make it imperative, the pavement adjustment responsibility shall include the replacement up to the entire existing pavement.
D. Where marginal access streets are used to provide access to major arterials, improvements on those thoroughfares will be waived
20
TABLE 1
STREET DESIGN STANDARDS FOR CUL-DE-SACS AND LOOP TYPE LOCAL STREETS
TERRAIN CLASSIFICATION
LEVEL
ROLLING
HILLY
Development Density
Low
Med
High
Low
Med
High
Low
Med
High
Right-of-way (ft.)
50
60
60
50
60
60
50
60
60
Pavement width (ft.)*
30
41
41
30
41
41
30
41
41
Sidewalk width (ft.)
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Minimum Stopping Distance (ft.)
200
200
200
150
150
150
150
150
150
Maximum Grade
4%
4%
4%
8%
8%
8%
12%
12%
12%
Maximum Cul-de-Sac Length
700
500
500
600
500
500
500
500
500
Minimum Cul-de-Sac Radius
(ROW)
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
Minimum Cul-de-Sac Radius
(Pavement)
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
40
Minimum Centerline Radius of
Streets with an Angle turn of:
(1) 80 to 100
125
125
125
125
125
125
125
125
125
(2) Less than 80 or more than
100
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
*Pavement width from back of curb to back of curb
21
TABLE 2
STREET DESIGN STANDARDS FOR ALL LOCAL STREETS AND PUBLIC ACCESS
EASEMENTS EXCEPT CUL-DE-SACS AND LOOP TYPE STREETS
TERRAIN CLASSIFICATION
LEVEL
ROLLING
HILLY
Development Density
Low
Med
High
Low
Med
High
Low
Med
High
Right-of-way (ft.)
50
60
60
50
60
60
50
60
60
Pavement width (ft.)*
30
41
41
30
41
41
30
41
41
Sidewalk width (ft.)
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Minimum Stopping
Sight Distance
200
200
200
150
150
150
150
150
150
Maximum Grade
4%
4%
4%
8%
8%
8%
12%
12%
12%
Minimum Centerline Radium of
Streets with an Angle of Turn of:
(1) 80 to 100
125
125
125
125
125
125
125
125
125
(2) Less than 80 or more than
100
200
200
200
200
200
200
150
150
150
*Pavement width from back of curb to back of curb
NOTE: Exceptions to the standards contained in this table are permitted under certain
conditions for large lots.
22
TABLE 3
COLLECTOR STREET DESIGN STANDARDS
TERRAIN CLASSIFICATION
LEVEL
ROLLING
HILLY
Development Density
Low
Med
High
Low
Med
High
Low
Med
High
Right-of-way (ft.)
60
60
66
60
60
66
60
60
66
Pavement width (ft.)*
41
41
45
41
41
45
41
41
45
Sidewalk width (ft.)
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
Minimum Stopping
Sight Distance
250
250
250
200
200
200
150
150
150
Maximum Grade
4%
4%
4%
8%
8%
8%
10%
10%
10%
Minimum Spacing when Intersection with Arterial
1320
1320
1320
1320
1320
1320
1320
1320
1320
Minimum Centerline Radius
350
350
350
230
130
130
150
150
150
TABLE 4
THOROUGHFARE STREET DESIGN STANDARDS
R/W
WIDTH (ft.)
Sidewalks
(ft.)
Planting
Strip (ft.)
Median
(ft.)
Pavement
Width (ft.)
70
5
8
None
44
82
5
5
14
48
90
5
9
14
48
120
5
12
14
72
23
152.63 - HORIZONTAL ALIGNMENT
When there is an angle of deflection of more than ten (10) degrees between two (2) centerline tangent sections of a street, a curve of adequate radius shall connect them (see Sections l52.59 to l52.62 inclusive). Between reverse curves, a minimum tangent of fifty (50) feet shall be introduced.
152.64 - VERTICAL ALIGNMENT
All changes of grade shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length in feet equal to twenty (20) times the algebraic difference in the rate of grade for arterials and industrial streets; for collector and local streets, fifteen (15) times.
A. Minimum vertical visibility shall conformto the Ohio Department of Transportation regulations in effect on the date of the approval of the preliminary plat.
B. No street grade shall be less than 0.5 percent and on stop streets grade shall not exceed 2 percent positive or 3 percent negative within one hundred (100) feet of an intersection unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
152.65 - INTERSECTION DESIGN STANDARDS
A. The design and improvement standards for intersections are suggested minimums for all street intersections in subdivisions. All such intersections shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards as specified in Table 5.
B. Multiple intersections involving junctions of more than two (2) streets shall be avoided.
C. Four-way intersections of local streets should be avoided and three-way or T-intersections should be encouraged wherever possible.
D. Individual grades for each curb shall be provided on a stop street when the grade on the through street exceeds two (2) percent.
E. Low points which would result in water ponding or poor visibility shall not be permitted.
24
TABLE 5
INTERSECTION DESIGN STANDARDS
TERRAIN CLASSIFICATION
LEVEL
ROLLING
HILLY
Maximum Approach Speed (MPH)
25
25
25
Clear sight distance (ft.)
(Length along each approach leg)
90
90
70
Minimum of Angle of Intersection
Streets shall remain in the angle of
Intersection for at least 100 feet
Beyond the point of intersection.
75º (90º preferred)
Minimum Curb Radius (ft.)
a. Local – Local
b. Local – Collector
c. Collector – Collector
d. Collector, marginal access - arterial
25
25
30
35
25
25
30
35
25
25
30
35
Minimum Centerline, offset of
Adjacent intersections (ft.)
a. Local – Local
b. Local – Collector
c. Collector – Collector
d. Collector, marginal access - arterial
150
200
300
1320
150
200
300
1320
150
200
300
1320
25
152.66 - SPECIAL STREET TYPES
The following requirements shall apply to special street types.
A. Permanent dead-end streets shall not be permitted. Temporary deadend streets shall be permitted only as part of a continuing street plan.
B. Dedication of new half-streets shall not be permitted. Where a dedicated or platted half-street exists adjacent to the tract being subdivided, the other half of said half-street shall be platted.
C. Where a subdivision abutts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the Planning Commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, or other such treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. There shall be no direct vehicular access from residential lots to such arterial streets or highways.
D. Alleys shall not be approved in residential subdivisions except where justified by extreme conditions. Alleys may be required in commercial and industrial districts if other provisions cannot be made for adequate service access. The minimum widths for alleys shall be twenty (20) feet for the right-of-way and twenty (20) feet for the pavement width.
152.67 - STREETS FOR COMMERCIAL SUBDIVISIONS
Streets serving business developments and accessory parking areas shall be planned to connect with arterial streets so as not to generate traffic on local streets. The intersections of driveways from parking areas with arterial or collector streets shall be located so as to cause the least possible interference with traffic movement on the streets, and shall be located not less than one hundred (100) feet from the intersection of an arterial or collector street with any other street, and shall be spaced not less than two hundred (200) feet from each other. The Commission may require marginal access streets to provide maximum safety and convenience.
152.68 - STREETS FOR INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISIONS
Collector streets for industrial subdivisions shall be planned to serve industrial areas exclusively and shall connect with arterial streets so that no industrial traffic will be directed into any residential streets. The intersections of service streets from parking areas with arterial or collector streets shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet from the intersection of the arterial or collector street with any other street.
Streets shall be planned to be extended to the boundaries of any adjoining land planned for industry, except for severe physical conditions or if the Commission finds such extension is not in accord with the approved plan of the area.
26
152.69 - SIDEWALKS
A. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of a street in all residential subdivisions. Sidewalks shall be required to be constructed along secondary or main highways as indicated in the Major Thoroughfare Plan and these regulations.
B. Public sidewalks shall be required for all commercial lots.
C. The Planning Commission may waive public sidewalks for industrial lots.
152.70 - BLOCKS
The following regulations shall govern the design and layout of blocks:
A. The arrangement of blocks shall be such as to conform to the street planning criteria set forth in Sections 152.58 to 152.69 inclusive, and shall be arranged to accommodate lots and building sites of the size and character required for the district as set forth in these subdivision regulations or the Zoning Ordinance and to provide for the required community facilities.
B. Irregularly shaped blocks, those intended for cul-de-sacs or loop streets, and those containing interior parks or playgrounds, may be approved by the Commission if properly designed and located and if the maintenance of interior public spaces is covered by agreements.
C. No block shall be longer than fifteen hundred (1,500) feet and the block width shall accommodate two (2) tiers of lots, except where unusual topography or other exceptional physical circumstances exist.
D. Where blocks are over nine hundred (900) feet in length a crosswalk easement not less than ten (10) feet in width at or near the halfway point may be required, if necessary, to provide proper access to schools, recreational areas, shopping centers, and other facilities.
152.71 - LOTS
The following regulations shall govern the design and layout of lots:
A. The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will provide satisfactory building sites, properly related to topography and the character of the surrounding development.
B. Each lot shall have its full frontage on a dedicated street or public access easement. The minimum lot sizes and frontage shall be as specified in the Zoning Ordinance. Where soil conditions are of such nature that proper operation of wells and septic tanks may be impaired, the Planning Commission may increase the size of any or all lots in the subdivision above the minimum required by the Zoning Ordinance.
27
C. All side lots lines shall be at right angles to street lines and radial to curved street lines, except where the Commission determines that a variation to this rule would provide a better layout.
D. Lots with double frontage shall be avoided except where the Commission determines that it is essential to provide separation of residential development from arterial streets.
E. No corner lot shall have a width at the building of less than seventy-five (75) feet.
F. The maximum depth of a lot shall not be greater than three times the width of the lot, except lots which contain an area of five (5) acres or more. Lots containing over five (5) acres shall not be less than three hundred (300) feet in width at any location; they should be of such shape and dimensions as to render the possible subdivision of any such parcels at some later date into lots and streets which meet the requirements of these regulations.
G. Fifty (50) feet of additional lot depth may be required where a residential lot in a subdivision backs up to a railroad right-of-way, a high pressure gasoline or gas line, open draining ditch, arterial street, an industrial area or other existing land use which may have a detrimental effect on the residential use of the property, and where no street is provided at the rear of such lot. Where a residential lot has its side lot line adjacent to any of the aforementioned an appropriate additional width may also be required.
152.72 - EASEMENTS
A. Utility Easements: Public utility easements at least ten (10) feet in total width split between abutting lots may be required along the rear and sides of lots where needed for the accommodation of a public utility, drainage or sanitary structures or any combination of the foregoing. Where deemed necessary by the Planning Commission an additional easement width shall be provided.
B. Watercourses: The subdivider shall dedicate rights-of-way or provide easements for storm drainage purposes which conform substantially with the lines of any natural watercourses, channels, streams, or creeks which traverse the subdivision or for any new channel which is established to substitute for a natural watercourse, channel, stream, or creek. Such rights-of-way or easements shall be of a width which will provide for the maintenance of the channel and incidental structures as determined by the Planning Commission.
28
152.73 - PHYSICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Natural Land Uses: Subdivisions should be planned to take advantage of the topography of the land, to economize in the construction of drainage facilities, to reduce the amount of danger, to minimize the destruction of trees and topsoil and to preserve such natural features as watercourses, unusual rock formations, large trees, sites for historical significance and other assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the subdivision and the community.
152.74 - FLOODPLAIN
A. As a safety measure for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, the Planning Commission shall not approve any subdivision located in areas subject to periodic flooding. If the subdivision is located in said area or an area having other physical impairment, the Commission may approve the subdivision provided the developer or subdivider agrees to perform such improvements as will render the area substantially safe for residential, commercial or industrial uses; and further, provide that in lieu of the improvements, the subdivider shall furnish a surety bond or a certified check covering the estimated cost of such improvements. Prior to acting on a proposed subdivision located in a flood plain, the Commission shall secure the advice of the Miami Conservancy District.
B. Street Easement: If a stream flows through, or adjacent to, the proposed subdivision, the plat shall provide for a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way along the stream for a floodway of at least ten (10) feet. For the smaller streams, the plat shall provide for channel improvement to enable them to carry all reasonable floods within banks. The floodway easement shall be wide enough for future enlargement of the stream channels as adjacent areas become more highly developed and runoff rates are increased.
C. Streets: Approval shall not be given for streets within a subdivision which would be subject to flooding. All streets must be located at elevations which will make them flood free in order that no portion of the subdivision would become isolated by floods.
152.75 - PUBLIC OPEN SPACES AND SITES
Where a park, playground, school, or public access to water frontage which is shown in the Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part in the proposed subdivision, the Commission shall request the dedication of such area within the subdivision. The subdivider shall pay for only that portion of the cost of the public site that benefits his subdivision as determined by the Commission. The Commission shall wherever possible establish the preservation of all natural features which add value to residential developments and to the community, such as large wooded areas, water courses, beaches, areas of historical significance and similar irreplaceable assets.
29
152.76 - PARK LAND DEDICATION OR FEE IN LIEU OF LAND
For the purpose of providing parks, playground, or other recreational areas, the Commission shall require that land be dedicated or a fee in lieu of land be paid. The Commission shall make the decision as to the appropriate method of providing parks.
A. Park Land Dedication - Land dedicated for park purposes shall be based on the criteria of providing 2.5 acres of neighborhood parks for each 1,000 population. The procedure for the land dedication shall be:
1. Procedure - The Planning Commission shall refer any subdivision proposed to contain a dedicated park to the Parks and Recreation Board for a recommendation. All land to be reserved for dedication to West Carrollton for park purposes shall have prior approval of the City Council and shall be marked on the plat "Reserved for Park and/or Recreation Purposes".
2. The Amount of Land Dedicated - The number of acres to be reserved shall be determined by multiplying the number of lots created for single family houses by .008. For multi-family residential developments the number of units permitted by the Zoning Ordinance shall be multiplied by .008 to determine the acreage required for parks
3. Park Sites - Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of a character and location suitable for use as a playground, playfield, or other recreation purposes, and shall be relatively level and dry; and shall be improved by the developer to the standards required by the Planning Commission, which improvements shall be included in the performance bond. A recreation site shall have a total frontage on one or more streets of at least two hundred (200) feet, and no other dimension of the site shall be less than two hundred (200 in depth.
4. Minimum Size - In general, land reserved for recreation purposes shall have an area of at least two (2) acres. When less than two (2) acres are created, the commission may require that the recreation area be located at a suitable place on the edge of the subdivision so that additional land may be added at such time as the adjacent land is subdivided. In no case shall an area of less than one (1) acre be reserved for recreation purposes if it will be impractical or impossible to secure additional lands in order to increase its area.
B. Money in Lieu of Land - In subdivisions where the Commission has determined that it is not feasible or practical to dedicate land, a fee in lieu of land shall be paid to the City. This fee shall be equal to one-half of one percent of the estimated cost of construction, to be paid on each building permit issued for the construction of a residential building.
30
C. Applicability to Planned Unit Developments Residential - Planned Unit Developments shall not be exempt from the provisions of this section, except as to such portion of land which is actually dedicated to the City for park and recreation purposes. If no further area, other than the area to be reserved as required by the Zoning Ordinance, is required by the Planning Commission, the full fee shall be paid as required in 152.76 (B).
D. Other Recreation Reservations - The provisions of this section are minimum standards. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a developer from reserving other land for recreation purposes in addition to the requirements of this section.
152.77 - WHEELCHAIR RAMPS
Wheelchair ramps shall be provided at all corners and where required walkways intersect with streets.
31
REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS
152.80 - GUARANTEE FOR INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
A. In order that the City has the assurance that the construction and installation of such improvements as street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, public sanitary sewers, public water supply and street signs will be constructed, the subdivider shall enter into one of the following agreements:
1. To construct all improvements directly affecting the subdivision, as required by the City prior to the final approval of the plat; or,
2. In lieu of the completion of the improvements, furnish a bond executed by a surety company, letter of credit or certified check equal to the cost of construction of such improvements as shown on plans, and based on an estimate approved by the City Engineer.
B. Before the final plan is given final approval, the developer shall have executed a subdivider's contract and a performance bond, letter of credit or certified check with the City covering the estimated cost of required improvements. Letters of credit shall not permit draws by the developer without the express approval of the City.
The performance bond, letter of credit or cash deposit shall run to the City and shall provide that the subdivider, his heirs, successors and assigns, their agent or servants, will comply with all applicable terms, conditions, provisions and requirements of these regulations, and will faithfully perform and complete the work of constructing and installing such facilities or improvements in accordance with such laws and regulations, and that the work will be completed within two (2) years from the date of execution, but the bond or letter of credit will run indefinitely until released by the City.
C. If the construction or installation of any improvement or facility, for which guarantee has been made by the developer in the form of a bond, letter of credit or cash deposit, is not completed within two (2) years from the date of final approval of the record plan, the developer may request the City to grant an extension of six (6) months, provided he can show reasonable cause for inability to complete said improvements within the required two (2) years. The extension shall not exceed six (6) months. At the expiration of the six (6) month extension, the City will use as much of the bond, letter of credit or cash deposit as necessary to complete the construction of the improvements.
D. As required improvements are completed, approved, and accepted, the City Council, with the concurrence of the City Engineer, may reduce the amount of the performance bond, letter of credit or cash deposit.
32
E. Periodic inspections during the installation of improvements shall be made by the City to insure conformity with the approved plans and specifications as required by these regulations.
The subdivider shall notify proper administrative officials at least twenty-four (24) hours before each phase of the improvements is ready for inspections.
The absence of an inspector from a plat during construction shall not relieve the subdivider from full responsibility under this agreement. Upon acceptable completion of installation of the required improvements, the City Manager shall issue a letter to the subdivider or his agent and such letter shall be sufficient evidence for the release by the City.
F. When the proper administrative officials, following final inspection of a subdivision, certify to the City Council that all improvements have been constructed in accordance with City specifications, the City Council may proceed to accept the facilities for which bond, letter of credit or cash deposit has been posted.
G. Whenever public improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the agreement and with specifications as established, the City Council may exercise its rights of foreclosure under the bond, letter of credit or cash deposit.
152.81 - CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURE AND MATERIALS
The subdivider shall design and construct improvements not less than the standards outlined in the Standard Drawing and Montgomery County Specifications and these regulations. The work shall be done under City supervision and inspection and shall be completed within the time fixed or agreed upon by the City. The minimum requirements for materials shall be in accordance with the standards of the then current or as subsequently amended volume of "Construction and Material Specifications" of the State of Ohio Department of Transportation and the requirements of the Ohio E.P.A. All inspection costs shall be paid for by the subdivider.
152.82 - MONUMENTS, MARKERS AND PINS
Permanent concrete monuments shall be accurately set and established at the intersection of all outside boundary lines of the subdivision; at the intersection of those boundary lines with all street lines; at the beginning and end of all curves; at points on the curve where the radius or direction changes; and at such other points as are necessary to establish definitely all lines of the plat, including all corners. Stone or concrete monuments shall be at least thirty-six (36) inches long and at least six (6) inches in diameter, and shall be provided with an appropriate center point. Solid iron pins or iron pipe monuments at least three-quarters (3/4) inch in diameter and at least thirty (30) inches long shall be set at the corners of all lots. All required monuments, markers, and pins shall be in place prior to the release of the performance bond.
33
152.83 - STREET IMPROVEMENTS
All streets shall be graded to their full width, including side slopes, and improved in conformance with the standards given or referred to in these regulations.
152.84 - STREET WIDTH
Minimum street pavement widths shall conform to the standards given in Section 152.59 to 152.62 inclusive.
152.85 - STREET SUBGRADE
The subgrade shall be free of sod, vegetative or organic matter, soft clay, and other objectionable materials for a depth of at least two (2) feet below the finished surface. The subgrade shall be properly rolled, shaped, and compacted, and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
152.86 - STREET BASE COURSE
The street base course shall conform to the Standard Drawings.
152.87 - STREET SURFACE COURSE
Upon the expiration of the established maintenance period for the base course, the surface course shall be constructed using either asphaltic concrete, bituminous mix, or Portland cement concrete. Specific material and thickness recommendations are stated in the Standard Drawings.
152.88 - PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT
If the subdivider elects to construct streets totally out of Portland cement concrete or if such pavement is required by the City Engineer, the design shall conform to the Standard Drawings.
152.89 - FULL-DEPTH ASPHALT PAVEMENT
If streets are to be constructed out of "full-depth" asphalt, the design shall conform to the Standard Drawings.
152.90 - STREET CURBS AND GUTTERS
Curb or combined curb and gutter shall be constructed along all streets according to the Standard Drawings
152.91 - SIDEWALKS
All sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete or other acceptable material to the minimum width specified in Sections 152.50 through 152.62 inclusive, and a minimum depth of four (4) inches in accordance with the Standard Drawings.
34
152.92 - DRIVEWAYS
Driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the Standard Drawings.
152.93 - STREET NAME SIGNS AND STREET NAMING
A. Street name signs of a type in use throughout the City and in accordance with the Standard Drawings shall be erected by the subdivider at all intersections and at all places where streets change name.
B. Street names shall not duplicate the names of existing streets in the City or the County.
C. Whenever a new street is constructed along the approximate alignment or extension of an existing street, its name shall be the same as that of the existing one.
D. To avoid duplication and confusion, the proposed names of all streets shall be approved by the Planning Commission prior to such names being assigned or used.
152.94 - STREET AND WALKWAY LIGHTING
Installation of street lights and walkway lights in any residential, commercial or industrial subdivision shall be the financial responsibility of the developer of such subdivision. Such lights shall be installed as directed by the Service Director. The lights shall be installed by the public utility serving that area unless otherwise directed by the city.
152.95 - STREET TREES
Trees shall be provided by the subdivider in all subdivisions where curbs, gutters and sidewalks are required. One tree should be provided in front of each house, additional trees may be required in other types of subdivisions. Trees shall be of a species which are resistant to damage and disease and which do not cause interference with underground utilities, or visibility at street intersections. For example, pine oaks, marshall seedless ash, sugar maples, sweetgums, lindens or tulip trees may be used. The trees should be a minimum of two (2) inches in diameter. Existing trees shall be retained whenever possible.
152.96 - WATER SUPPLY IMPROVEMENTS
The following requirements shall govern water supply improvements:
A. Where a public water supply is reasonably accessible or required because of pollution problems in the determination of the City Planning Commission, the subdivision shall be provided with a complete water distribution system, including a connection for each lot and appropriately spaced fire hydrants. Public water distribution and public wells systems shall meet the requirements of the Ohio E.P.A. as cited in Sections 3701.18 to 3701.21, inclusive, of the Ohio Revised Code.
35
B. Where public water supply is not available or not required, the subdivider shall supply evidence that the Montgomery County Combined General Health District has approved the private well. The subdivider may be required to make one (1) or more test wells in the area to be platted if such evidence is deemed not acceptable. Copies of well logs which are obtained shall include the name and address of the well driller and shall be submitted with the plat to the City Planning Commission.
C. Individual private wells shall be located as approved by the Combined General Health District. In all cases where it has been determined that individual water supplies from private wells are not feasible, a public water distribution system shall be required.
152.97 - FIRE PROTECTION
Fire hydrants with two and one-half (2 1/2) inch outlets with N.S.T. threads and one (1) four and one-half (4 1/2) inch pumping connections shall be provided by the subdivider in all subdivisions with public water supplies. The hydrants should be located between property lines and curbs with all outlets facing or parallel to the street. In residential areas hydrants shall be placed at the corners of all blocks and mid-block for blocks exceeding six hundred (600) feet in length. The maximum distance permitted between the nearest hydrant and any house shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet. Hydrants in business and industrial areas shall be spaced not more than four hundred (400) feet apart, so that the maximum distance between any building and the nearest hydrant will not exceed two hundred (200) feet. The type of hydrant and control valves and the location of the hydrant shall be approved by the Fire Chief. The minimum size of any water line serving any hydrant shall not be less than six (6) inches in diameter and shall be circulating water lines. In multi-family residential areas and low-to-moderate risk commercial areas the minimum size of the water main shall be eight (8) inches. In industrial areas and high risk commercial areas the minimum water size shall be twelve (12) inches. When exceptional circumstances warrant, the Planning Commission on the advice of the Service Director, may reduce the requirements for commercial or industrial areas.
The size and location of all water lines and hydrants shall be approved by the City Engineer, Fire Chief and Service Director.
152.98 - SANITARY SEWER IMPROVEMENTS
The following requirements shall govern sanitary sewer improvements:
A. Where an adequate public sanitary sewer system is reasonably accessible, in the determination of the City Planning Commission, public sanitary sewers shall be installed to adequately serve all lots, including lateral connections to the public system. Public sewer system extensions shall meet the requirements of the Ohio E.P.A. and City standards. Combinations of sanitary sewers and storm sewers shall be prohibited.
36
B. Where a public sanitary sewer system is not reasonably accessible, the subdivider may provide:
1. A central treatment plant for the group, provided that such central treatment plant is installed in accordance with State, City and Combined General Health District requirements; or,
2. Lots may be served by individual disposal systems if the provisions of Section 152.98 (C) are met.
C. Where the installation of individual disposal systems is considered, the suitability of the soil for individual systems, the absorptive ability of the soil, surface drainage, ground water level, and topography shall be the criteria for determining whether or not the installation of individual systems is permissible. Criteria shall be in accordance with the requirements of the City, Combined General Health District, and the requirements of the Ohio E.P.A.
D. Each lot so served shall be of a size and shape to accommodate the necessary length of tile field at a safe distance from and at a lower elevation than the proposed building(s). Such lot size and shape shall conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which they are located.
E. At least one (1) percolation test shall be made for each lot being platted, and each test shall be located in close proximity to the proposed individual sewage disposal unit, be numbered, and its location shown on the preliminary plat. All percolation tests shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the City Planning Commission and the Combined General Health District.
F. Where the installation of individual disposal units is considered and where the average natural ground slope exceeds ten (10) percent, the installation of a step-up disposal system may be required subject to specification by the City and the Montgomery County Combined General Health District.
G. In areas where public sewerage will be available in a reasonable period of time the Planning Commission may require the installation of a sewage collection system to serve all lots.
152.99 - DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS
The subdivider shall construct all necessary facilities including underground pipe, inlets, catch basins, or open drainage ditches, as approved by the City Engineer, to provide for the adequate disposal of subsurface and surface water and maintenance of natural drainage courses. The velocity of flow in an open ditch shall not exceed four (4) feet per second in soil ditches or six (6) feet per second in turf gutters. Paved gutters will be required if velocities of flow are greater than those specified or if it is otherwise likely that destructive erosion will result. Drainage ditches shall not be permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer facility.
37
152.100 - STORM SEWERS AND STORM WATER DRAINAGE
Where an adequate public storm sewer is available at the plat boundary, the subdivider shall construct a storm sewer system and connect with such storm sewer line. If such a storm sewer system is not accessible, natural drainage channels with easements of adequate width shall be provided, as approved by the City Engineer and the City Planning Commission. Paved gutters or storm sewers shall be required if velocities of flow are greater than specified in Section 152.99 of these regulations or cause destructive erosion. Storm drainage, including drain tile around basements, shall not be permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer facility, but shall connect to an adequate drainage outlet.
152.101 - CULVERTS AND BRIDGES
Where natural drainage channels intersect any street right-of-way, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to have satisfactory bridges and/or culverts constructed. Where culverts are required, minimum requirements shall be observed as follows:
A. All culverts shall extend across the entire right-of-way width of the proposed street. The cover of the culvert and its capacity shall be approved by the City Engineer. The minimum diameter of a culvert pipe shall be eighteen (18) inches. Depending on existing drainage conditions, head walls may be required.
B. Driveway culverts shall be of adequate length and size as approved by the City Engineer. The driveway culverts shall be laid so as to maintain the flow lines of the ditch or gutter. Head walls may be required.
152.102 - ELECTRIC, GAS, AND TELEPHONE IMPROVEMENTS
A. Electric service and telephone service shall be provided within each subdivision. Gas service may be required where reasonably accessible. Whenever such facilities are reasonably accessible and available, they may be required to be installed within the area prior to the approval of the final plat. Telephone, electric, and street lighting wires, conduits and cables shall be constructed underground except where the City Engineer determines that topographic, bedrock, or underground water conditions would result in excessive costs to the subdivider.
B. Overhead utility lines, where permitted, shall be located at the rear of all lots. The width of the easement per lot shall be not less than five (5) feet and the total easement width shall be not less than ten (10) feet.
C. Whenever a sanitary sewer line and electric and/or telephone line are each placed underground in the same utility easement, the following provisions shall be applicable.
38
152.103 – OVER-SIZE AND OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS
The utilities, pavements, and other land improvements required for the proposed subdivision may be required to be designed of over-size and/or extensions provided to serve nearby land which is an integral part of the neighborhood service or drainage area as determined by the City Engineer.
152.104 – COST OF OVER-SIZE IMPROVEMENTS
The subdivider shall be required to pay for only that part of the construction costs for the trunk sewers, or water lines which are serving the proposed subdivision as determined by the City. The City shall pay only the difference of pipe costs of oversizing water mains and sanitary sewer required to service the surrounding area. The subdivider shall be required to pay for only that part of the construction costs for major arterial streets as specified in Section 152.62 or as determined by the City.
152.105 – EXTENSIONS TO BOUNDARIES
The subdivider may be required to extend the necessary improvements to the boundary of the proposed subdivision to serve adjoining unsubdivided land, as determined by the City Planning Commission.
152.106 – OFF-SITE EXTENSIONS
If streets or utilities are not available at the boundary of a proposed subdivision, and if the City Planning Commission finds that the extensions across undeveloped areas would not be warranted as a special assessment to the intervening properties or as a municipal expense until some future time, the subdivider may be required, prior to the approval of the final plat, to obtain necessary easements or rights-of-way and construct and pay for such extensions. Such improvements shall be available for connections by subdividers of adjoining land.
152.107 – FINAL INSPECTIONS
Upon completion of all improvements, the subdivider shall request, in writing, a final inspection by the City Engineer as required under Section 711.091 of the Ohio Revised Code.
39
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
152.110 – FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Refer to Ordinance No. 2278 adopted August 25, 1981 entitled “Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance”, which regulates development within flood hazard areas.
40
REVISIONS – ENFORCEMENT
152.130 – RECORDING OF PLAT
No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded by the County Recorder of Montgomery County or have any validity until said plat has received final approval in the manner prescribed in these regulations.
152.131 – REVISION OF PLAT AFTER APPROVAL
No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any plat of a subdivision after approval has been given by the City Planning Commission, and endorsed in writing on the plat, unless said plat is first resubmitted to the Commission.
152.132 – SALE OF LAND WITHIN SUBDIVISIONS
No owner or agent of the owner of any land located within a subdivision shall transfer or sell any land by reference to, exhibition of, or by the use of a plat of the subdivision before such plat has been approved and recorded in the manner prescribed in these regulations. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from the provisions of these regulations.
152.133 – SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES
The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses, and a collection of procedure for the same, and other matters pertaining to these regulations. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the City Clerk, and may be altered, or amended only by the City Council. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
152.134 – PENALTIES
The following penalties shall apply to the violations of these regulations:
A. Whoever violates any rule or regulation adopted by the City Council for the purpose of setting standards and requiring and securing the construction of improvements within a subdivision or fails to comply with any order pursuant thereto is creating a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the City or any citizen thereof. Whoever violates these regulations shall forfeit and pay not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such sum may be recovered with costs in a civic action brought in the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County.
41
B. A county Recorder who records a plat contrary to the provisions of those regulations shall
forfeit and pay not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), to be recovered with costs in a civil action by the prosecuting attorney in
the name and for the use of Montgomery County.
C. Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land within or without a municipal
corporation, transfers any lot, parcel, or tract of such land from or in accordance with a plat
of a subdivision before such plat has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder,
shall forfeit and pay the sum of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each lot, parcel, or tract of land sold. The description of such lot,
parcel, or tract by metes and bounds in the deed or transfer shall not serve to exempt the
seller from the forfeiture provided in this section. If such land is within a municipal
corporation, such sum may be recovered in a civil action brought in the Court of Common
Pleas of Montgomery County by legal representative of the City in the name of the City.
D. Any person who disposes of, offers for sale or lease for a time exceeding five 95) years any
lot or any part of a lot in a subdivision before provisions of these regulations are complied
with shall forfeit and pay the sum of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each lot or part of a lot so sold, offered for sale or leased, to be
recovered with costs in a civil action, in the name of the City Treasurer for the use of the
City.
152.135 – VARIANCES
The following regulations shall govern the granting of variances:
A. Where the City Planning Commission finds that extraordinary and unnecessary hardship may
result from strict compliance with these regulations, due to exceptional topographic or other
physical conditions, it may vary the regulations so as to relieve such hardship, provided such
relief may be granted without detriment to the public interest and without impairing the
intent and purpose of these regulations or the desirable development of the neighborhood and
community. Such variations shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of
these regulations, the Comprehensive Plan, or the Zoning Ordinance.
B. In granting variances or modifications, the City Planning Commission may require such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objective of the standards or
requirements so varied or modified.
152.136 – APPEAL
Any person who believes he has been aggrieved by the regulations or actions of the City Planning
Commission has all the rights of appeal as set forth in Chapter 711 of the Ohio Revised Code or any
other applicable section of the Ohio Revised Code.
42
ENACTMENT
152.140 – EFFECTIVE DATE
These regulations shall become effective from and after the date of their approval and adoption by the City Planning Commission and City Council after public hearing and certification to the Montgomery County Recorder. Henceforth, any other regulations previously adopted by the City Council or the City Planning Commission shall be deemed to be repealed. These regulations shall in no way affect any subdivision having received preliminary approval to the effective date provided, however, that no changes to the preliminary plat, as approved, are introduced by the subdivider.














