CITY OF BETHANY, OKLAHOMA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2020 S-18 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 1988, passed 2-4-20
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICIALS
 
COUNCIL
MAYOR                 KP Westmoreland
COUNCIL MEMBERS
Ward One              Amanda Sandoval
                     Chris Powell
Ward Two              Steve Palmer
                     Matthew Goodwin
Ward Three            Kathy Larsen
                     John Herren
Ward Four             S.R. Hunter
                      Jeff Knapp
                       
APPOINTED CITY OFFICIALS
CITY MANAGER          Bradd Brown
CITY ATTORNEY         Claudia Conner
MUNICIPAL COURT JUDGE Judge Kathleen Himmler
DEPARTMENT MANAGERS
FIRE CHIEF            Shaum Jennings
COURT CLERK           Staci Peck
CITY CLERK TREASURER  Michael Vaughn
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR David Buchanan
POLICE CHIEF          Phil Stowell
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 1688
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF
BETHANY, OKLAHOMA, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING
AND COMPILING CERTAIN GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF  ORDINANCES.
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Bethany
are inadequately arranged and classified, and are insufficient in form and
substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the City of Bethany and for the proper conduct of its
affairs; and
   WHEREAS, the laws of the State of Oklahoma empower and authorize the City of
Bethany  to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any existing ordinances
and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published, and to incorporate
such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
   WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Bethany has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of Bethany
of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book
form; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
City of Bethany and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the City of Bethany that this ordinance take
effect at any early date. 
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF  BETHANY,
OKLAHOMA:
   Section 1.  The general ordinances of the City of Bethany as revised,
amended, restated, codified and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and
shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Bethany."
   Section 2.  Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following titles:
   Title I:   General Provisions
   Title III:   Administration
   Title V:   Public Works
   Title VII:   Traffic Code
   Title IX:   General Regulations
   Title XI:   Business Regulations
   Title XIII:   General Offenses
   Title XV:   Land Usage
   Section 3.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred, or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing, or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat, or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance or a temporary or special nature, or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
   Section 4.  Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Bethany City Council, and the City Clerk is hereby
authorized and directed to file a copy of the Code of Ordinances in the Office
of the Clerk.
   Section 5.  Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 7, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places
of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations
therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly
signed, attested, recorded and approved, and that any public hearings and
notices thereof as required by law have been given.
   Section 6.  This ordinance shall also serve as notice to the public of
publication of the Bethany Code of  Ordinances. 
   Section 7.  It being immediately necessary for the preservation of the
public peace, health, safety and welfare of the City of Bethany and the
inhabitants thereof that this ordinance be put into full force and effect, an
emergency is hereby declared to exist by reason whereof this ordinance shall be
in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval.
PASSED and ADOPTED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Bethany on this 19th
day of November, 2002. 
                                   /s/                           
         J.D. Johnston, Mayor
ATTEST:  (Seal)
                  /s/                     
John D. Shugart, City Clerk
APPROVED AS TO LEGAL FORM:
                  /s/                     
David Davis, City Attorney
ORDINANCE/RESOLUTION NO. 1707
AN ORDINANCE AND RESOLUTION ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHANY, OKLAHOMA NOTIFYING THE PUBLIC OF PUBLICATION
OF THE SUPPLEMENT; AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2003 S-1 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Bethany, Oklahoma, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Bethany; and,
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the City
of Bethany and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the City of Bethany that this ordinance take
effect at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND RESOLVED by the City Council of the City of
Bethany, Oklahoma:
   Section 1. That the 2003 S-1 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Political Subdivision as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2. Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the City Council, and the Clerk of the City of Bethany
is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the
Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk, and to file a copy
of this supplement with the County Law Library of Oklahoma County, and a copy
of this Ordinance/Resolution with the Oklahoma County Clerk.
   Section 3. This Ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of the City of Bethany, and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.
The foregoing Ordinance/Resolution was duly adopted and approved by the Mayor
and City County of the City of Bethany, Oklahoma, on the 4th day of November,
2003, after compliance with notice requirements of the Open Meetings Law (25
OSA, Sections 301, et seq.).
                  /s/  J.D. Johnston                         
                  J.D. Johnston, Mayor
ATTEST:  (Seal)
/s/  John D. Schugart                             
John D. Shugart, City Clerk
APPROVED AS TO LEGAL FORM:
/s/  David Davis                                       
David Davis, City Attorney
ORDINANCE/RESOLUTION NO. 1734
AN ORDINANCE AND RESOLUTION ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHANY, OKLAHOMA; NOTIFYING THE PUBLIC OF
PUBLICATIONS OF THE SUPPLEMENT; AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2004 S-2 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Bethany, Oklahoma, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Bethany; and,
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the City
of Bethany and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the City of Bethany that this ordinance take
effect at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND RESOLVED by the City Council of the City of
Bethany, Oklahoma:
   Section 1.    That the 2004 S-2 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Political Subdivision as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.    Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the City Council, and the Clerk of the City of Bethany
is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the
Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk, and to file a copy
of this supplement with the County Law Library of Oklahoma County, and a copy
of this Ordinance/Resolution with the Oklahoma County Clerk.
   Section 3.   This Ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of the City of Bethany, and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.
The foregoing Ordinance/Resolution was duly adopted and approved by the Mayor
and City Council of the City of Bethany, Oklahoma, on the 21st day of
September, 2004, after compliance with notice requirements of the Open Meeting
Law (25 OSA, Sections 301, et seq.).
   /s/  J.D. Johnston 
   MAYOR
ATTEST:  (seal)
/s/  John Shugart 
CITY CLERK
   Approved as to form and legality on Sept. 21, 2004.
   /s/  David Davis 
   CITY ATTORNEY
RESOLUTION NO. 1253
A RESOLUTION ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY OF BETHANY, OKLAHOMA; NOTIFYING THE PUBLIC OF PUBLICATIONS OF THE
SUPPLEMENT; AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2006 S-4 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Bethany, Oklahoma, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Bethany; and,
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the City
of Bethany and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the City of Bethany that this resolution take
effect at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND RESOLVED by the City Council of the City of
Bethany, Oklahoma:
Section 1.    That the 2006 S-4 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Political Subdivision as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.    Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the City Council, and the Clerk of the City of Bethany
is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the
Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk, and to file a copy
of this supplement with the County Law Library of Oklahoma County, and a copy
of this Resolution with the Oklahoma County Clerk.
The foregoing Resolution was duly adopted and approved by the Mayor and City
Council of the City of Bethany, Oklahoma, on the 1st day of August, 2006, after
compliance with notice requirements of the Open Meeting Law (25 OSA, Sections
301, et seq.).
   /s/  Bryan Taylor
   MAYOR
ATTEST:  (seal)
/s/  Sandra Kimerer 
CITY CLERK
   Approved as to form and legality on August 1, 2006.
   /s/  David Davis 
   CITY ATTORNEY
RESOLUTION NO. 1281
A RESOLUTION ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY OF BETHANY, OKLAHOMA; NOTIFYING THE PUBLIC OF PUBLICATIONS OF THE
SUPPLEMENT; AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2007 S-5 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Bethany, Oklahoma, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Bethany; and,
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
City of Bethany and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the City of Bethany that this resolution take
effect at an early date.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND RESOLVED by the City Council of the City
of Bethany, Oklahoma:
Section 1.   That the 2007 S-5 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Political Subdivision as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the City Council, and the Clerk of the City of Bethany
is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the
Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk, and to file a copy
of this supplement with the County Law Library of Oklahoma County, and a copy
of this Resolution with the Oklahoma County Clerk.
The foregoing Resolution was duly adopted and approved by the Mayor and City
Council of the City of Bethany, Oklahoma, on the 6th day of November, after
compliance with notice requirements of the Open Meeting Law (25 OSA, Sections
301, et seq.).
   /s/  Bryan Taylor
   MAYOR
ATTEST:  (seal)
/s/  Sandra Kimerer 
CITY CLERK
   Approved as to form and legality on November 6, 2007.
   /s/  David Davis 
   CITY ATTORNEY
CHARTER
PREAMBLE
ARTICLE I:  INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, POWERS
   
1-1.   Incorporation; Annexation, Consolidation, Merging
   
1-2.   Form of Government
   
1-3.   Powers of the City
   
1-4.   Intergovernmental Relations
ARTICLE II:  LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT
   
2-1.   Council; Legislative Authority Vested in, Election, Term, Term Limits
   
2-2.   Council: Qualifications
   
2-3.   Mayor: Qualifications, Term, Term Limits, Duties
   
2-4.   Vice-Mayor: Appointment, Duties
   
2-5.   Mayor and Council: Compensation
   
2-6.   Council: Powers
   
2-7.   Council Not to Interfere in Appointments and Removals
   
2-8.   City Clerk
   
2-9.   Mayor and Council: When Inducted Into Office, Meetings
   
2-10.   Mayor and Council: Absences to Terminate Office
   
2-11.   Mayor and Council: Removal
   
2-12.   Council: Vacancies
   
2-13.   Council: Quorum, Rules, Yeas and Nays
   
2-14.   Ordinances: Enacting Clause
   
2-15.   Ordinances: Passage, Publication, When Effective
   
2-16.   Ordinances: Emergency
   
2-17.   Adoption by Reference
   
2-18.   Ordinances: Codification
ARTICLE III:  CITY MANAGER AND ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
   
3-1.   City Manager: Appointment, Term, Qualifications, Removal
   
3-2.   Acting City Manager
   
3-3.   City Manager: Powers and Duties
   
3-4.   Administrative Department, Offices and Agencies
ARTICLE IV:  DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE, FISCAL AFFAIRS
   
4-1.   City Clerk: Office Created, Duties
   
4-2.   City Treasurer: Office Created, Duties
   
4-3.   Purchases and Sales
   
4-4.   Sale of Property Valued at More Than $10,000.00
   
4-5.   Public Improvements
   
4-6.   Fiscal Year
   
4-7.   Independent Annual Audit
ARTICLE V:  OFFICERS TO BE APPOINTED BY THE COUNCIL
   
5-1.   City Attorney: Appointment, Term, Qualifications, Duties
   
5-2.   Municipal Court: Appointment, Term, Qualifications, Duties
ARTICLE VI:  NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
   
6-1.   Nomination and Election of Mayor and Councilmembers, Nonpartisan
Elections
   
6-2.   Filing for Councilmember or Mayor - General
   
6-3.   Primary Election: Filing for Mayor
   
6-4.   Primary Election: Filing for Councilmember
   
6-5.   Primary Election: Time, When Not Required
   
6-6.   Primary Election: Who Nominated or Elected
   
6-7.   General Election: Time, Who Elected, When Not Required
   
6-8.   Political Activity of Officers and Employees
   
6-9.   Transitional Provisions
   
6-10.   Council May Establish Election Dates and Filing Periods Under Certain
Circumstances
ARTICLE VII:  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
   
7-1.   Feminine Gender
   
7-2.   Initiative and Referendum
   
7-3.   Merit System
   
7-4.   Nepotism, Compatibility of Offices
   
7-5.   Conflict of Interest
   
7-6.   Bonds
   
7-7.   Oath of Office
   
7-8.   Who May Administer Oaths
   
7-9.   Removal of Officers and Employees
   
7-9.1   Removal/Ouster of Councilmembers and Mayor
   
7-10.   Acting Officers and Employees
   
7-11.   Separability Clause
   
7-12.   Publicity of Records
   
7-13.   Abstention of Voting
ARTICLE VIII:  PLANNING AND ZONING
   
8-1.   General Grant of Power
   
8-1.1.   Zoning Change Protests
ARTICLE IX:  AMENDMENT
   
9-1.   Amendment: Proposal, Ratification, Approval
   
9-2.   Amendment: Board of Freeholders
ARTICLE X:  SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT
   
10-1.   Amendment: When Effective
   
10-2.   Ordinances Continued
   
10-3.   Pending Actions and Proceedings
PREAMBLE
   We, the people of the City of Bethany, Oklahoma, exercising the powers of
home rule granted to us by the Constitution and laws of the State of Oklahoma,
in order to provide for more efficient, adequate, and economical government, do
hereby ordain, ratify, and establish this Charter of the City of Bethany,
Oklahoma.
ARTICLE I:  INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, POWERS
SECTION 1-1.  INCORPORATION; ANNEXATION, CONSOLIDATION, MERGING.
   The City of Bethany, Oklahoma, within the corporate limits as now
established or as hereafter may be established, shall continue to be a
municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the “City
of Bethany.”  It shall succeed to and possess all the property, rights,
privileges, franchises, powers, and immunities now belonging to the corporation
known as the City of Bethany, Oklahoma; and shall be liable for all debts and
other obligations for which the corporation is now legally bound.
   The City of Bethany, Oklahoma, may not be annexed by or to, or consolidated
with any other city or other political subdivision, or merged into a combined
county-city government, unless a majority of the qualified electors of the City
of Bethany voting on the question approve such annexation, consolidation, or
merger; and such question shall be submitted to the qualified electors of the
City only by the City Council or by the Mayor on proper initiative petition at
a special election; provided that nothing herein shall prohibit the City of
Bethany from annexing additional territory to the City as provided by law.
SECTION 1-2.  FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the
“Council-Manager Government.”  All powers of the City shall be exercised in the
manner prescribed by this Charter or, if the manner is not prescribed, then in
such manner as the Council may prescribe by ordinance.
SECTION 1-3.  POWERS OF THE CITY.
   The City shall have all the powers, functions, rights, privileges,
franchises, and immunities granted to cities by the State Constitution and law
and all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers
granted.  Except as prohibited by the State Constitution and law, the City
shall have all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises, and
immunities of every name and nature whatsoever.
   The City shall have power to adopt a corporate seal and to alter it at
pleasure, to sue and be sued, and to make contracts.  It shall have power to
acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any City purpose,
including public utilities, works and ways, in fee simple or any lesser
interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease, condemnation, or other
legal means; and to hold, maintain, improve, enlarge, manage, control, operate,
lease, sell, convey, or otherwise dispose of, such property as its interests
may require, including public utilities, works and ways.  It shall have power
to issue bonds in the manner and within the limitations prescribed by the State
Constitution and law.  It shall have the power, within the limits prescribed by
the State Constitution and law, to accept and administer federal and state
grants-in-aid and to do everything necessary to accomplish the purpose or
purposes for which such grants may be made.  It shall have power to ordain and
to enforce local legislation, consistent with the State Constitution and law,
for the proper organization and functioning of City government, for the
preservation and enforcement of good government and order, for the protection
and benefit of trade and commerce, for the protection of health, life, safety,
morals, and property, for the prevention, summary abatement, and removal of
nuisances, and otherwise for the promotion of the common welfare.  It shall
have power to grant, extend, and renew franchises in accordance with the State
Constitution and law.  The City shall have the power to engage directly or
indirectly in advocacy calculated to influence legislative and administrative
matters at all levels of government.
   The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be deemed to
be exclusive or limiting; and in addition to the powers enumerated herein or
implied hereby, the City shall have all powers which, under the State
Constitution and law, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to
enumerate.
   Provisions of State law relating to matters which may be regulated by cities
operating under Charters shall be in effect only insofar as they are applicable
and are not superseded by this Charter or by ordinance.
SECTION 1-4.  INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS.
   The City may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and
may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by
contract or otherwise, with any one or more states, civil divisions or agencies
thereof, or the United States or any agency thereof.
ARTICLE II:  LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT
SECTION 2-1.  COUNCIL; LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY VESTED IN, ELECTION, TERM, TERM
LIMITS.
   The legislative authority of the City shall be vested in and exercised by
the City Council.  The electors shall elect its members as provided in this
Charter for a term of four (4) years and until their successors have been
elected and qualified.  Effective January 1, 2020, no Councilmember shall serve
more than three (3) consecutive four (4) year terms.  After serving the maximum
number of terms, no Councilmember may serve in the same office unless the
Councilmember has been out of office for no less than two (2) years.  Election
or appointment to a partial term shall not count toward the eligibility
limitation, but election or appointment to a full term shall count toward the
eligibility limitation.
(Amended 10-14-03; Amended 2-12-19)
SECTION 2-2.  COUNCIL: QUALIFICATIONS.
   There shall be two Councilmembers from each of the four (4) wards of the
City.  To become eligible as a candidate for Councilmember a person must, for
at least one (1) year prior to filing a declaration of candidacy, be a
registered voter and resident of the ward of the City.  If  a Councilmember
ceases to be a resident of the ward in which he was elected, he shall thereupon
cease to be a Councilmember.
(Amended 10-14-03)
SECTION 2-3.  MAYOR: QUALIFICATIONS, TERM, TERM LIMITS, DUTIES.
   To become eligible as a candidate for Mayor a person must, for at least one
(1) year prior to filing a declaration of candidacy, be a registered voter and
resident of the City. The Mayor shall be nominated and elected at large. If the
Mayor ceases to be a resident of the City, he or she shall thereupon cease to
be Mayor. The term of office of Mayor shall be four (4) years and until a
successor has been elected and qualified. Effective January 1, 2020, no Mayor
shall serve more than three (3) consecutive four (4) year terms. After serving
the maximum number of terms, no Mayor may serve in the same office unless the
Mayor has been out of office for no less than two (2) years. Election or
appointment to a partial term shall not count toward the eligibility
limitation, but election or appointment to a full term shall count toward the
eligibility limitation. The Mayor shall be ex-officio a member of the Council.
The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council, and may participate
with and have a vote in all proceedings of and business transacted by the
Council; but the Mayor shall have no power of veto. The Mayor shall certify all
ordinances and resolutions passed by the Council. The Mayor shall sign all
contracts awarded by the Council, all warrants drawn on the City Treasury in
payment of claims and obligations of the City duly authorized by the Council,
and all commissions and certificates of appointment made by the Council,
provided a facsimile signature may be used except where prohibited by law. The
Mayor shall, by proclamation, call all special elections of the City and the
officials to conduct the same, as shall be authorized by the Council, the
Constitution, and the general laws of the State or this Charter. The Mayor
shall perform such other ministerial duties as the Council may direct and such
other special duties as may be required by law. The Mayor shall be recognized
as head of the City Government for all ceremonial purposes and by the Governor
for purposes of military law. The Mayor shall have no regular administrative
duties except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
(Amended 10-14-03; Amended 2-12-19)
SECTION 2-4.  VICE-MAYOR: APPOINTMENT, DUTIES.
   The Council shall appoint one of its members Vice-Mayor for a term of one
year at the first meeting in June of each year.  He shall act as Mayor during
the absence or disability of the Mayor, and if a vacancy occurs shall be come
Mayor for the completion of the unexpired term.  If, by succession to the
office of Mayor or otherwise the office of Vice-Mayor becomes vacant, the
Council shall appoint another Vice-Mayor.
SECTION 2-5.  MAYOR AND COUNCIL: COMPENSATION.
   The Mayor and each Councilmember shall receive such compensation as may be
prescribed by ordinance; provided that neither the compensation of the Mayor or
of any Councilmember shall be changed after his election or during his current
term of office.
SECTION 2-6.  COUNCIL: POWERS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all powers of the City,
including the determination of all  matters of policy, shall be vested in the
Council. Without limitation of the foregoing, the Council may:
   1.   Appoint and remove the City Manager as provided in this Charter;
   2.   By ordinance enact municipal legislation;
   3.   Raise revenue, make appropriations, regulate bond elections, the
issuance of bonds, sinking funds, the refunding of indebtedness, salaries and
wages, and all other fiscal affairs of the City subject to the provisions of
the State Constitution and law and this Charter;
   4.   Establish or adopt a pension, retirement, and/or social security system
or systems for any or all groups of the officers and employees in the service
of the City, either alone or in cooperation with other municipalities, the
state or federal government, or all;
   5.   Inquire into the conduct of any office, department, or agency of the
City, and investigate municipal affairs;
   6.   Appoint and remove its own subordinates, the members of the Personnel
Board, the members of the Planning Commission, the Board of Adjustment and
other quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial authorities, the members of the
zoning authorities, now existing or when and if established, or prescribe the
method of appointing or electing and removing them;
   7.   Grant pardons, including the remission of fines and costs upon the
recommendation of the Municipal Judge;
   8.   Regulate elections and the initiative and referendum within the limits
prescribed by the State Constitution and law and this Charter;
   9.   Regulate the organization, powers, duties, and functions of the
Municipal Court and of the Minor Violations Bureau, when and if established,
within the limits prescribed by the State Constitution and law and this
Charter;
   10.   Create, change, and abolish all offices, departments, and agencies of
the City other than the offices, departments and agencies established by this
Charter; and assign additional functions and duties to
offices, departments, and agencies established by the Charter;
   11.   Regulate or prohibit the keeping of domestic fowls, animals, and
livestock within the City, and as a part of such regulation tax the owners and
harborers of dogs;
   12.   Regulate the moving of buildings into, within, or through the City;
provided that no such building shall be moved into, within, or through the City
except on permit issued by the Planning Commission pursuant to such regulations
as the Council may make;
   13.   To define, control, and prohibit public nuisances within the City of
Bethany;
   14.   To determine all local matters of policy, except as may be prohibited
by the Oklahoma Constitution.
SECTION 2-7. COUNCIL NOT TO INTERFERE IN APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVALS.
   Neither the Council, Mayor, nor any of its other members may direct or
request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office or
employment by the City Manager or by any other authority; or, except as
provided in this Charter, participate in any manner in the appointment or
removal of officers and employees of the City.  The Mayor, Council, and its
members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City
Manager in all matters pertaining to the administration of the affairs of the
City, and neither the Mayor, Council, nor any member thereof shall give orders,
either publicly or privately, on administrative matters to any subordinate of
the City Manager.  Nothing herein contained shall restrict an employee's right
to exercise any rights guaranteed to them under the United States Constitution
and Oklahoma Constitution.
SECTION 2-8.  CITY CLERK.
   The City Clerk, hereinafter provided for, shall keep the journal of the
proceedings of the Council, shall enroll in a book or books kept for the
purpose all ordinances and resolutions passed by it, and shall perform such
other duties as this Charter may require and as the Council may prescribe.
SECTION 2-9.  MAYOR AND COUNCIL: WHEN INDUCTED INTO OFFICE, MEETINGS.
   The terms of office of the Mayor and Councilmembers shall begin at the date
and time of the first regularly or specially scheduled City Council meeting
following their certification of election.  If the Mayor-elect or a
Councilmember-elect fails to qualify within one month after the beginning of
his term of office, his office shall become vacant.  The Council shall meet
regularly at least monthly at such times as it shall prescribe by ordinance. 
The Mayor or any three Councilmembers may call special meetings by filing such
call with the City Clerk, setting forth therein the date and time of such
meeting and the business to be transacted and such call shall be entered at
length in the minutes of the meeting, and no business shall be transacted at
such meeting except that which is specified in the call.  The City Clerk shall
immediately give notice, under seal of the City, to the Mayor and
Councilmembers showing the date and time of the meeting, and the business to be
transacted.
(Amended 10-14-03)
SECTION 2-10.  MAYOR AND COUNCIL: ABSENCES TO TERMINATE OFFICE.
   If the Mayor or any Councilmember shall be absent from more than one-half
(½) of all the regularly scheduled meetings of the Council held within any
period of four (4) consecutive calendar months, he shall thereupon cease to
hold such office; provided, a person who ceases to hold office by reason of
absences shall not be eligible for reappointment to the unexpired term for said
vacant position.
(Amended 10-14-03)
SECTION 2-11.  MAYOR AND COUNCIL: REMOVAL.
   The Mayor, Vice-Mayor, or any Councilmember may be removed from office for
the willful violation of any provision of this Charter, or for any cause
specified by applicable State law for the removal of officers, and by the
method or methods prescribed thereby.
SECTION 2-12.  COUNCIL: VACANCIES.
   The Council, by majority vote of its remaining members, shall fill vacancies
in its own membership for the unexpired terms within thirty (30) days of the
date the vacancy occurs.  Provided, if a vacancy occurs in the office of
Councilmember which office has more than twelve (12) months remaining on an
unexpired term, then the remaining members of the City Council shall call for a
special election for the purpose of filling the vacancy for the duration of the
unexpired term.  The election shall be held within ninety (90) days of the date
the Council position becomes vacant.
(Amended 10-14-03)
SECTION 2-13.  COUNCIL: QUORUM, RULES, YEAS AND NAYS.
   A majority of all of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum,
but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day.  The Council shall determine
its own rules.
SECTION 2-14.  ORDINANCES: ENACTING CLAUSE.
   The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the Council shall be:  “Be
it ordained by the Council of the City of Bethany,” and of all ordinances
proposed by the voters under their power of initiative: “Be it ordained by the
People of the City of Bethany.”
SECTION 2-15.  ORDINANCES: PASSAGE, PUBLICATION, WHEN EFFECTIVE.
   Every proposed ordinance shall be read, either in full or by title, and a
vote of a majority of all the Councilmembers shall be required for the final
passage of an ordinance.  The vote on final passage of every ordinance shall be
by yeas and nays and shall be entered in the journal.  Except as may be
required by this Charter for the publication of ordinances relating to
particular matters, every ordinance shall be published by title within ten (10)
days after its passage in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Every
ordinance, except an emergency ordinance, shall become effective thirty (30)
days after its final passage unless it specifies a later time.
SECTION 2-16.  ORDINANCES: EMERGENCY.
   An emergency ordinance is an ordinance which, in the judgment of the
Council, is necessary for the immediate preservation of peace, health, or
safety, and which shall become effective immediately upon passage and approval
unless it specifies a later time. Every such ordinance shall contain, as part
of its title, the words:  “and declaring an emergency;” and in a separate
section herein called the emergency section shall declare the emergency setting
forth the general facts constituting the emergency.  The Council shall vote on
the emergency section separately, and must adopt the section by a vote of at
least three-fourths (3/4) of all its members, which vote shall be by yeas and
nays and entered in the journal.
SECTION 2-17.  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The Council, by ordinance, may adopt by reference codes, ordinances, and
standards relating to building, plumbing, electrical installations, milk and
milk products, and other matters which it has power to regulate otherwise. 
Such a code, ordinance, or standard so adopted need not be enrolled in the book
of ordinances but a copy shall be filed and kept in the office of the City
Clerk.  The City Clerk shall keep copies of every such code, ordinance, or
standard in force for distribution or sale at their approximate cost.
SECTION 2-18.  ORDINANCES: CODIFICATION.
   The ordinances of the City shall be codified and published in book or
pamphlet form at least every ten (10) years unless the Council, by use of a
looseleaf system and process of amendment, keeps the code up-to-date.  Titles,
enacting clauses, and emergency sections may be omitted from the code; and
temporary and special ordinances and parts of ordinances may be omitted. 
Permanent general ordinances and parts of ordinances which are to be repealed
by the code shall be omitted from the code.  The ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the code may be revised, rearranged, and reorganized;
and the code may contain new matter, provisions of the State Constitution and
law relating to the City and provisions of this Charter.  A copy of the
published code shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk, but the code
need not be enrolled in the book of ordinances.
ARTICLE III:  CITY MANAGER AND ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
SECTION 3-1. CITY MANAGER: APPOINTMENT, TERM, QUALIFICATIONS, REMOVAL.
   There shall be a City Manager. The Council shall appoint him for an
indefinite term by a majority vote of all its members. The City Manager shall
at time of appointment have a Bachelor Degree from an accredited university or
college in a field which the Council deems appropriate.
   At the time of his appointment he need not be a resident of the City or
State; but, during his tenure of office he shall reside within the City.  No
Councilmember or Mayor may be appointed City Manager during the term for which
he shall have been elected nor within two (2) years after the expiration of his
term.  The Council may suspend or remove the City Manager with or without cause
at any time by a vote of a majority of all its members.
SECTION 3-2.  ACTING CITY MANAGER.
   To perform his duties during his temporary-absence or disability the City
Manager, by letter filed with the City Clerk, may appoint a qualified
administrative officer of the City to be Acting City Manager.  If the City
Manager fails to make such designation, or if the Council suspends the City
Manager, or if there is a vacancy in the office of the City Manager, the
Council may appoint an Acting City Manager to serve until the City Manager
returns, or until his disability or suspension ceases, or until it appoints
another City Manager.  The Council must appoint a new City Manager within six
(6) months after the office of City Manager becomes vacant.  The Council may
suspend or remove an Acting City Manager with or without cause at any time by a
vote of a majority of all its members.
SECTION 3-3.  CITY MANAGER: POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The City Manager shall be chief executive officer and head of the
administrative branch of the City government.  He shall execute the laws and
administer the government of the City; and shall be responsible therefor to the
Council.  He shall:
   (1)   Appoint and when necessary, for the good of the service, remove any or
all heads of administrative departments and other administrative officers and
employees of the City except as otherwise provided in this Charter.  The City
Manager may authorize the head of a department, an officer, or an agency to
appoint and remove subordinates in such department, office, or agency, subject
to such merit system regulations as the Council may ordain.
   (2)   Supervise and control, directly or indirectly, all administrative
departments, offices, and agencies appointed by himself or by his subordinates.
   (3)   Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the Council, be responsible
for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect, and recommend
to the Council any changes in the budget which he deems desirable.
   (4)   Submit to the Council a report as of the end of the fiscal year on the
finances and administrative activities of the City for the preceding year.
   (5)   Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs
of the City, and make such recommendations as may seem to him desirable.
   (6)   Perform such other duties as this Charter may prescribe and such
duties as the Council may prescribe, consistent with this Charter.
SECTION 3-4.  ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENT, OFFICES AND AGENCIES.
   There shall be a Department of Finance, a Police Department, a Fire
Department, and such other administrative departments, offices and agencies as
are established by this Charter and as the Council may establish.
ARTICLE IV:  DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE, FISCAL AFFAIRS
SECTION 4-1.  CITY CLERK: OFFICE CREATED, DUTIES.
   There shall be a City Clerk who shall be an officer of the City appointed by
the City Manager for an indefinite term.  Subject to such regulations as the
Council may prescribe, the City Clerk shall collect or receive revenue and
other money for the City, and shall deposit the same with the City Treasurer in
an account or accounts maintained by the City Treasurer in a depository or
depositories.  The City Clerk shall maintain a general accounting system for
the City government.
SECTION 4-2.  CITY TREASURER: OFFICE CREATED, DUTIES.
   There shall be a City Treasurer who shall be an officer of the City
appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term.  Subject to such
regulations as the Council may prescribe the City Treasurer shall deposit all
funds coming into his hands in such depositories as the Council may designate. 
The person holding the office of City Clerk may also hold the office of City
Treasurer.
SECTION 4-3.  PURCHASES AND SALES.
   The City Manager, subject to any regulations which the Council may
prescribe, shall contract for and purchase, or issue purchase orders for, all
supplies, materials, and equipment for the offices, departments, and agencies
of the City government. Every such contract or purchase exceeding an amount to
be established by ordinance shall require the prior approval of the Council. 
The City Manager also may transfer to or between offices, departments, and
agencies, or sell surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, and equipment
subject to such regulations as the Council may prescribe.  Before the purchase
of or contract for any supplies, materials, or equipment, or the sale of any
surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, or equipment, ample opportunity for
competitive bidding under such regulations and with such exceptions as the
Council may prescribe shall be given; but the Council shall not except a
particular contract, purchase, or sale from the requirement of competitive
bidding.
SECTION 4-4.  SALE OF PROPERTY VALUED AT MORE THAN $10,000.00.
   The sale of any property, real or personal, or of any interest therein,
including the sale of public utilities, the value of which is more than
$10,000.00 shall be made only by authority of a special ordinance other than an
emergency ordinance.  Such ordinance shall be published in full in a newspaper
of general circulation within the City within ten (10) days after its passage
and shall include a section reading substantially as follows:  “Section        
           .  This Ordinance shall be referred to a vote of the electors of the
City if a proper referendum petition is properly filed within thirty (30) days
after its passage; otherwise, it shall go into effect thirty (30) days after
its passage.”
SECTION 4-5.  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   Public improvements may be made by the City government itself or by
contract.  The Council shall award all contracts for such improvements;
provided, that the Council may authorize the City Manager to award such
contracts not exceeding an amount to be determined by the Council, and subject
to such regulations as the Council may prescribe.  Every contract for public
improvements of such amount as the Council may determine by ordinance, or such
amount as may be required by the Oklahoma Public Competitive Bidding Act,
whichever amount is greater, shall be awarded to the lowest and best
responsible bidder after such notice and opportunity for competitive bidding as
the Council may prescribe, or as is required by law.  All bids may be rejected
and further notice and opportunity for competitive bidding may be given.  Such
contracts may be altered by mutual consent of the parties.  Public improvement
means any beneficial or valuable change or addition, betterment, enhancement,
or amelioration of or upon any real property, or interest therein, belonging to
a public agency intended to enhance its value, beauty, or utility, or to adopt
it to new or future purposes.  The term does not include the direct purchase of
materials, equipment, or supplies by a public agency. Nothing herein shall
prevent the City from constructing public improvements by the Force Account
method.
SECTION 4-6.  FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the City government shall begin on the first day of July
and shall end on the last day of June of every calendar year.
SECTION 4-7.  INDEPENDENT ANNUAL AUDIT.
   The Council shall designate a qualified public accountant or accountants who
shall make an independent annual audit of the accounts and evidences of
financial transactions of the department of finance and of all other
departments, offices, and agencies keeping separate or subordinate accounts or
making financial transactions, as of the end of every fiscal year or more often
at the discretion of the Council, and who shall report to the Council and to
the City Manager. In lieu of the above, the Council may arrange with an
appropriate State authority for such an audit when and if permitted by law.
ARTICLE V:  OFFICERS TO BE APPOINTED BY THE COUNCIL
SECTION 5-1.  CITY ATTORNEY: APPOINTMENT, TERM, QUALIFICATIONS, DUTIES.
   The Council shall appoint a City Attorney on the first Tuesday in June in
every odd-numbered year or as soon thereafter as practicable.  The City
Attorney shall serve for a term of two (2) years and until a successor is
appointed and takes office.  The City Attorney shall be licensed to practice
law in the Courts of the State of Oklahoma. The Council may suspend or remove
the City Attorney by a majority vote of all the members of the City Council. 
The Council may fill vacancies in the office of City Attorney for the unexpired
term.  It shall be the duties of the City Attorney to attend Council meetings;
to prepare ordinances and resolutions when directed by the Council or other
proper authority of the City; to advise the City Council, City Manager, and
other officers of the City as regards to their official powers, duties, and
responsibilities, upon request; to represent the City in suits in which the
City is a party; and to perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law,
this Charter or ordinance.
(Amended 2-12-19)
SECTION 5-2.  MUNICIPAL COURT: APPOINTMENT, TERM, QUALIFICATIONS, DUTIES.
   (a)   Cases arising out of violations of the ordinances of the City shall be
tried by the existing Municipal Court created by State law or a lawful
successor of such court created by State law; provided, that the Council, by
ordinance, shall have the power to create a Municipal Court to hear and
determine such cases if and when it deems it necessary or desirable to do so.
   (b)   The Council shall appoint a Judge of the Municipal Court on the first
Tuesday in June in every odd-numbered year or as soon thereafter as
practicable. The Municipal Judge shall serve for a term of two (2) years and
until a successor is appointed and qualified. The Council may suspend or remove
the Municipal Judge by a majority vote of all the members of the City Council.
The Municipal Judge shall have original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
cases involving offenses against the Charter and ordinances of the City. The
Municipal Judge shall have the power to issue warrants; collect fines, costs,
and bond forfeitures; and to commit to jail for nonpayment of fines and/or
costs. The style of all process shall be in the name of the City. The Municipal
Judge shall keep a docket of all proceedings of the Municipal Court showing the
names of the defendant, the complaining party, the arresting officer, the
offense charged, and the disposition of all cases and of all fines, costs, bond
forfeitures and other money collected. The Municipal Judge shall make a monthly
report to the Council giving the information above specified, and shall oversee
the collection of all fines, costs, forfeitures, and other money collected and
belonging to the City. The Municipal Judge shall perform such other duties as
shall be prescribed by law, this Charter, or ordinance. The Municipal Judge may
administer oaths, make and enforce all proper orders, rules and judgments, and
punish for contempt as provided by law.
(Amended 2-12-19)
ARTICLE VI:  NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
SECTION 6-1.  NOMINATION AND ELECTION OF MAYOR AND COUNCILMEMBERS, NONPARTISAN
ELECTIONS.
   Candidates for Councilmember shall be nominated by wards, and Councilmembers
shall be elected by wards.  Candidates for Mayor shall be nominated at large,
and the Mayor shall be elected at large.  Both the primary and general
elections shall be nonpartisan, and no party designation or emblem shall be
placed on the ballots.
SECTION 6-2.  FILING FOR COUNCILMEMBER OR MAYOR–GENERAL.
   Any person filing for the office of Councilmember or Mayor shall file with
the Secretary of the Oklahoma County Election Board a sworn statement of
candidacy stating the following:
   (a)   his legal name as he desires it to appear on the ballot;
   (b)   the street address of his residence;
   (c)   the ward in which he resides;
   (d)   age;
   (e)   office for which he is filing as a candidate. No reference to party
affiliation shall be placed on the filing statement.  A person may not file for
both the offices of Mayor and Councilmember for the same election.
SECTION 6-3.  PRIMARY ELECTION: FILING FOR MAYOR.
   In every other odd-numbered year (once every four years), hereinafter called
Mayor Election Year, any qualified person may have his name placed on the
ballot for the primary election as a candidate for Mayor by filing as described
in Section 6-2 hereof, during the period defined as three days beginning not
more than twenty days from the date the resolution calling the election is
required by law to be filed with the County Election Board. The filing dates
shall be established by the Council and set forth in the resolution calling the
election. Any incumbent Councilmember whose term does not expire in the current
calendar year shall resign his Council position prior to filing for Mayor. In
the event a Councilmember whose term is not expiring in the current calendar
year files for Mayor without resigning his Council position, then his Council
position shall become vacant immediately upon his filing for Mayor.
(Amended 10-14-03; Res. 1259 Amended and approved 12-12-06; Amended 4-5-16)
SECTION 6-4.  PRIMARY ELECTION: FILING FOR COUNCILMEMBER.
   In every odd-numbered year (once every two years), hereinafter called
Council Election Year, any qualified person may have his name placed on the
ballot for the primary election for the expiring term of Councilmember by
filing as described in Section 6-2 hereof during the period as defined as the
three days beginning not more than twenty days from the date the resolution
calling the election is required by law to be filed with the County Election
Board. The filing dates shall be established by the Council and set forth in
the resolution calling the election..
(Amended 10-14-03; Res. 1259 Amended and approved 12-12-06; Amended 4-5-16)
SECTION 6-5.  PRIMARY ELECTION: TIME, WHEN NOT REQUIRED.
   A primary election shall be held in the City on the first Tuesday in
February of every Council Election Year to nominate candidates for the one
position on the Council from each ward for which the term is expiring. A
primary election shall be held in the City on the first Tuesday of February of
every Mayor Election Year to nominate candidates for Mayor. If no office has
more than one candidate at the election, all the candidates shall be not only
nominated, but also elected to the respective offices ipso facto; and no
primary or general election shall be held. If not more than one person is a
candidate for a particular office at the election, he shall be not only
nominated, but also elected to that office ipso facto; and his name shall not
appear on the primary or general election ballot. Every qualified elector shall
be entitled to vote for one candidate for Councilmember from his ward and also
to vote for one candidate for Mayor for the City at large.
(Amended 10-14-03; Res. 1259 Amended and approved 12-12-06; Amended 4-5-16)
Editors Note: See Code §
12.01 that sets the date for elections as the second Tuesday in February per
Ordinance 1918, passed 10/4/16
SECTION 6-6.  PRIMARY ELECTION: WHO NOMINATED OR ELECTED.
   The two (2) candidates for Councilmember from each ward and the two (2)
candidates for Mayor for the City at large receiving the greatest number of
votes for the office for which they filed shall be nominated; provided that if
one of the candidates for such office receives a majority of all votes cast for
all candidates for such office, he alone shall be not only nominated but also
elected ipso facto, and his name shall not appear on the ballot for the general
election.
SECTION 6-7.  GENERAL ELECTION:  TIME, WHO ELECTED, WHEN NOT REQUIRED.
   A general election shall be held in the City to elect a Mayor at large and
one Councilmember from each ward on the first Tuesday in April in every Mayor
Election Year, and a general election shall be held in the City on the first
Tuesday in April in every Council Election Year to elect one Councilmember from
each ward.  Every qualified elector shall be entitled to vote for one candidate
for Mayor for the City at large.  The candidate for Councilmember from each
ward receiving the greater number of votes for Councilmember, cast in his ward,
and the candidate for Mayor receiving the greater number of votes for Mayor
cast in the City at large, shall be elected. However, no general election shall
be held if there is no office for which there are candidates remaining to be
elected.
(Amended 10-14-03)
SECTION 6-8.  POLITICAL ACTIVITY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   No officer or employee of the City, except the Councilmembers and Mayor, may
attempt to influence the nomination, election, or defeat of any candidate for
Councilmember or Mayor, except by the proper exercise of his right to vote.  A
violation of this section shall constitute cause for removal from office or
employment.
SECTION 6-9.  TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
   Beginning with elections for the year 2004 the following transitional terms
shall apply in order to provide for an orderly change to the new length of
terms of office for Councilmembers and Mayor and to accommodate the new
election schedules:
   In year 2004, those Councilmembers whose terms expire shall run for three
(3) year terms expiring in 2007;
   In year 2005, the Mayor and those Councilmembers whose terms are expiring
shall run for four (4) year terms;
   In year 2007, those Councilmembers whose terms are expiring shall run for
four (4) year terms.  Following these transitional years the Councilmembers and
Mayor shall run for four year terms when their terms expire.
(Amended 10-14-03)
SECTION 6-10.  COUNCIL MAY ESTABLISH ELECTION DATES AND FILING PERIODS UNDER
CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES.
   In the event the State law prohibits elections to be conducted by the
Oklahoma County Election Board on the dates established in this Charter or if
State law alters the required filing periods then the City Council may by
ordinance establish the dates for Primary and General Elections and/or filing
periods on such dates as may be permitted by State law.
(Amended 4-5-16)
ARTICLE VII:  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION 7-1.  FEMININE GENDER.
   When the masculine gender is used in this Charter it shall also mean the
feminine unless the masculine alone is clearly indicated.
SECTION 7-2.  INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.
   The powers of initiative and referendum are reserved to the people of the
City.  In the exercise of these powers the requirements of the State
Constitution and law shall be observed.
SECTION 7-3.  MERIT SYSTEM.
   Appointments and promotions in the service of the City shall be made solely
on the basis of merit and fitness, and removals and demotions shall be made
solely for the good of the service.  Better to achieve these ends, the Council
may establish a merit system and provide for its proper organization and
functioning and for proper personnel administration.
SECTION 7-4.  NEPOTISM, COMPATIBILITY OF OFFICES.
   Neither the City Manager, the Council, nor any other authority of the City
government may appoint or elect any person related to any Councilmember, the
City Manager, or to himself, or in the case of a plural authority to one of its
members by affinity or consanguinity within the third degree to any office or
position of profit in the City government.
   Except as may be otherwise provided by this Charter or by ordinance, the
same person may hold more than one office or position in the City government. 
The City Manager may hold more than one such office or position through
appointment by himself, by the Council, or by other City authority having
authority to fill the particular office or position, subject to any regulations
which the Council may make by ordinance; but he may not receive compensation
for service in such other offices and positions.  Also the Council, by
ordinance, may provide that the City Manager shall hold ex-officio designated
offices which the City manager has authority to fill by appointment as well as
other designated compatible City offices.
SECTION 7-5.  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   (a)   Neither the Mayor, Councilmembers, the City Manager, nor any City
employee shall sell or barter anything to the City or to a contractor to be
supplied to the City; or make any contract with the City; or purchase anything
from the City other than those things which the City offers generally to the
public (i.e. utility services), and then only on the same terms as are offered
to the public.  Violation of this section shall constitute cause for removal
from office or employment.  Any violation of this section with knowledge,
expressed or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the City
shall render the contract voidable by the City Manager or the Council. This
subsection shall not apply in cases in which the City acquires property by
condemnation.
   (b)   The Council, by ordinance or the City Manager by personnel rules, may
further regulate conflicts of interest and ethics of officers and employees of
the City.
   (c)   Any member of the Council or any board, commission, or other authority
who has a direct personal or private interest in any question before the body
of which he is a member shall abstain from voting thereon.  Violation of this
section shall constitute cause for removal from office for members of any
board, commission, or other authority of the City government.  Provided,
however, a violation of this section shall not affect the validity of any
action taken by the City Council or any other board or commission of the City.
SECTION 7-6.  BONDS.
   The City Manager, the City Clerk, the City Treasurer, and such other
officers and employees as the Council, by ordinance, may designate, before
entering upon their duties shall provide bonds for the faithful performance of
their respective duties, payable to the City, in such form and in such amounts
as the Council may prescribe by ordinance, with a surety company authorized to
operate within the State.
   The City shall pay the premiums on such bonds.
SECTION 7-7.  OATH OF OFFICE.
   Every officer of the City before entering upon the duties of his office
shall take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation of office prescribed by the
State Constitution.
   The oath shall be filed and kept in the City Clerk's office.
SECTION 7-8.  WHO MAY ADMINISTER OATHS.
   All officers authorized by federal or state law, the Mayor, City Manager,
City Attorney, City Treasurer, City Clerk, heads of all other administrative
departments, Municipal Judge, and such other officers as the Council may
authorize may administer oaths.
SECTION 7-9.  REMOVAL OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   The City Manager or other appointing or electing authority at any time may
suspend or remove any officer or employee to whom he or the other appointing or
electing authority respectively may appoint or elect a successor, except as
otherwise provided by or in accordance with this Charter.
SECTION 7-9.1.  REMOVAL/OUSTER OF COUNCILMEMBERS AND MAYOR.
   The provisions of the Oklahoma Constitution and State Statutes applicable to
removal of municipal public officers shall govern the removal of members of the
City Council and Mayor.
(Amended 10-14-03)
SECTION 7-10.  ACTING OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   The appointing or electing authority who may appoint or elect the successor
of an officer or employee may appoint or elect a person to act during the
temporary absence, disability, disqualification, or suspension of such officer
or employee, or in case of vacancy until a successor is appointed or elected
and qualifies, unless the Council ordains that a particular superior or
subordinate of such officer or employee shall act.  The Council, by ordinance,
may provide for a deputy to act in such cases.
SECTION 7-11.  SEPARABILITY CLAUSE.
   If a Court of competent jurisdiction should hold any section or part of a
section of this Charter invalid, such holding shall not affect the remainder of
this Charter nor the context in which such section or part of a section so held
invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of a
section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with that section or
part of a section.
SECTION 7-12.  PUBLICITY OF RECORDS.
   All records of the City and its departments which are required by law to be
kept shall be open to public inspection at proper times and in proper manner
during all business hours of the day; provided, however, that this shall not
apply to any records required by law to be kept secret, nor shall it apply to
records which their disclosure would defeat the purpose for which same are
kept.
SECTION 7-13.  ABSTENTION FROM VOTING.
   If a member of the City Council or a member of any board of commission of
the City abstains from voting on an issue said vote shall not be recorded as a
negative vote but rather shall be reflected in the minutes as an abstention and
not counted in determining whether the item passed or failed.
ARTICLE VIII:  PLANNING AND ZONING
SECTION 8-1.  GENERAL GRANT OF POWER.
   (a)   The City of Bethany shall have full power to promote the general
welfare by regulating the use of property and by controlling the development of
the City through the exercise of the complete powers of planning and zoning
within the City limits to the fullest extent permissible under the Constitution
of the United States and the Constitution of this State.  The exercise of the
powers of planning and zoning within the City shall be in pursuance of this
grant of authority, except with respect to those matters of general State
concern as to which State law controls under the State Constitution.  The City
also may exercise powers of planning and zoning granted by the State in respect
to matters of general State concern, as aforesaid, and also in respect to
property situated outside the City limits.
   (b)   The scope of the planning function shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the development and administration of a comprehensive land-use plan
which will provide for the careful and thoughtful integration of residential,
commercial, industrial, public, and other elements to achieve and preserve
social purposes, economic values, and aesthetic quality of the neighborhoods
and of other areas that compose the City.
   (c)   The City of Bethany shall have full authority to regulate and restrict
the location of mobile homes and manufactured housing within the City of
Bethany to the extent allowed a home rule city under the Oklahoma and United
States Constitutions.
   (d)   The City of Bethany shall have full authority to regulate and restrict
the location of oil, gas, and disposal wells and related appurtenances within
the City, and to adopt regulations concerning oil, gas, and disposal wells and
related appurtenances within the City for the general safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the City of Bethany insofar as is consistent with the Oklahoma
and United States Constitutions.
   (e)   The City of Bethany shall have the power to regulate, restrict, and/or
prohibit the operation or disposal sites for hazardous and deleterious wastes
within the City of Bethany to the fullest extent possible under the Oklahoma
and United States Constitutions.
   (f)   The erection or construction of any dwelling unit or units of a
greater density than twelve (12) dwelling units per acre is hereby prohibited
within the City of Bethany, Oklahoma, except for the following: (1) dwelling
units for student housing owned by accredited public or private educational
institutions of higher learning within the City of Bethany, Oklahoma; or (2)
dwelling units located within the Central Business Zoning District; or (3)
dwelling units approved as part of a Planned Unit Development in accordance
with the City of Bethany Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinances. For purposes
of this section the following definitions will apply:
   (1)   Dwelling Unit means one room or a suite of two or more rooms designed
for or used by one (1) family for living and sleeping purposes, and have one
(1) kitchen or kitchenette.
(Article VIII, Section f, Amended and Approved at Election Held March 15, 1988;
Amended 2-12-19)
SECTION 8-1.1.  ZONING CHANGE PROTESTS.
   In case of a written protest against a zoning change filed at least three
(3) days prior to the City Council public hearing by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) or more of the area of the lots included in such proposed change,
or by the owners of fifty percent (50%) or more of the area of the lots within
a three hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundary of the territory
included in a proposed change such amendments shall not become effective except
by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the City
Council.
(Amended 4-5-16)
ARTICLE IX:  AMENDMENT
SECTION 9-1.  AMENDMENT: PROPOSAL, RATIFICATION, APPROVAL.
   This Charter may be amended by proposals therefor submitted to the people by
the Council or submitted by the Mayor upon initiative petition of the people as
provided by the State Constitutions, at a general or special election, ratified
by a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon, and approved by the
Governor as provided by the State Constitution.  If more than one amendment is
proposed, all of them, except those which are so interrelated that they should
be ratified or rejected together, shall be submitted in such manner that the
electors may vote on them separately.  A proposition to amend this Charter may
be either in the form of a proposed amendment to a part or parts of the Charter
or of a proposed new Charter.
SECTION 9-2.  AMENDMENT: BOARD OF FREEHOLDERS.
   The Council, by ordinance, may provide for the election of a board of
freeholders to prepare and propose amendments to this Charter.  When an
amendment proposed by a board of freeholders shall have been submitted by the
Council at a general or special election, ratified by a majority of the
qualified electors voting thereon, and approved by the Governor, as provided by
the State Constitution, it shall go into effect.
ARTICLE X:  SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT
SECTION 10-1.  AMENDMENT: WHEN EFFECTIVE.
   The provisions of this amended Charter shall go into effect immediately upon
approval by the Governor as provided by the State Constitution.
SECTION 10-2.  ORDINANCES CONTINUED.
   All ordinances, insofar as they are not inconsistent with this amended
Charter, shall continue in effect until they are repealed or until they expire
by their own limitations.
SECTION 10-3.  PENDING ACTIONS AND PROCEEDINGS.
   The adoption of this amended Charter shall not abate or otherwise affect any
action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending when it takes full effect,
brought by or against the municipality or any agency, office, department, or
officer thereof.
TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
         
APPENDIX:   CITY SEAL
      
12.   CITY POLICIES
CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions and notes
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to statutes
   
10.09   Reference to other sections
   
10.10   Reference to offices
   
10.11   Errors and omissions
   
10.12   Official time
   
10.13   Reasonable time
   
10.14   Ordinances repealed
   
10.15   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.16   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.17   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.18   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.19   Section histories; statutory references
 
   
10.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   City ordinances, see 11 O.S. §§ 14-101 et seq.
   General powers, see 11 O.S. §§ 22-101 et seq.
§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.
   This code may be cited as the “Bethany City Code” or other properly
identifying description.  When a change or changes have been prepared and
inserted in the code as provided herein below, the
words “as amended” may be added to the citation or title when referring to the
code as amended.
Statutory reference:
   Adoption and revision of codes of ordinances, see 11 O.S. §§ 14-108 and 14-
109
§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein or by law or implication required, the same
rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04  CAPTIONS AND NOTES.
   (A)   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
   (B)   Notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information or
referring to statutes or to other parts of the code are inserted in the code,
and may be inserted in changes to the code, for the convenience of persons
using the code, and shall have no legal effect.
§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY, THE CITY or MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Bethany, Oklahoma.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of Bethany.
      COUNTY.  Oklahoma County, Oklahoma.
      JOINT AUTHORITY.  All words giving JOINT AUTHORITY to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving authority to a majority of the
persons or officers.
      LAW.  Applicable federal law, provisions of the State Constitution and
state statutes, the ordinances of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all
rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.
      MAYOR.  The Mayor of the city.
      MONTH.  A calendar month.
      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may
be substituted for an oath, and, in such cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall
be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OTHER OFFICIALS or OFFICERS AND THE LIKE.  Whenever reference is made to
officers, agencies or departments by title only, such as “Clerk,” “City Clerk,”
“City Attorney,” “Fire Chief,” “Police Chief” and the like they shall mean the
officers, agencies or departments of the city.
      PERSON.  Includes natural persons, corporations, private and public,
partnerships and all other unincorporated organizations, trusts, estates and
government agencies, except when a contrary intention plainly appears.
      PRECEDING; FOLLOWING.  Next before and next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY.  Real and personal property.
      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE.  The State of Oklahoma.
      STATUTORY REFERENCES.  References to the statutes of the state as they
now are or as they may be amended.
      STREET.  Street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct, highway,
court, place, square, curb or any other public way in the city which is
dedicated and open to public use.
      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the  subject matter of
the heading.  Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WEEK.  Seven days.
      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR.  A calendar year.
§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the ordinance:
   (A)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender.  Words used in the masculine gender in this code or in other
ordinances of the city include the feminine and neuter.
   (D)   Singular and plural.  Words used in the singular number in this code
or in other ordinances of the city include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
   (E)   Tenses.  The use of a verb in the present tense shall include the
future, if applicable.
   (F)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.
   If a part of this code or of any ordinance passed by the Council after this
code goes into effect is invalid, all valid parts which are severable from the
invalid parts remain in effect.  If a part of this code or of any ordinance
passed hereinafter is invalid in one or more of its applications, the part
remains in effect in all valid applications which are severable from the
invalid applications.
§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO STATUTES.
   Reference to the statutes of the state means the statutes as they are now or
as they may be amended, and a reference to the Oklahoma Statutes for a certain
year also means the comparable provision when included in future codifications.
§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever, in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.10  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.11  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words were clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and the word
or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published.  No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.12  OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within the city for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.13  REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.  If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.14  ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   All ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature
passed prior to and in effect at the time the code is adopted but not included
in the code are hereby repealed as of the time when the code goes into effect. 
Ordinances passed on or after that date shall not be repealed or amended by the
adoption of the code.
§ 10.15  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.16  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.17  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.18  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature
passed or adopted on and after the most recent ordinance included in this code
of ordinances may be passed or adopted either in the form of amendments to this
code of ordinances or without specific reference to the code, but in either
case all ordinances and parts of ordinances shall be deemed amendments to the
code, and all of the substantive permanent and general parts of the ordinances
and changes made thereby in the code shall be inserted and made in the code
whenever authorized or directed by motion, resolution or ordinance of the City
Council, as provided hereinafter.
§ 10.19  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section.  Example:  (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. 
Example:  (11 O.S. § 1-402)  (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-
85)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.  Example:
   § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see 51 O.S. §§ 24A.1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published and subsequently amended, the prior code
section number shall be indicated in the history.  Example:  (Prior Code, § 9-
15).
§ 10.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by state law, and except as provided in
divisions (B) and (C) of this section, whenever in this code or in any
ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful, an offense, or a misdemeanor, or whenever in the Code of Ordinances
the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any
provision of this code or of any ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding $500, plus costs.  Each day or any portion of a day
during which any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The following offenses under this code shall be punishable by a
maximum fine of $750, plus court costs, and/or imprisonment not exceeding 60
days:
 
Offense Code Section
Larceny and pump piracy                                             131.01,
                                                                    131.02
Eluding a police officer                                            70.041
Interfering with municipal officer/resisting arrest                 134.01
Disorderly conduct                                                  132.008
Assault and battery on a police officer                             134.05
False evidence and false representation                             134.06
Carrying a concealed weapon                                         132.151
Use of city water after service disconnected                        52.09
Maintaining disorderly house                                        132.076,
                                                                    132.077
Obtaining food, lodging, transportation, or other services by false 132.107
representation
Prostitution                                                        132.136
Assault and battery                                                 133.01
Resisting arrest                                                    134.04
Contempt of court                                                   33.032
Interfering with animal control officer                             95.066
Inhalation of toxic substance                                       132.023
Bogus checks                                                        132.108
 
 
Offense                                                Code Section
Failure to obey lawful commands of fire/police officer 134.10
Credit card fraud                                      132.106
 
   (C)   The following offenses under this code shall be punishable by a fine
of $800, plus court costs, and/or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days:
 
Offense                                                            Code Section
Driving and actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under 71.049
the influence of alcohol or drugs and driving while impaired
Possession of controlled dangerous drugs and possession of drug    132.021,
paraphernalia                                                      132.022
Sale or furnishing of alcoholic beverages and/or beer to minors    111.07
 
   (D)   Fifty dollars of each alcohol fine or deferral fee shall be
transferred to a fund to be used to defray costs of enforcement of laws
relating to juvenile access to alcohol, and alcohol- and drug-related offenses.
   (E)   The maximum fine or deferral fee for offenses relating to parking or
speeding shall not exceed $200, plus court costs.
(Prior Code, § 1-107)  (Am. Ord. 1733, passed 9-7-04; Am. Ord. 1759, passed 1-
17-06; Am. Ord. 1763, passed 5-2-06; Am. Ord. 1772, passed 10-3-06)
Statutory reference:
   Fines over $200 to be set by jury trial, see 11 O.S. § 27-119
   Maximum fine levied, see 11 O.S. § 14-111
CHAPTER 11:  CITY STANDARDS
Section
Wards
   
11.01   Ward numbers and boundaries
   
11.02   Ward map
City Seal
   
11.15   Description and identification
   
11.16   Authorized uses
   
11.17   Unauthorized uses
   
Appendix:   City Seal
WARDS
§ 11.01  WARD NUMBERS AND BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The city is hereby divided into four wards to be known as Ward One,
Ward Two, Ward Three and Ward Four.
   (B)   The boundaries of these wards being more particularly described as
follows:
      (1)   Ward One.
         (a)   Beginning on the centerline of the intersection of North Mueller
Avenue and Northwest 36th Street; thence east on the centerline of said 36th
Street to the east city boundary; thence south on the east city boundary of the
City of Bethany to the centerline of the intersection of North Peniel Avenue
and Northwest 16th Street; thence west on the south city boundary to the
centerline of the intersection of North Glade Avenue and Northwest 16th Street;
thence north along the west city boundary to the centerline of the intersection
of North Glade Avenue and Northwest 21st Street; thence east on centerline of
Northwest 21st Street to the centerline of the intersection of North Alexander
Lane and Northwest 21st Street; thence north on the centerline of North
Alexander Lane to the centerline of the intersection of Northwest 23rd Street
and North Alexander Lane; thence east on the centerline of Northwest 23rd
Street to the centerline of the intersection of North Mueller Avenue and
Northwest 23rd Street; thence north on the centerline of North Mueller Avenue
to the centerline of the intersection of Northwest 36th Street and North
Mueller Avenue, the point of beginning.
         (b)   Ward I is and includes all of that land presently within the
City of Bethany east of North Mueller Avenue and south of Northwest 36th
Street, and all of the land south of Northwest 23rd Street and east of North
Alexander, and all of the land south of Northwest 21st Street and east of North
Glade Avenue, or which might later be added in this area to the city limits of
the city.
      (2)   Ward Two.
         (a)   Beginning on the centerline of the intersection of North
Rockwell Avenue and Northwest 36th Street; thence north on the centerline of
North Rockwell Avenue to the north city boundary; thence east along the north
city boundary to the northeast corner of the Bethany Cemetery; thence south on
the east boundary of the City of Bethany to the centerline of the intersection
of North Hammond Avenue and Northwest 36th Street; thence west on the
centerline of Northwest 36th Street to the centerline of the intersection of
North Rockwell Avenue and Northwest 36th Street, the point of beginning.
         (b)   Ward II is and includes all of that land presently within the
City of Bethany east of North Rockwell Avenue and north of Northwest 36th
Street, or which may later be added in this area to the city limits of the
city.
      (3)   Ward Three.
         (a)   Beginning on the centerline of the intersection of Northwest
50th Street and North Rockwell Avenue; thence south on the centerline of North
Rockwell Avenue to the centerline of the intersection of Northwest 36th Street
and North Rockwell Avenue; thence west on the centerline of Northwest 36th
Street to the centerline of the intersection of North Wilburn Avenue and
Northwest 36th Street; thence south on the centerline of North Wilburn Avenue
to the centerline of the intersection of Northwest 30th Street and North
Wilburn Avenue; thence west on the centerline of Northwest 30th Street to the
centerline of the intersection of North Council Road and Northwest 30th Street;
thence south on the centerline of North Council Road, to a point where the city
boundary on the west side of North Council Road intersects North Council Road;
thence west on said city boundary and south to the centerline of Northwest 23rd
Street; thence west on the centerline of Northwest 23rd Street to the west city
boundary; thence north on the west city boundary of the City of Bethany to the
centerline of Northwest 50th Street; thence east on the centerline of Northwest
50th Street to the centerline of the intersection of Northwest 50th Street and
North Rockwell Avenue, the point of beginning.
         (b)    Ward III is and includes all of that land presently within the
City of Bethany west of North Rockwell Avenue between Northwest 50th Street and
Northwest 36th Street, west of North Wilburn Avenue between Northwest 36th
Street and Northwest 30th Street, west of North Council Road between Northwest
30th Street and Northwest 23rd Street, or which might be added to the city
limits of the city.
      (4)   Ward Four.
         (a)   Beginning on the centerline of the intersection of Northwest
36th Street and North Mueller Avenue; thence south on the centerline of North
Mueller Avenue to the centerline of Northwest 23rd Street; thence west on the
centerline of Northwest 23rd Street to the centerline of North Alexander Lane;
thence south on the centerline of North Alexander Lane to the centerline of the
intersection of Northwest 21st Street and North Alexander Lane; thence west on
the centerline of Northwest 21st Street to the centerline of the intersection
of North Glade Avenue and Northwest 21st Street; thence south on the centerline
of North Glade Avenue to the centerline of Northwest 19th Street; thence west
on the centerline of Northwest 19th Street to the centerline of North Council
Road; thence north on the centerline of North Council Road to the centerline of
the intersection of Northwest 30th Street and North Council Road; thence east
on the centerline of Northwest 30th Street to the centerline of the
intersection of North Wilburn Avenue and Northwest 30th Street; thence north on
the centerline of North Wilburn Avenue to the centerline of the intersection of
Northwest 36th Street and North Wilburn Avenue; thence east on the centerline
of Northwest 36th Street the centerline of the intersection of North Mueller
Avenue and Northwest 36th Street, the point of beginning.
         (b)   Ward IV is and includes all of the land presently within the
city of Bethany south of Northwest 36th Street between North Mueller Avenue and
North Wilburn Avenue to Northwest 23rd Street on the south, and all of the land
south of Northwest 30th Street between North Council Road and North Mueller
Avenue to Northwest 23rd Street on the south, and all of the land south of
Northwest 23rd Street between North Alexander Lane and North Council Road to
Northwest 21st Street on the south, and all land south of Northwest 21st Street
between North Council Road and North Glade Avenue the city boundary, or which
might later be added in this area to the city limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-201)  (Am. Ord. 1664, passed 1-8-02)
Statutory reference:
   Division of city into wards; requirements for equal population; review after
census, see 11 O.S. § 20-101
§ 11.02  WARD MAP.
   For the purpose of further clarification of the ward boundary lines, the
ward boundary map shall point out the general areas of the four wards as they
presently exist or will possibly exist in the future.  The ward map shall be
maintained on file in the office of the City Clerk and shall be available for
inspection during normal business hours.
(Prior Code, § 1-202)
CITY SEAL
§ 11.15  DESCRIPTION AND IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   The city has adopted an official city seal for identification of its
corporate identity and the seal and the name.
   (B)   “The City of Bethany, Oklahoma,” are registered trademarks with the
state, Registration No. 30775.
(Prior Code, § 2-701)
§ 11.16  AUTHORIZED USES.
   (A)   The seal of the city shall be used only for official government
purposes of the city.  The officers and employees of the city are hereby
authorized to affix, depict or otherwise use the seal of the city on any
official city correspondence, property, publication, pin, medal, graphic
display, flag, banner or any other visual display.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      OFFICIAL.  Any action taken by an officer or employee of the city, as
part of his or her duty or obligation to the city, and on behalf of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-702)
§ 11.17  UNAUTHORIZED USES.
   (A)   It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm, corporation or
other legal entity to use the seal of the city for private purposes.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PRIVATE PURPOSES.  Any action taken by any person, firm, corporation or
other legal entity which serves their private interest rather than the official
business of the city.
   (C)   Further, the following acts of using the seal are specifically
prohibited:
      (1)   Use of city seal on any product or service, except those services
offered by the city;
      (2)   Use of the seal for political campaign advertising purposes,
including advertisements for candidates for City Council or municipal
elections; and
      (3)   Use of the seal to indicate endorsement by the city of any product,
service or issue, except those specifically endorsed by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-703) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
APPENDIX:   CITY SEAL
   The following depicts the city's seal.  This seal is particularly described
and its uses defined in §§
11.15 through
11.17 of this code of ordinances.
Click_here_to_view_seal
CHAPTER 12: CITY POLICIES
Section
Primary Election Dates for Council and Mayor Elections
   
12.01   Primary election dates
Visible Posting of Permits Required
   
12.10   Posting of permits required
PRIMARY ELECTION DATES FOR COUNCIL AND MAYOR ELECTIONS
§ 12.01  PRIMARY ELECTION DATES.
   Pursuant to the authority of the City Charter §
6-10, and applicable provisions of the Oklahoma Statutes the date for primary
elections for Council Members and Mayor are established as the second Tuesday
in February in the years set forth in the Charter for those elections.
(Ord. 1918, passed 10-4-16)
VISIBLE POSTING OF PERMITS REQUIRED
§ 12.10  POSTING OF PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Visible, outside posting shall be made of all permits issued for
demolition, remodeling, and construction projects requiring city permits.
   (B)   Visible, outside posting of permits for any excavation or construction
on any public property, easements or rights-of-way shall be required at a
location on or abutting the job site.
   (C)   For other permits required for various uses of property such as garage
sales, auctions, or other activities requiring a city permit, the permit shall
be posted in a visible outside location on the property where the activity is
taking place.
   (D)   For the purposes of this subchapter, VISIBLE means the permit can be
readily seen by city code officials when at the location of the permitted
activity without entering into a structure.
(Ord. 1928, passed 2-21-17)
TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   CITY OFFICERS
      
32.   BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND DEPARTMENTS
      
33.   MUNICIPAL COURT
      
34.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
35.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
36.   CIVIL DEFENSE; EMERGENCIES
      
37.   PERSONNEL
      
38.   TAXATION
      
39.   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
CHAPTER 30:  CITY COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Regular meetings
   
30.02   Special meetings
Rules of Procedure
   
30.15   Governing procedure; conduct
   
30.16   Agenda
   
30.17   Presiding official; duties
   
30.18   Order
   
30.19   Roll call
   
30.20   Quorum
   
30.21   Order of business
   
30.22   Reading of minutes
   
30.23   Rules of discussion
   
30.24   Addressing the Council
   
30.25   Repetitious request
   
30.26   Decorum; enforcement
   
30.27   Standing committees
   
30.28   Protest; filing against Council action
   
30.29   Claims against city
   
30.30   Ordinances, resolutions, motions and contracts
   
30.31   Adjournment
   
30.32   Disturbing Council meetings
Cross-reference:
   Civil Emergencies, see
§§ 36.15 through
36.18
   Council, see
§ 31.16
   Council authority, qualifications and powers, see Charter Arts. II, V, and
VI
   Election procedures, see
§§ 31.01 through
31.03
   Mayor, see
§ 31.15
   GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01  REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (A)   (1)   The City Council shall hold regular meetings on the first and
third Tuesday of each month from 7:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m.
      (2)   When the day fixed for any regular meeting of the City Council,
however, falls on a day designated by law as a legal or national holiday, or a
day wherein a majority of the members of the City Council shall be absent from
the city, the Council, not less than ten days prior to the date for
implementation of any change, may, by motion, change the date, time or place of
a regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council, provided written notice
thereof is contemporaneously given the City Clerk.
   (B)   All regular meetings of the City Council shall be held at Bethany
Library until renovations at City Hall are made.
(Prior Code, § 2-602)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00; Am. Ord. 1986, passed 2-4-20)
§ 30.02  SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Mayor may call special meetings of the City Council whenever, in
his or her opinion, the public business may require it, or a special meeting
may be called at the express request of any three members of the City Council.
   (B)   Whenever a special meeting shall be called, a notice in writing signed
by the Mayor, three members of the City Council or the City Clerk attesting to
the Mayor or Council members' call, shall be served upon each member of the
Council either in person or by notice left at the Council member's place of
residence, stating the date, place and hour of the meeting and the purpose for
which the meeting is called, and no business shall be transacted thereat,
except such as is stated in the notice.
(Prior Code, § 2-603)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
   RULES OF PROCEDURE
§ 30.15  GOVERNING PROCEDURE; CONDUCT.
   The following provisions, unless modified by subsequent ordinance consistent
herewith, shall govern the conduct of all regular, special and emergency
meetings of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-601)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.16  AGENDA.
   (A)   All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract
documents or other matters to be submitted to the Council shall, at no time
later than 12:00 p.m. on the Thursday prior to each Council meeting, be
delivered to the City Manager, whereupon the City Manager shall arrange a list
of the matters according to order of business and furnish each member of the
Council, City Clerk and the City Attorney with a copy of same prior to the
Council meeting and as far in advance of the meeting as time for preparation
will permit.  Inclusion of the foregoing matters on the agenda shall be at
request of the Mayor or Council member, the City Manager, City Clerk or the
City Attorney.
   (B)   Upon receipt of all items for the agenda, as provided for in division
(A) above, the City Manager shall determine if all items could reasonably be
accomplished in a regular Council meeting prior to 10:00 p.m.  In the event the
number of items to be considered appears to exceed a normal meeting, any item
(s) which would not adversely affect the public or city operations by being
placed on a later agenda may be removed by the City Manager and deferred no
later than the third next succeeding regular City Council meeting.
   (C)   The foregoing should not be interpreted as precluding the utilization
of addendum to the agenda; provided however, that same complies with the
requirements of the State Open Meeting Act, being 25 O.S. §§ 301 et seq., and
further, is of an urgent nature as well as concerns a matter which could not
have otherwise been transmitted to the City Manager in a timely fashion. Items
of this nature may be added to the agenda on the Monday before the meeting,
only if they qualify for listing on the consent docket or litigation, or
constitute an emergency, as defined under the State Open Meeting Act.
(Prior Code, § 2-604)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.17  PRESIDING OFFICIAL; DUTIES.
   (A)   The presiding official of the City Council shall be the Mayor.  The
Mayor shall assume the chair of the presiding official immediately after
beginning his or her term of office.
   (B)   The Mayor shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular,
special and emergency meetings of the City Council.
   (C)   He or she shall state every question coming before the Council,
announce the decision of the Council on all subjects and decide all questions
of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the Council, in which event a
majority vote of the Council shall govern and conclusively determine the
question of order.  The Mayor may vote on any or all questions. He or she shall
sign all ordinances and resolutions, and all other obligations of the city, as
authorized by the City Council, adopted by the Council during his or her
presence.  In the event of the absence of the Mayor, the Vice-Mayor, elected
from the membership at the first meeting in May of each year, shall be the
presiding official as well as sign all ordinances, resolutions or obligations
of the city, as adopted by the City Council, during his or her presence.
(Prior Code, § 2-605)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.18  ORDER.
   The Mayor, or in his or her absence, the Vice-Mayor, or upon the occurrence
of five or more Council persons being present, or the City Clerk or his or her
assistant shall call the Council to order.  A temporary chairperson shall be
elected by the five or more members of the Council present. Upon the arrival of
the Mayor or Vice-Mayor, the temporary chairperson shall immediately relinquish
the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-606)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.19  ROLL CALL.
   Before proceeding with the business of the Council, the City Clerk or his or
her deputy may call the roll of the members.  The names of those present shall
be entered in the minutes.
(Prior Code, § 2-607)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.20  QUORUM.
   A majority of all the members elected to the Council shall constitute a
quorum at any regular, special or emergency meeting of the Council.  In the
absence of a quorum, the Mayor, or Vice-Mayor in the Mayor's absence, shall
declare the meeting adjourned.
(Prior Code, § 2-608)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.21  ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   (1)   All meetings, regular, special and emergency, except executive
sessions as authorized by law, shall be open to the public.
      (2)   No person shall be barred unless the person is disorderly or
refuses to obey the lawful order of the Mayor, or Vice-Mayor in the absence, or
temporary chairperson upon the event of absence of either the Mayor or Vice-
Mayor, who may order the Chief of Police or any attending police officer to
eject any person.
      (3)   The Police Department shall have at least one officer present or
standing by during each Council meeting.
   (B)   Promptly at the hour set by law on the day of each regular, special or
emergency meeting, the members of the City Council, the City Manager, the City
Clerk and the City Attorney shall take their regular stations in the Council
chambers and the business of the City Council shall be taken up for
consideration and disposition in the following order:
      (1)   Call to order;
      (2)   Flag salute;
      (3)   Roll call;
      (4)   Approval of consent docket including minutes of previous meetings
and claims;
      (5)   Proclamations and awards;
      (6)   Public comment;
      (7)   Public hearing items;
      (8)   Consideration and unfinished business from previous meeting;
      (9)   Introduction and adoption of resolutions and ordinances;
      (10)   Consideration of petitions, contracts and communications;
      (11)   New business;
      (12)   Report of officers, boards, committees, City Attorney and City
Manager;
      (13)   Council comments and suggestions; and
      (14)   Adjournment.
   (C)   The order of disposition of the matters to be taken up for
consideration by the Council may be rearranged by the direction of the
presiding officer.
(Prior Code, § 2-609)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.22  READING OF MINUTES.
   Unless the reading of the minutes of a Council meeting is requested by a
member of the Council, the minutes may be approved without reading if the City
Clerk has previously furnished each member with a synopsis thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2-610)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.23  RULES OF DISCUSSION.
   (A)   The Mayor, Vice-Mayor or temporary chairperson, as the case may be,
may move, second, discuss and vote from the chair, subject only to the
limitations of discussion as are by these rules imposed on all members and
shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a Council member
by reason of acting as the presiding officer.
   (B)   (1)   Every member desiring to speak shall address the chair, and say,
“Mr. or Madame Mayor,” and the member shall not proceed with the member's
remarks until named and recognized by the presiding officer.  If any member is
speaking, or otherwise transgresses the rules of the City Council, the Mayor
shall, or any member may, call the person to order, and the member called to
order should immediately cease, unless permitted to explain, and the Council,
if appealed to, shall decide without discussion.
      (2)   If the decision be in favor of the member called to order, he or
she shall be at liberty to proceed.  If against him or her and the case
requires, he or she shall be liable to the censure of the Council. 
      (3)   No person shall speak more than twice on the same question unless
permitted by the Council.
      (4)   No member of the Council shall leave his or her seat to speak to
any other member of the Council or any other person in the Council Chamber
without first obtaining permission of the Mayor.
      (5)   When the City Council is in session, or when a member is speaking,
or the City Clerk, Manager or Attorney is reading any paper to or speaking to
the City Council, no member shall, in any way, disturb the proceedings of the
City Council.  No member of the City Council shall be permitted to talk upon
any one given subject longer than five minutes at any given meeting, except
when permission be granted for an extension of time by a two-thirds vote of the
members present at the meeting of the Council.  No members of the Council
shall, at any time in addressing any meetings thereof, indulge in any
personalities or indecorous language or in any matters or things not pertaining
to the subject under discussion.
      (6)   The right of the floor of the Council shall be accorded only to the
members of the Council and to the appointive officers of the city unless
otherwise provided for herein.
   (C)   A Council member moving for the adoption of an ordinance or resolution
shall have the privilege of closing the discussion thereon unless by a majority
vote of the members present at the meeting the Council decides to extend
discussion for a time certain.  In all other cases, the closing of discussion
shall be governed by the presiding official unless, by majority vote of the
members present at the meeting, the Council decides to extend discussion for a
time certain.
   (D)   A motion to reconsider may be made either immediately during the same
session or at a recessed and reconvened session thereof only.  The motion shall
take precedence over all other motions and it shall be debatable.
   (E)   (1)   Any Council member may request, through the presiding official,
the privilege of having an abstract of his or her statement on any subject
under consideration by the Council entered in the minutes.
      (2)   If the Council consents thereto, the statement shall be entered in
the minutes.
   (F)   The City Clerk may be directed by the presiding official to enter in
the minutes a synopsis of discussion on any question coming regularly before
the Council.
   (G)   When a question before the Council contains several propositions, any
member may call for a division of the question so as to vote on each
proposition separately.  Unless the request for division is made, after
preliminary discussion of an agenda item, the Mayor shall, consistent with
these rules, call the matter for determination by the Council. Subsequent to
the Mayor calling the matter for determination, the procedure shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Main motion.
         (a)   Any member of the Council desiring to offer a motion on a
particular agenda item shall so indicate by addressing the Chair and saying
“Mr. or Madame Mayor” to obtain the Mayor's recognition.  Subsequent to the
Mayor recognizing the member, the member will thereupon, in clear and concise
terms, move to:
            1.   Continue the matter until a specific date;
            2.   Table the matter indefinitely;
            3.   To take a certain course of action;
            4.   Approve for award a bid pending review of bid by staff, the
signing of the contract and furnishing the required bond;
            5.   Approve reading of an ordinance by title only;
            6.   Approval of an ordinance and that the reading of the ordinance
be waived;
            7.   Adopt a resolution;
            8.   Approve or reject the request for; or
            9.   Approve consent agenda.
         (b)   These are exemplary only and not intended to list all possible
main motions.
         (c)   Thereafter, members desiring to second the motion shall so
indicate by addressing the chair and saying “Mr. or Madam Mayor, I second the
motion.”  Subsequent to the main motion receiving a second and following any
discussion, the Mayor shall call for a vote.  In all cases, the member making
the motion, the member seconding the motion and the vote of the members thereon
shall be entered in the minutes of the Council.
         (d)   If no member offers a motion on an agenda item, the Mayor shall
again call for motions. If no motion is presented after the second calling, the
Mayor shall declare the item failed for lack of motion.  Similarly, if no one
seconds another member's motion, the Mayor shall, after calling twice therefor,
declare that the motion failed for lack of a second.
         (e)   Anytime prior to the Mayor's calling for vote of the Council, a
member may move to amend the motion, which shall require a second.  An
amendment must be germane to the main motion and be accepted by the member
making the main motion and the member seconding same, if applicable.
      (2)   Procedural motions.
         (a)   In addition to main motions, Council members may offer certain
procedural motions which take precedence over the main motion and are not
subject to discussion.  The procedural motions also require a second from a
Council member to proceed with the procedural motions.
         (b)   A non-exclusive list of exemplary procedural motions are:
            1.   Amend main motion;
            2.   Extend limit or close time for discussion;
            3.   Call for the question;
            4.   Recess or adjournment;
            5.   Appeal Mayor's call to order;
            6.   Division of motion into parts;
            7.   Table; and
            8.   Other motions pertaining to the disposition of main motions or
dealing with rules of conduct at the meeting.
   (H)   An item previously decided by the City Council may be placed on the
agenda as a new item of business only under the following circumstances:
      (1)   When the vote by the City Council occurred at least six months
before the item again appears on the agenda;
      (2)   When an item deals with any matters dealing with initiation,
prosecution, defense or settlement of litigation brought by or against the
city, its employees or agencies; and/or
      (3)   When a majority of the members of the City Council present at a
Council meeting direct the item to be placed on the agenda.
(Prior Code, § 2-611)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.24  ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL.
   (A)   Any qualified person may address the Council with written
communication without securing prior permission, or any person desiring to make
oral communication to the Council shall follow the procedure set forth below. 
Communications will be presented under the following headings of business:
      (1)   Written communications.  Interested parties or their authorized
representatives may address the Council by written communications as follows:
         (a)   Provide 11 copies to the City Clerk prior to the start of the
Council meeting and Clerk will distribute to the members at the Council table;
         (b)   Provide a single copy to the Clerk or to the Mayor prior to
start of meeting; or
         (c)   Mail written communication to “Mayor and City Council, Bethany
City Hall, P.O. Box 219, Bethany, OK 73008,” and copies will be provided to
Mayor and each Council member.
      (2)   Oral communication.  Interest persons or their authorized legal
representatives may address the Council by oral communications upon being
authorized by the Mayor.  Preference shall be given those persons who have
notified the City Clerk in advance of their desire to speak in order that same
may appear on the agenda of the City Council.  Absent an emergency situation,
no action will be taken by the City Council on a matter deemed not listed on
the agenda.  Interested persons shall make request of the City Council, Mayor
or City Manager to have an agenda item placed on the City Council agenda.
Nothing in this section shall accord any right to any person other than
appropriate city officials to place items on an agenda of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-612)
   (B)   (1)   Upon recognition by the Mayor, a person addressing the Council
shall give his or her name, address and city of residence in an audible tone of
voice for the records and, unless further time is granted by the Council, shall
limit his or her address to five minutes.  All remarks shall be addressed to
the Council as a body and not to any member thereof.
      (2)   No person, other than the Council and the person having the floor
shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a
member of the Council, without the permission of the Mayor.  No questions shall
be asked of a Council member or staff, except through the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2-614)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.25  REPETITIOUS REQUEST.
   (A)   At the time that a member of the public presents a comment or opinion,
request, proposal and the like to the Council, the Mayor and Council shall be
permitted 90 days to evaluate, request and receive staff information and
respond.
   (B)   The presentation by the same member of the public of the same subject
will not be permitted again until 90 days has elapsed.
(Prior Code, § 2-613) 
(Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.26  DECORUM; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   While the Council is in session, the members must preserve order
and decorum, and a member shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or
interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the Council, nor disturb any member
while speaking or refuse to obey the lawful order of the Council or its Mayor,
except as otherwise herein provided.
      (2)   Any person making personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks or
who shall become boisterous and unruly while addressing the Council shall be
forthwith, by the Mayor, barred from further audience before the Council at
that meeting unless permission to continue be granted by a majority vote of the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-615)
   (B)   The Chief of Police or a member or members of the Police Department,
as he or she may designate, shall be sergeant-at-arms of the Council meetings. 
He, she or they shall carry out all lawful orders and instructions given by the
Mayor for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum of the Council meeting. 
Upon instructions of the presiding official, it shall be the duty of the
sergeant-at-arms, or any of them present, to place any person who violates the
order and decorum of the meeting under arrest, and cause him or her to be
prosecuted under the provisions of this code, the complaint to be signed by the
presiding official.  (Prior Code, § 2-616)
(Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.27  STANDING COMMITTEES.
   The standing committees of the Council shall be the Park Committee and
Traffic Committee.  Ad hoc committees may be created by the Council or Mayor
from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 2-617)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.28  PROTEST; FILING AGAINST COUNCIL ACTION.
   Any member shall have the right to have the reasons for his or her dissent
from, or protest against, any action of the Council entered on the minutes.
(Prior Code, § 2-618)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.29  CLAIMS AGAINST CITY.
   No account or other demand against the city shall be allowed until the same
has been considered and reported upon and approved by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-619)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.30  ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, MOTIONS AND CONTRACTS.
   (A)   All ordinances, unless otherwise provided for herein, shall be
prepared by the City Attorney.  No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation
to the Council unless ordered by a majority vote of the Council or requested in
writing by the Mayor, City Manager or City Attorney.
   (B)   All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall, before
presentation to the Council, have been approved as to form and legality by the
City Attorney or his or her authorized representative, and further, such shall
have been examined and approved for administration by the City Manager or his
or her authorized representative, where there are substantive matters of
administration involved.
   (C)   (1)   Ordinances and resolutions must be introduced and sponsored by a
member of the Council, except that the City Manager or City Attorney may
present ordinances and resolutions, and any Council member may assume
sponsorship thereof by moving that the ordinance and resolution be adopted. 
Otherwise, they shall not be considered.
      (2)   No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be
clearly expressed in its title.
      (3)   When any person, persons or corporations shall present an ordinance
to the Council asking for any franchise, lease, privilege, right-of-way,
occupancy or otherwise of any street, alley, park, square or any public ground
or property, or any extension of a previous grant of the same or the closing of
any street or alley, they shall furnish to the Council an original and 12
copies of the ordinance printed, and if required by the City Manager, the
person, persons or corporations presenting the ordinance shall provide each
member of the Council, the City Manager, the City Attorney and the City Clerk,
a plat of the property.  No ordinance shall be considered until these terms
have been complied with and the proposed ordinance has been reviewed by the
City Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 2-620)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.31  ADJOURNMENT.
   The Mayor shall adjourn all meetings of the Council, except a motion to
adjourn shall be required to end any meeting of the Council when any member
immediately objects to the Mayor declaring the meeting adjourned.
(Prior Code, § 2-621)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00)
§ 30.32  DISTURBING COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   It is unlawful for any person to, during the course of any regular, special
or emergency meeting of the City Council, engage in any conduct calculated to
or resulting in a disruption or disturbance of the administration of the public
business coming before the City Council.  Any person deemed in violation of
this section may be summarily removed from the Council chambers of the City
Hall by the sergeant-at-arms on order of the presiding official of any meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2-622)  (Ord. 1632, passed 3-7-00) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICERS
Section
Election Procedures
   
31.01   Elections
   
31.02   Filing and fees
   
31.03   Applicability of state law
Specific Officers
   
31.15   Mayor
   
31.16   Council
   
31.17   Compensation of Mayor and Council members
   
31.18   Council meetings; attendance
   
31.19   City Manager; duties; sales and purchasing procedures
   
31.20   City Clerk
   
31.21   City Attorney
ELECTION PROCEDURES
§ 31.01  ELECTIONS.
   All elections in the city, whether general or special, shall be conducted by
the County Election Board in accordance with the Charter and ordinances of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 2-501)  (Ord. 1548, passed 1-16-96)
§ 31.02  FILING AND FEES.
   (A)   A qualified person may become a candidate for the Office of Council
member or Mayor by filing a declaration of candidacy with the County Election
Board during the time period established by the Charter of the city.
   (B)   (1)   A declaration for candidacy shall be accompanied by a cashier's
check or certified check payable to the County Election Board in the amount of
$50.
      (2)   The filing fee shall be forfeited to the County Election Board and
the proceeds applied to the costs of the election as charged to the city by the
County Election Board unless the candidate is unopposed in the election or
receives more than 15% of the votes cast for the office for which the person
filing was a candidate, in which case the check shall be returned to the
candidate immediately.
(Prior Code, § 2-502)  (Ord. 1548, passed 1-16-96)
§ 31.03  APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW.
   Except where the Charter or ordinances of the city provide otherwise, all
elections of the city shall be conducted in accordance with those state
election laws applicable to municipal elections.
(Prior Code, § 2-503)  (Ord. 1548, passed 1-16-96)
   SPECIFIC OFFICERS
§ 31.15  MAYOR.
   (A)   The duties of the Mayor of the city shall be those prescribed by the
Charter of the city and the special duties as may be required by law and
ordinance.  He or she shall serve as the city's voting delegate to the
Association of Central Oklahoma Governments and other state or national
municipal organizations in which the city participates.
   (B)   Where appropriate, the Mayor may designate a Council member or the
City Manager as an alternate voting delegate to serve in his or her absence.
(Prior Code, § 2-101)  (Ord. 1314, passed 12-4-84; Am. Ord. 1481, passed 10-15-
91)
Cross-reference:
   Presiding official; duties, see
§ 30.17
§ 31.16  COUNCIL.
   The duties of the Council shall be those prescribed by law, Charter and
ordinances of the city. The Council may regulate the number and classes of
positions of employment in various offices, departments and agencies of the
city government and determine the salaries, wages and compensation to be paid
all officers, assistants and employees of the city. Except as otherwise
provided by Charter or ordinance, all employment regulations may be by
resolution or motion.  Where a regulation is by resolution, it shall be entered
at length in the resolution book.  Where a regulation is by motion, it shall be
entered at length in the minutes.
(Prior Code, § 2-102)
§ 31.17  COMPENSATION FOR MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor shall receive a salary of $4,200 annually, payable at
$350 per month.
      (2)   The Mayor shall also be paid up to $100 per month, on an
accountable plan, for expenses incurred in carrying out his or her duties and
attending to business of the city.
      (3)   This section, however, shall not prohibit the City Council from
approving additional expense reimbursement for the Mayor for non-
routineexpenses.
   (B)   Each Council member shall receive a salary of $2,400 annually, payable
at $200 per month.
   (C)   The salaries provided herein are intended to fully compensate the
Mayor and Council members for attendance at all meetings of the City Council,
regular or special, for attendance at all meetings of standing committees to
which they may be assigned, for training and for all other time required of
them to conscientiously fulfill the obligations of their office.
(Prior Code, §2-103)  (Ord. 1314, passed 12-4-84; Am. Ord. 1481, passed 10-15-
91; Am. Ord. 1815, passed 1-20-09)
§ 31.18  COUNCIL MEETINGS; ATTENDANCE.
   The regular meeting times of the Council shall be the first and third
Tuesday in each month at 7:30 p.m. Special meetings of the Council may be
called as provided by the Charter of the city.  It shall be the duty of the
Council members to attend each meeting of the Council, whether same be regular,
adjourned or a specially called meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2-104)
§ 31.19  CITY MANAGER; DUTIES; SALES AND PURCHASING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   (1)   The duties of the City Manager shall be those prescribed by the
Charter, ordinances of the city and other duties as may be designated by the
Council. He or she shall attend all meetings of the Council, and shall prepare
an agenda containing the business to be transacted at the meeting, together
with his or her recommendations thereon. He or she shall faithfully execute the
ordinances, policies, rules and regulations established by the Council.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided by the Charter and the ordinances of
the city, the City Manager shall have complete direction, supervision and
control of the administrative departments and employees of the city, and may,
in the interest of economy, make an employee an assistant to a department head,
or may make a head of one department an assistant to that of another, or may
transfer any department head or employee from one department to another. He or
she shall see that the duties of the several departments are promptly
performed, to the end that each department properly functions and shall, upon
request of the Personnel Board, furnish records of any administrative office or
employee of the city.
      (3)   He or she shall, from time to time, advise the Council of the
financial condition of the city, the shortage of equipment or labor in any
department and may make recommendations to the Council as may seem to him or
her advisable. The City Manager shall prepare the City Budget and present the
same to the City Council on or before the first Regular Meeting in March of
each year prior to the beginning of the next fiscal year. The City Manager may,
at his or her will, attend, as ex-officio member, any or all meetings of the
Police Pension Board, Firemen's Pension Board or any or all other pension
boards created by ordinance or state law for the purpose of administrative
guidance or in an advisory position, but without voting power.
(Prior Code, § 2-105)
   (B)   (1)   The City Manager or his or her designee shall contract for and
purchase all supplies, materials, equipment and services for the offices,
departments and agencies of the city government. The City Manager may also
transfer to or between offices, departments and agencies or sell surplus or
obsolete supplies, materials and equipment.
      (2)   All purchases of and contracts for supplies, materials, equipment
and contractual services shall, except as specifically provided herein, be
based wherever possible on competitive bids.
      (3)   (a)   All supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services,
except as otherwise provided herein, when the estimated costs thereof shall
exceed $25,000, shall be purchased by formal written contract from the lowest
and best bidder, after due notice inviting bids.
         (b)   Except as hereinafter provided, the purchase shall be approved
in advance by the City Council.
      (4)   (a)   Notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in an
official newspaper in the city and at least ten days prior to the last day set
for receipt of bids.
         (b)   The notice shall include a general description of the articles
or services being purchased, shall state where detailed specifications may be
obtained and the time and place for opening bids.
         (c)   The City Manager shall also mail the notice inviting bids to all
responsible prospective suppliers who have requested mailing of bid notices,
and to any other suppliers known to the City Manager or department head to be
interested in bidding on the particular purchase.
      (5)   All purchases of and contracts for supplies, materials, equipment,
public construction contracts and contractual services of less than the
estimated value of $25,000, shall be made in the open market without
advertisement for bids, and without necessity of the final written contract
procedure set forth above.
      (6)   (a)   All open market purchases shall be based on at least three
competitive quotes obtained by documented telephone solicitation or in writing,
except where not possible or practical. Records of all quotes received on open
market purchases shall be maintained with the original purchase order.
         (b)   No contract or purchase shall be subdivided or split to avoid
any of the provisions of this section.
      (7)   The City Manager is authorized to delegate purchasing
responsibility to other employees of the city under his or her supervision and
under the rules and regulations as he or she may deem appropriate.
      (8)   (a)   Materials, supplies, equipment or services available only
from a single source may be purchased by the City Manager without obtaining
quotes or bids.
         (b)   Materials, supplies, equipment and services may be purchased
without obtaining quotes or bids where purchased at or below the state central
purchasing contract bid price from any vendor offering the same or equivalent
materials, supplies, equipment or services.
         (c)   Materials, supplies, equipment, or services may be purchased
without obtaining quotes or bids where purchased through an interstate/
interlocal purchasing agreement entered into between the city or its trusts and
the interstate purchasing co-operative. This division (B)(8)(c) shall not apply
to "Public Construction Contracts" as defined in the Oklahoma Public
Competitive Bidding Act of 1974, (61 O.S. §§ 101 et. seq.)
         (d)   Where the City Manager declares that an emergency exists which
would require that the requirement of obtaining quotes or bids be waived, then
no bids or quotes need be obtained, and the City Manager is authorized to
expend up to $75,000, as necessary, to remedy the emergency without prior City
Council approval, subject to the following procedure: At least 24 hours prior
to the expenditure, the City Manager shall notify in writing or via email, the
Mayor and members of City Council of the proposed emergency by describing the
nature of the emergency and the proposed expenditure; prior to the stated time
of the proposed emergency expenditure, either the Mayor or any three Council
members may call an Emergency Meeting of the City Council if they determine the
need for Council consideration before the expenditure; following the emergency
expenditure the City Manager shall list the expenditure at the next City
Council meeting for ratification.
         (e)   No bids or quotes are required to be obtained for professional
services and other contractual services which are unique and not subject to
competition.
         (f)   Bulk gasoline and diesel fuel may be purchased by the City
Manager without prior City Council approval and without competitive bidding,
provided at least three open market quotes shall be obtained and documented in
writing as provided in division (6)(a) above, and the fuel purchased at the
lowest price.
      (9)   Property valued at more than $2,000, shall be sold or traded in
only after approval by the City Council, and shall be submitted for competitive
bidding or public auction as the Council may direct and under the notice and
advertisement as the Council may direct. Property valued at less than $2,000,
may be sold or traded in by the City Manager without City Council approval
under the condition as the City Manager deems appropriate.
      (10)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the ability
of the City Manager to construct improvements or perform other projects by the
force account method.
      (11)   The city reserves the right to reject any bids for purchases or
sales of property or services where the public interest will be served thereby.
      (12)   All contracts awarded for purchases or sales of supplies,
materials, equipment or services shall be awarded to the lowest, most
responsible and most responsive bidder.
      (13)   It is the intent of this section to procure for the city the
highest quality of supplies, materials, equipment and services at the least
expense to the city. Further, the intent is to encourage full and open
competition on all purchases and sales. This section shall be interpreted and
construed in furtherance of this intent.
(Prior Code, § 2-106)  (Ord. 1280, passed 3-6-84; Am. Ord. 1419, passed 1-19-
88; Am. Ord. 1556, passed 8-6-96; Am. Ord. 1615, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 1644,
passed 10-3-00; Am. Ord. 1890, passed 1-20-15)
   (C)   (1)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to declare an emergency
and to enter into all necessary contracts, not exceeding the sum of $75,000,
per occurrence, for the emergency repair and/or replacement of public
improvements without prior approval of the City Council and without competitive
bidding under the procedures set forth in division (B)(8)(d) above.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (C), the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         EMERGENCY. A determination by the City Manager that the condition
requiring repair or replacement results from a sudden, unexpected condition or
unforeseen occurrence or condition, and is a situation wherein the public
health and/or safety is immediately endangered.
(Prior Code, § 2-106.1)  (Ord. 1396, passed 3-3-87; Am. Ord. 1732, passed 8-3-
04; Am. Ord. 1801, passed 5-6-08; Am. Ord. 1890, passed 1-20-15; Am. Ord. 1936,
passed 6-6-17; Am. Ord. 1979, passed 9-16-19)
§ 31.20  CITY CLERK.
   (A)   (1)   The City Clerk shall have the duties and responsibilities
prescribed in the Charter and code of the city.
      (2)   He or she shall keep the seal of the city and attest the signature
of the Mayor or Vice-Mayor.
      (3)   He or she shall receive and take orders for all utility service
rendered by the city.
   (B)   He or she shall collect and receive all moneys, deposits and
miscellaneous revenues from every source which is required to be paid to or
deposited with the city.  He or she shall keep City Hall open continuously
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. each day, except Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays.  The City Clerk shall daily deposit all moneys collected
in the official depository of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-107)
§ 31.21  CITY ATTORNEY.
   The duties of the City Attorney shall be those prescribed by the Charter of
the city and other special duties as may be required by law. He or she shall
attend City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of Adjustment
meetings and any other meetings as requested by the City Council or Mayor. The
City Attorney shall advise the City Council, City Manager and other officers of
the city as regards their official powers, duties and responsibilities. Upon
request, the City Attorney shall represent the city in litigation in which the
city is a party; prepare ordinances, resolutions and other necessary documents
when directed by the City Council or other proper authority of the city, and to
perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law, charter or ordinance.
The City Attorney shall receive, as his or her salary, a reasonable sum as may
be determined by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-108)  (Am. Ord. 1978, passed 9-16-19)
Cross-reference:
   City Attorney, see
§ 33.019
CHAPTER 32:  BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND DEPARTMENTS
Section
Hospital Board
   
32.001   Board created; powers and duties
   
32.002   Appointment of members; qualifications and tenure
   
32.003   Organization of Board
Park Department; Director
   
32.015   Creation of Department
   
32.016   Duties
   
32.017   Custody of equipment
   
32.018   Park Director
Library Board
   
32.030   Library Advisory Board
   
32.031   Duties
Community Development Department
   
32.045   Creation of Department
   
32.046   Duties of Director
   
32.047   Duties of City Inspector
Street Department
   
32.060   Creation of Department
   
32.061   Custody of road equipment
   
32.062   Purchase of supplies
   
32.063   Statement of needs for fiscal year
Utility Department
   
32.075   Establishment of Department
   
32.076   Duties
   
32.077   Custody of equipment
Personnel Board
   
32.090   Creation
   
32.091   Meetings
   
32.092   Procedures
Cross-reference:
   Board of Adjustment; zoning, see §§
158.085 et seq.
   Cemetery Commission, see
§ 94.01
   Planning and Zoning Commission, see §§
158.070  et seq.
HOSPITAL BOARD
§ 32.001  BOARD CREATED; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Hospital Board of the city which shall
have the powers, duties and responsibilities of organization and operation of a
hospital in the city, including the medical practice therein.
   (B)   The Board shall endeavor to achieve the purposes for which the Bethany
General Hospital was planned, constructed and put into operation, so that the
hospital may become an accredited hospital and may meet the minimum standards
for approval set by the Joint Committee on Accreditation of the American
Hospital Association and in connection therewith, the Hospital Board shall have
the power to employ an Administrator, appoint committees, to contract as a
Board and comply with contracts and to do all things necessary to accomplish
that end.
   (C)   The Board shall have additional powers, duties and responsibilities as
may be created by resolution of the trustees of the Bethany Hospital Trust or
as set forth in any contract that may be established between the Board and the
Hospital Trust.
(Prior Code, § 9-101)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal hospital boards, see 11 O.S. §§ 30-101 et seq.
§ 32.002  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; QUALIFICATIONS AND TENURE.
   (A)   The Hospital Board shall consist of seven members, residents of the
city who shall be appointed by the Chairperson of the Trustees of the Bethany
Hospital Trust, with the consent of the Board of Trustees and removable by the
Trustees.
   (B)   The Chief of the Medical Staff of the hospital and the Hospital
Administrator and the manager of the Bethany Hospital Trust shall be ex-officio
non-voting members of the Board.
   (C)   The appointed members shall serve for a period of three years and
until their successors are appointed and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 9-102)  (Ord. 1329, passed 5-21-85)
§ 32.003  ORGANIZATION OF BOARD.
   (A)   As soon as practical after the appointment of the Hospital Board, the
members thereof shall meet and organize.
   (B)   They shall adopt by-laws to govern their procedure which shall define
the policies and procedures to be followed in the organization and operation of
the hospital in order to achieve the purposes of the hospital.  One member
shall be elected as Secretary.
   (C)   The by-laws shall be approved by the Trustees of the Bethany Hospital
Trust.
(Prior Code, § 9-103)
   PARK DEPARTMENT; DIRECTOR
§ 32.015  CREATION OF DEPARTMENT.
   The Park Department is hereby created and established in the city and shall
consist of the Superintendent and other personnel as the City Manager shall,
from time to time, determine.
(Prior Code, § 12-101)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal parks, park and recreation boards, see 11 O.S. §§ 33-101et seq.
§ 32.016  DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Park Department to have charge of, control,
operate, repair, maintain and improve all parks, playgrounds, swimming pools,
other recreational facilities and cemeteries belonging to or under the control
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 12-102)
§ 32.017  CUSTODY OF EQUIPMENT.
   The Superintendent shall have custody of the equipment of the Department and
shall be accountable to the City Manager for its care and safekeeping.  He or
she shall maintain a running inventory of the equipment, together with all cars
or other vehicles and shall maintain thereon the estimated value thereof, which
shall be revised from time to time.  He or she shall furnish the City Manager
with a copy thereof and shall file a copy with the City Clerk.  The
Superintendent shall make recommendations to the City Manager as to needed
supplies and equipment.
(Prior Code, § 12-103)
§ 32.018  PARK DIRECTOR.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Office of the Park Director for the city. 
The office shall be held by the City Manager.  (Prior Code, § 12-105)
   (B)   (1)   The City Council shall, from time to time, adopt rules and
regulations as it deems necessary to maintain security, safety and efficient
operation of the parks and other public areas under control of the city.  The
rules and regulations shall be adopted and may be amended by written resolution
of the City Council.  The resolution adopting or amending the rules shall not
become effective until the resolution adopting them is published in full, one
time, in the Tribune Review newspaper.
      (2)   Upon adoption of rules, the City Manager shall cause signs to be
erected and maintained at prominent and conspicuous locations at all parks and
other public areas where the rules will apply.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this code for any person,
firm or corporation to violate any of the rules or regulations in public parks
or other public areas where signs are posted designating the rules, and a
violation of this section shall be punished as provided.
(Prior Code, § 12-106)  (Ord. 1571, passed 7-15-97)
   (C)   (1)   Any park or any section of any park may be declared closed to
the public by the Park Director at any time and for any interval of time,
either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals, either entirely or
merely to certain uses, as the Director may determine to be necessary to
maintain safety, order, security and efficient operation in the parks.
      (2)   Signs shall be erected and maintained by the Park Director stating
these special closing times.
(Prior Code, § 12-107)
   (D)   (1)   Shelter areas in the park may be reserved for designated periods
of time upon application for reservation permit made in advance to the Park
Director.  The application shall state:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any;
         (c)   The day and hours for which the permit is desired;
         (d)   The park or portion thereof for which the permit is desired;
         (e)   An estimate of the anticipated attendance; and
         (f)   Any other information which the Director shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued
hereunder.
      (2)   The Director may issue a reservation permit hereunder when he or
she finds:
         (a)   The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park;
         (b)   The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the
promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation;
         (c)   The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to
incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;
         (d)   The proposed activity or use will not entail unusual,
extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the city; and
         (e)   The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the day and hour required in the application.
      (3)   Fees for issuance of a reservation permit shall be set by
resolution of the City Council.  (Ord. 1614, passed 6-1-99)
      (4)   The Director shall have authority to revoke a reservation permit
upon a finding of a violation of any rule or ordinance or for good cause shown.
(Prior Code, § 12-108)
   (E)   The Director, all police and peace officers and any park attendants
shall have the authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation
of this section or violating any rules and regulations of the Park Director. 
(Prior Code, § 12-109)
Penalty, see § 10.99
   LIBRARY BOARD
§ 32.030  LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby established the Library Advisory Board, consisting of
five members, four of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor, one from each ward.
   (B)   The fifth member shall be the City Manager or his or her designee. 
The four members appointed by the Mayor shall serve for one year or until their
successors have been appointed and qualified.  Their terms shall expire at 7:30
p.m. on the first Tuesday in May of each year.
(Prior Code, § 12-201)
Statutory reference:
   Public Library Code; joint library systems, see 65 O.S. §§ 1-101et seq.
§ 32.031  DUTIES.
   (A)   The Library Advisory Board shall meet as soon as practical after their
appointment and shall, at the first meeting, determine the dates and times of
future meetings.
   (B)   They shall make a study of the needs in the city and shall make
reports and recommendations to the City Council from time to time as to the
needs and the proper way to meet those needs.
(Prior Code, § 12-202)
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
§ 32.045  CREATION OF DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby established the Community Development
Department, which consists of a Director and other personnel as shall be
authorized by the City Council.
      (2)   The Director shall possess qualifications as the City Manager deems
appropriate.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the City Manager to establish and
maintain the organization, personnel, equipment and resources required for
execution and fulfillment of the community development objectives adopted in
the program budget.
      (2)   The annual expenditures for the purposes shall be subject to
appropriation by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 5-101)
§ 32.046  DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
   It shall be the duty of the Director to:
   (A)   Prepare, at the request of the City Manager or City Council, all plans
and specifications for the erection, construction or addition to all
infrastructure systems, buildings and other structures owned or to be erected
by or for the benefit of the city;
   (B)   Issue work orders, supervise and have inspected all construction
making additions or extensions to the infrastructure systems of the city;
   (C)   Develop, maintain and revise, with the consent of the City Council, a
capital improvements program for the scheduled replacement, upgrading, addition
or extension to the infrastructure systems of the city and other public
facilities;
   (D)   Administer planning, zoning and development ordinances, issue permits
and have inspected all construction by private parties within the scope hereof,
and, from time to time, examine all Building, Fire, Electrical, Mechanical and
Plumbing Codes and other ordinances and regulations pertaining to buildings and
development in the city and make recommendations to the City Council concerning
same; and
   (E)   Supervise all personnel of the Department and perform other duties as
the City Manager may direct.
(Prior Code, § 5-102)
§ 32.047  DUTIES OF CITY INSPECTOR.
   In addition to the other duties as the Director may assign, the City
Inspector shall be charged with the duty of enforcing all Building, Fire,
Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes.
(Prior Code, § 5-103)
   STREET DEPARTMENT
§ 32.060  CREATION OF DEPARTMENT.
   The Street Department for the city is hereby established and shall consist
of the Street Superintendent and other employees as shall be designated by the
City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 15-101)
§ 32.061  CUSTODY OF ROAD EQUIPMENT.
   The Street Superintendent shall have custody of the road equipment and shall
be accountable to the City Manager for its care and safekeeping.  He or she
shall inventory the equipment, giving its estimated value and revise the same
from time to time, which shall be furnished to the City Manager, a copy thereof
to be filed with the City Clerk for use of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 15-102)
§ 32.062  PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES.
   The Street Superintendent may make recommendations to the City Manager for
the purchase of supplies, materials and equipment for the Department.
(Prior Code, § 15-103)
§ 32.063  STATEMENT OF NEEDS FOR FISCAL YEAR.
   The Street Superintendent shall prepare an itemized statement each year
showing by item the needs of his or her Department for the ensuing fiscal year,
which statement shall be furnished to the City Manager by the date set by the
City Manager for his or her use in the preparation of the city budget.
(Prior Code, § 15-104)
   UTILITY DEPARTMENT
§ 32.075  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT.
   The Utility Department is hereby created and established in the city and
shall consist of the Utility Superintendent and other personnel as shall be
authorized by the Council.  The Utility Superintendent shall also be known as
and shall have the duties of the Water Superintendent and the Sanitary Sewer
Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 17-101)
§ 32.076  DUTIES.
   (A)   It shall be the duties of the Utility Department to erect, maintain
and operate the water system and sanitary sewer system of the city.  It shall
install water meters, extend water mains and lines and sewer laterals and
gathering systems.  It shall operate the water plant and water softening plant
and maintain on hand at all times an adequate supply of water and chemicals
necessary to treat same.  It shall read all water meters and bill customers for
water and sewer service monthly.
   (B)   It shall make all needed tests to assure a wholesome supply of water.
(Prior Code, § 17-102)
§ 32.077  CUSTODY OF EQUIPMENT.
   The Superintendent shall have custody of the equipment of the Department and
shall be accountable to the City Manager for its care and safe keeping.  He or
she shall maintain a running inventory of the equipment, together with all cars
or other vehicles, and shall maintain thereon the estimated value thereof,
which shall be revised from time to time.  He or she shall furnish the City
Manager with a copy thereof and shall file a copy with the City Clerk.  The
Superintendent shall make recommendations to the City Manager as to needed
supplies and equipment.
(Prior Code, § 17-103)
   PERSONNEL BOARD
§ 32.090  CREATION.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Personnel Board for the city consisting of
five members.  One member shall be nominated by the City Council members from
each of the city's four wards and appointed by a majority vote of City Council,
and the fifth member to be appointed at large by the Mayor.  Members of the
Board shall be residents of the city and residents of the ward from which they
are appointed.  Appointments shall be for a term of three years, expiring on
June 30 of the expiration year, continuing until their successors are appointed
and qualified.
   (B)   If any member of the Board should cease to be a resident of the city,
he or she shall thereupon cease to be a member of the Board.  The Council, by a
majority vote, may remove any member from the Board for cause.  For those
members appointed by the City Council, vacancies occurring on the Board shall
be filled by nomination from the ward in which the vacancy occurs and
appointment by a majority vote of the City Council for the unexpired term.
   (C)   For a vacancy of the member appointed by the Mayor, the Mayor shall
fill a vacancy for the unexpired term.  Each member of the Board shall, before
entering upon the duties of his or her office, take and subscribe the oath or
affirmation of office prescribed by the Charter for the officers of the city,
which oath shall be filed and kept in the City Clerk's office.
(Prior Code, § 2-215)  (Ord. 1549, passed 2-19-96; Am. Ord. 1551, passed 4-2-
96)
§ 32.091  MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Board shall meet within the city, but may determine the place and
time of its meeting.  The City Manager, the Chairperson or any two members of
the Board may call special meetings.  Any three members of the Board present
shall constitute a quorum to do business and all business transacted by the
Board shall receive an affirmative vote of at least three members thereof.
   (B)   The Board shall elect from their number the Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson and the Secretary.
(Prior Code, § 2-216)  (Am. Ord. 1333, passed 6-18-85; Am. Ord. 1553, passed 4-
16-95)
§ 32.092  PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Personnel Board shall hold a hearing within 20 days after the
filing of any request for appeal, pursuant to § 37.11.
   (B)   (1)   The Board shall rule on questions of admissibility of evidence,
competency of witnesses or evidence.  The hearing shall be informal and shall
be
conducted in accordance with rules of evidence normally following by
administrative tribunals and without formal or technical adherence to those
rules applicable in a court of law.
      (2)   The burden of proof shall be upon the authority from whose action
the appeal is taken and no disciplinary actions shall be approved unless
sustained by a preponderance of the evidence.
   (C)   If, after a hearing before the Board, the employee is found to be
discharged, demoted or suspended without sufficient cause, he or she shall be
restored to his or her former position without loss of pay.  If, after hearing
the evidence, the Board shall find cause for disciplinary action, it may
approve or modify the action taken by the disciplinary authority.
   (D)   The findings of fact and decision of the Personnel Board shall be
reduced to writing.
   (E)   Appeals from the Personnel Board may be taken by the city or by the
employee to the District Court of the county by filing with the City Clerk a
written notice of appeal within 30 days of the final decision of the Personnel
Board.  The appeal to the District Court shall be on the record of the
proceedings before the Personnel Board and shall not be de novo appeal.
(Prior Code, § 2-217)  (Am. Ord. 1333, passed 6-18-85)
CHAPTER 33:  MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
General Provisions
   
33.001   Authority and law
   
33.002   Codification of ordinances; file and sale
   
33.003   Establishment of Court
Officers; Duties
   
33.015   Municipal Judge
   
33.016   Special Municipal Judge
   
33.017   Marshal Division; service of process
   
33.018   Court Clerk
   
33.019   City Attorney
Municipal Court Procedures
   
33.030   Style of prosecution
   
33.031   Rules of conduct
   
33.032   Contempt of Court
   
33.033   Change of venue; disqualification
   
33.034   Summons
   
33.035   Warrant of arrest
   
33.036   Arraignment; pleading
   
33.037   Bail
   
33.038   Postponement
   
33.039   Procedure
   
33.040   Presence of defendant required
   
33.041   Failure to appear, penalty, bond forfeiture, bench warrant
   
33.042   Judgement
   
33.043   Acquittal
   
33.044   Probation
   
33.045   Suspension of sentence
   
33.046   Judgement of imprisonment
   
33.047   Collection of fine
   
33.048   Court costs and fees
   
33.049   Enforcement of payment
   
33.050   Appeals; filing
   
33.051   Court records; abstract
   
33.052   Audit of records and reports
   
33.053   Forensic science and laboratory analysis fees and citizen-initiated
compliant deposit
   
33.054   Payment of jail costs
   
33.055   Fine and fees in lieu of appearance; exceptions
   
33.056   Collection fee
Juvenile Offenders
   
33.065   Jurisdiction
   
33.066   Custody and detention
   
33.067   Penalties; sentencing alternatives and the like
   
33.068   Confidentiality of records
   
33.069   Use of funds from juvenile offender prosecution
   
33.070   Failure of parent, guardian and the like to appear
   
33.071   Juvenile proceedings; privacy
   
33.072   Citation issued to juveniles
   
33.073   Jurisdiction for traffic offenses
Jury Trials
   
33.085   Right to trial by jury; waiver
   
33.086   Selection of jurors
   
33.087   Summons of jurors; form and service
   
33.088   Composition of jury; duties
   
33.089   Determination of questions of law
   
33.090   Verdict
   
33.091   Juror's fees
   
33.092   Cost bond for jury trial
   
33.093   Misconduct of jurors generally
   
33.094   Responsibility of officer in charge of jury
Code Enforcement
   
33.110   Code enforcement officers
   
33.111   Issuance of citations
   
33.112   Failure to appear
   
Appendix A:  Municipal Court Fine/Bond List
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.001  AUTHORITY AND LAW.
   (A)   This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the one
Municipal Court of the city, as placed in operation by resolution in accordance
with applicable state law and as filed with the County Clerk and the Clerk of
the State Supreme Court.
   (B)   To the extent of any conflict, this chapter supersedes and controls
all other ordinances or provisions.
(Prior Code, § 7-101)
§ 33.002  CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES; FILE AND SALE.
   (A)   (1)   The penal ordinances of the city shall be compiled and published
in permanent form, either published or typed, periodically, but not less than
once every ten years.  Any supplements shall be published on at least a
biennial basis.
      (2)   No penal ordinance shall be enforced unless it is reflected in a
permanent volume or supplement if the ordinance was adopted more than one year
before the latest compilation or supplement.
   (B)   When the municipality has compiled and published its permanent volume
or biennial supplement of penal ordinances, the City Council shall adopt a
resolution notifying the public of the publication.  A copy of the resolution
shall be filed in the office the County Clerk and in the office of the Clerk of
the State Supreme Court.  A copy of the permanent volume and each biennial
supplement shall be deposited free of cost by the municipality in the following
manner:
      (1)   One copy shall be deposited in the County Law Library; and
      (2)   Two copies shall be deposited with the Clerk of the State Supreme
Court.
   (C)   The permanent volume or biennial supplement of compiled penal
ordinances shall be available for purchase by the public through the office of
the City Clerk at a price equal to the cost of publication, plus any postal and
handling charges, plus a clerical fee.
(Prior Code, § 7-102)
Statutory reference:
   Codification and filing of city ordinances, see 11 O.S. §§ 14-108 to 14-111
§ 33.003  ESTABLISHMENT OF COURT.
   There is hereby established in the city the Municipal Court, which shall be
known as the Municipal Court of the city and the Municipal Criminal Court of
the city, with these names being interchangeable.
(Prior Code, § 7-103)  (Ord. 679, passed 1-7-69)
Statutory reference:
   Establishment and operations of municipal courts, see 11 O.S. §§ 27-101 to
27-132
   OFFICERS; DUTIES
§ 33.015  MUNICIPAL JUDGE.
   (A)   (1)   The duties of the Municipal Judge of the city are those
prescribed by law, the Charter and by ordinance.  The Municipal Judge shall
keep a docket of all proceedings of the Municipal Court showing the names of
the defendant, the complaining party and the arresting officers, the offense
charged and the disposition of all cases and of all fines, costs, bond
forfeitures and other money collected.  On or before the first Tuesday of every
month, the Municipal Judge shall make a report to the Council, giving the
information above specified.
      (2)   A copy of the report shall be referred to the Chief of Police.  The
Municipal Judge shall be paid a salary as shall, from time to time, be
determined by the City Council.
   (B)   The Municipal Judge shall have all the additional power and duties as
established for that office by state law.
(Prior Code, § 7-104)  (Ord. 1442, passed 4-18-89)
§ 33.016  SPECIAL MUNICIPAL JUDGE.
   (A)   (1)   The City Council may appoint a Special Municipal Judge to serve
in addition to the Municipal Judge.  The Special Municipal Judge shall serve as
a Municipal Judge during the times as the Municipal Judge is temporarily absent
or temporarily unable to perform the duties of his or her office.  The Special
Municipal Judge may also sit as Municipal Judge to handle the Court dockets as
may be necessary to avoid delays in Court dockets by reason of the volume of
Court cases.  The Municipal Judge may assign specific dockets to the Special
Municipal Judge in order to expedite the handling of Court dockets and avoid
overcrowding of the Court.
      (2)   While sitting as Municipal Judge, the Special Municipal Judge will
have the authority provided by law to the Municipal Judge.  The Special
Municipal Judge, created under this section, shall not be required to be a
resident of the city.
      (3)   The Special Municipal Judge will be compensated, as provided from
time to time, by the City Council.
   (B)   In the event of absence or inability to serve of both the Municipal
Judge and the Special Municipal Judge, a Temporary Judge shall be appointed by
the City Manager from a list furnished by the Municipal Judge.
(Prior Code, § 7-105)  (Ord. 1475, passed 8-6-91; Am. Ord. 1651, passed 4-17-
01)
§ 33.017  MARSHAL DIVISION; SERVICE OF PROCESS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of the Bethany City Charter there is hereby
created the Marshal Division of the Municipal Court of Bethany. The City
Manager, with the concurrence of the Chief of Police, shall appoint Court
Marshal(s), who shall attend the proceedings while the Court is in session and
who shall execute writs, orders, and processes of the Court. The City Marshal
shall perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Municipal Court
Clerk. The Marshal shall be appointed by the City Manager and subject to the
personnel rules and policy generally applicable to the other city's employees
not covered by collective bargaining agreements.
   (B)   For the purposes of the performance of duties under this section and
serving and executing writs, orders, warrants and processes, the Court Marshal
(s) shall have the authority equivalent to that of officers of the Bethany
Police Department.
   (C)   Any person appointed to the position of Marshal shall be a CLEET
certified for law enforcement.
   (D)   The Marshal position shall be under the supervision of the Department
Head of the Municipal Court and subject to direction by the Municipal Judge.
   (E)   In the absence of a Marshal, the Chief of Police or other designated
police officer of the municipality will be ex officio marshal of the court. The
Marshal will execute any writs and other process directed to him and such duty
may be performed by any deputy marshal or by any members of the police force of
the municipality, as the case may be.
   (F)   The Marshal shall be subject to the pay plan and benefits accorded to
the city's employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements.
(Am. Ord. 1907, passed 10-6-15)
§ 33.018  COURT CLERK.
   (A)   (1)   The City Clerk, or deputy designated by him or her, shall be the
Clerk of the Court.
      (2)   He or she shall assist the Judge in recording the proceedings of
the Court and in preparing writs, processes and other papers.
      (3)   He or she shall administer oaths required in proceedings before the
Court.  He or she shall enter all pleadings, processes and proceedings in the
dockets of the Court.  He or she shall perform other clerical duties relating
to the proceedings of the Court as the Judge shall direct.
   (B)   (1)   The Court Clerk shall collect all cash bonds and fines and shall
daily report to the City Treasurer of the bonds and fines so collected and
shall each day deliver the funds to the City Treasurer for safe keeping or
deposit to the General Fund of the city, as the case may be.
      (2)   The Court Clerk shall maintain the cash bonds of persons accused of
offenses, as may be ordered by the Judge, upon surrender of the receipt
therefor.
      (3)   The Court Clerk shall be under the fidelity bonds, as may be
determined by the City Manager, shall perform other duties and functions, as
may be directed by the City Manager, and shall be paid a salary as shall be
determined from time to time by the City Manager.
   (C)   (1)   The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall have all additional
powers and duties as established for that position by state law.
      (2)   The Attorney for the municipality, or his or her duly designated
assistant, may be employed to prosecute actions in the Municipal Court, and to
prosecute and resist appeals therefrom as may be deemed necessary and desirable
by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 7-107)
§ 33.019  CITY ATTORNEY.
   The Attorney for the municipality, or his or her duly designated assistant,
may be employed to prosecute actions in the Municipal Court, and to prosecute
and resist appeals therefrom as may be deemed necessary and desirable by the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 7-108)
   MUNICIPAL COURT PROCEDURES
§ 33.030  STYLE OF PROSECUTION.
   (A)   All prosecutions for violations of ordinances shall be styled “The
City of Bethany vs.                 .”
   (B)   Except as provided in this chapter, prosecution shall be initiated by
the filing of a written complaint, subscribed and verified by the person making
the complaint, and setting forth concisely the offense charged.
(Prior Code, § 7-109)
§ 33.031  RULES OF CONDUCT.
   The Judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and
with the ordinances of the city, for the proper conduct of the business of the
Court.  There is no duty on the part of the city or any of its officers or
employees to formally prosecute actions in the Municipal Court.  In the absence
of a prosecuting officer, the Judge shall proceed with the case and hear
evidence and examine witnesses in the manner as he or she may deem necessary to
effect justice.
(Prior Code, § 7-110)
§ 33.032  CONTEMPT OF COURT.
   Obedience to the orders, rules and judgements made by the Judge or by the
Court may be enforced by the Judge, who may fine or imprison for contempt
committed as to him or her while holding court or committed against process
issued by him or her in the same manner and to the same extent as the district
courts of the state.
(Prior Code, § 7-111)
§ 33.033  CHANGE OF VENUE; DISQUALIFICATION.
   (A)   In prosecutions before the Court, no change of venue shall be allowed,
but the Judge before whom the case is pending may certify his or her
disqualification or he or she may be disqualified from sitting under the terms,
conditions and procedure provided by law for courts of record.
   (B)   If the Judge is disqualified, the matter shall be heard by an
Alternate or Acting Judge appointee, as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-112)
§ 33.034  SUMMONS.
   (A)   Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of an ordinance, the
Judge, unless he or she determines to issue a warrant of arrest or unless the
defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been arrested and has
given bond for appearance, shall issue a summons, naming the person charged,
specifying his or her address or place of residence, if known, stating the
offense with which he or she is charged and giving him or her notice to answer
to charge in the court on a day certain, containing a provision for the
official return of the summons, and including other pertinent information as
may be necessary.
   (B)   (1)   The summons may be served in the same manner as provided for
service of civil process by the State Pleading Code.
      (2)   If the defendant fails to appear and to answer the summons within
the prescribed period after service, a warrant shall be issued for his or her
arrest, as provided by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-113)  (Ord. 1461, passed 6-19-90)
§ 33.035  WARRANT OF ARREST.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in the code of the city, upon the filing
of a complaint approved by endorsement by the City Attorney or by the Judge,
there shall be issued a warrant of arrest, in substantially the following form:
The City of Bethany, Oklahoma, to the Chief of Police of the Municipal Court of
Bethany, Oklahoma.  Complaint upon oath having this day been made by
(Complaint) that the offense of (Naming the offense in particular but general
terms) has been committed and accusing (Name of defendant) thereof, you are
commended therefore forthwith to arrest the above named (Name of defendant) and
bring (him/her/them) before me at (place).
WITNESS my hand this        day of                  ,           
                                                                               
 
Judge of the Municipal Court of Bethany, Oklahoma
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, personally or through a
duly constituted member of the police force of the city or through any other
persons lawfully authorized so to act, to execute the warrant as promptly as
possible.
(Prior Code, § 7-114)
§ 33.036  ARRAIGNMENT; PLEADING.
   (A)   Upon making his or her appearance before the Court, the defendant
shall be arraigned. The Judge or the City Attorney shall read the complaint to
the defendant, inform him or her of his or her legal rights or the consequences
of conviction and ask him or her whether he or she pleads guilty or not guilty.
   (B)   If the defendant pleads guilty, the Court may proceed to judgment and
sentence or may continue the matter for subsequent disposition.  If the plea is
not guilty, the Court may proceed to try the case, or may set it for hearing at
a later date.
(Prior Code, § 7-115)
§ 33.037  BAIL.
   (A)   Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to citation
or summons, or at any other time before trial, before or after arraignment, the
defendant shall be eligible to be released upon giving bail for his or her
appearance in an amount and upon conditions fixed by the Judge, who shall
prescribe appropriate rules of Court for the receipt of bail.  In case of
arrests made at night or under other conditions of emergency or when the Judge
is not available, the rules shall authorize the Chief of Police, or his or her
designated representative, to accept a temporary cash bond or a personal check
on a resident of the county with proper identification, not less than $10, nor
more than the maximum monetary penalty provided by ordinance for the offense
charges.
   (B)   Except in the case of parking or standing violations, at the same time
the defendant posts bail for any offense punishable by a fine of $10 or more,
the Court Clerk shall collect bail for the penalty assessments required under §
33.053.  The penalty shall be in addition to and not in substitution for any
required bail for the offense charged.
(Prior Code, § 7-116)  (Ord. 1391, passed 12-16-86; Am. Ord. 1462, passed 7-3-
90; Am. Ord. 1600, passed 10-6-98; Am. Ord. 1645, passed 10-3-00; Am. Ord.
1736, passed 11-2-04)
Statutory reference:
   Separate bail for CLEET Assessment, see 20 O.S. § 1313.2
§ 33.038  POSTPONEMENT.
   Before trial commences, either party, upon good cause shown, may obtain a
reasonable postponement thereof.
(Prior Code, § 7-117)
§ 33.039  PROCEDURE.
   In all trials, as to matters not covered in this chapter or by the statutes
relating to municipal courts, or by rules duly promulgated by the State Supreme
Court, the procedure applicable in trials of misdemeanors in the district
courts shall apply to the extent that they can be made effective.
(Prior Code, § 7-118)
§ 33.040  PRESENCE OF DEFENDANT REQUIRED.
   Unless excused by the Court, the defendant must be present in person at the
trial.
(Prior Code, § 7-119)
§ 33.041  FAILURE TO APPEAR, PENALTY, BOND FORFEITURE, BENCH WARRANT.
   (A)   Any person charged with an offense against the ordinances of the city,
or any person duly served with a summons or traffic citation shall appear
personally in Court on the time directed on the citation or summons, or as
directed by the Judge.  The failure to appear as required herein shall
constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction shall be punished as
provided in
§ 10.99 of this code.
   (B)   If, without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear according
to the terms or conditions of his or her bond either for hearing, arraignment,
trial, or judgment, or upon any other occasion when his or her presence in
Court of before the Judge may be lawfully required or ordered, the Judge may
direct that fact to be entered upon the Court minutes thereby declaring the
bond to be forfeited.  The Judge may also order a bench warrant to be issued
for the defendant as provided in this chapter.
   (C)   No person having signed a complaint in the Municipal Court of the city
alleging the violation of an ordinance, or any other person in response to an
order of the Court shall fail, refuse, or neglect to appear for the purpose of
testifying as a witness at the trial of the case after having been notified of
the time, date, and place at which the case is set for hearing.  The failure of
the complainant of witness to appear without sufficient excuse shall constitute
an offense punishable as provided in § 10.99 of this code.  The Judge may issue
a warrant for arrest of the complainant or witness.
(Ord. 1663, passed 12-18-01)
§ 33.042  JUDGEMENT.
   If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after trial, the Court must
render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within limits prescribed by the
applicable ordinance and imposing sentence accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 7-122)
§ 33.043  ACQUITTAL.
   If judgment is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be detained for any
other legal cause, he or she must be discharged at once.
(Prior Code, § 7-123)
§ 33.044  PROBATION.
   The Judge of the Municipal Court may, in his or her discretion, modify,
reduce, suspend, defer, continue or delay sentencing and judgment for a period
not to exceed six months from the date of the sentence, under the terms and
conditions as the Judge may specify.  A fee not to exceed $750 may be imposed
as an administrative fee to defer the costs of administering the defendant’s
probation. Said administrative fee may be in addition to the deferral fee
authorized by law.
(Prior Code, § 7-124)  (Ord. 1255, passed 10-4-83; Am. Ord. 1461, passed 6-19-
90; Am. Ord. 1624, passed 11-16-99; Am. Ord. 1733, passed 9-7-04; Am. Ord.
1772, passed 10-3-06)
§ 33.045  SUSPENSION OF SENTENCE.
   After conviction or plea of guilty and sentence, the Judge may suspend
sentence, in accordance with the provision of, and subject to the conditions
and procedures imposed by 11 O.S. §§ 27-123 and 27-124.
(Prior Code, § 7-125)
§ 33.046  JUDGMENT OF IMPRISONMENT.
   If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment is entered, a copy thereof,
certified by the Clerk, shall be delivered to the Chief of Police, the Sheriff
of the county or other appropriate police officer.  The copy shall be
sufficient warrant for execution of the sentence.
(Prior Code, § 7-126)
§ 33.047  COLLECTION OF FINE.
   (A)   For every judgment of conviction entered, the Clerk of the Court shall
collect the fine imposed. (Ord. 1255, passed 10-4-83)
   (B)   Upon conviction, in addition to the fine, the Clerk shall also collect
the costs as may have accrued in the case.
(Prior Code, § 7-127)
§ 33.048  COURT COSTS AND FEES.
   (A)   In addition to other fines, penalties, or fees, costs of the Municipal
Court shall be the total of $30, plus the fees and mileage of jurors and
witnesses.
   (B)   For every judgment of conviction, including pleas of guilty or nolo
contendere, and deferred or suspended sentences, where the offense is
punishable by a fine of $10 or more and is not a parking or standing violation,
and regardless of where the fine is actually imposed, the Court Clerk shall
assess and collect a fee of $10 for the Council on Law Enforcement Education
and Training, a fingerprinting fee of $10, a $5 fee for the Bureau of Narcotics
Drug Education Revolving Fund for those entering a plea of guilty or nolo
contendere or found guilty of the crimes of possession of marijuana or
possession of paraphernalia, and a $10 Forensic Science Improvement Assessment.
Fees collected pursuant to this section and §
33.041, in the case of bond forfeitures, shall be deposited into an account
created for the specified purposes. The City Clerk shall remit funds in the
account, less the authorized retainage and less all interest accruing to the
account as provided by law.
   (C)   In addition to other fines, penalties, fees or costs, the Court Clerk
shall assess a $35 fee for the initial filing of a bond, cash or surety, on
each offense. The Court Clerk shall remit on a monthly basis $25 of every $35
fee to the city Jail Operation Fund.
   (D)   In addition to other fines, penalties, fees or costs, the Court Clerk
shall assess a $20 technology fee on each offense. The purpose of the fee is to
partially offset the cost of acquisition, operation, maintenance, repair and
replacement of computers, software, and other technology necessary for
operation of Municipal Court and the Bethany Police Department. Fees collected
pursuant to this section shall be deposited equally into separate accounts for
the Police Technology Fund and The Courts Technology Fund created for the
specific purpose set herein.
(Prior Code, § 7-128)  (Ord. 1461, passed 6-19-90; Am. Ord. 1544, passed 9-19-
95; Am. Ord. 1624, passed 11-16-99; Am. Ord. 1731, passed 7-20-04; Am. Ord.
1824, passed 6-16-09; Am. Ord. 1923, passed 10-18- 16; Am. Ord. 1973, passed 7-
2-19; Am. Ord. 1984, passed 12-3-19)
§ 33.049  ENFORCEMENT OF PAYMENT.
   If a defendant who is financially able refuses or neglects to pay a fine or
costs or both, payment may be enforced by imprisonment until the same shall be
satisfied, at the rate of $25 per day.  If the defendant is without means to
pay the fine or costs, the Municipal Judge may direct the total amount due to
be entered upon the Court minutes and to be certified to the District Court,
the county where the site of the municipal government is located, where it
shall be entered upon the District Court judgment docket and shall have the
full force and effect of a District Court judgment.  Thereupon, the same
remedies shall be available for the enforcement of the judgement as are
available to any other judgment creditor.
(Prior Code, §7-129)  (Ord. 1170, passed 12-9-80; Am. Ord. 1814, passed 1-6-09)
§ 33.050  APPEALS; FILING.
   Appeals from the Municipal Court shall be had in accordance with the
procedures established by state law therefor and the Municipal Judge shall take
care that upon the filing of a proper appeal all necessary documents shall be
timely forwarded to the Clerk of the District Court of the county.
(Prior Code, § 7-130)
§ 33.051  COURT RECORDS; ABSTRACT.
   (A)   The Municipal Judge shall keep a record of every traffic citation
deposited with or presented to the Court or its Traffic Violations Bureau, and
shall keep a record of every official action by the Court or its Traffic
Violations Bureau in reference thereto, including, but not limited to a record
of every conviction, forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal and the amount
of the fine or forfeiture.
   (B)   (1)   Within ten days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a
person upon a charge of violating any provision hereof to regulating traffic
and motor vehicles, or other law regulating the operation of vehicles on
streets and highways, the Municipal Judge or Clerk of the Court in which the
conviction was held or bail was forfeited shall prepare and immediately forward
to the State Department of Public Safety a certified abstract of the Court's
record of the case.
      (2)   An abstract need not be made of any conviction involving the
illegal parking or standing of a vehicle.
   (C)   The abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the State
Department of Public Safety and shall include the name and address of the party
charged, the number of his or her operator's or chauffeur's license, the
registration number of the vehicle involved, the name of the offense, the date
of hearing, the plea, the judgment, whether bail was forfeited and the amount
of the fine or forfeiture.
(Prior Code, § 7-131)
§ 33.052  AUDIT OF RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   Records of traffic citations, complaints thereon and warrants issued
therefor required shall be audited annually, consistent with generally accepted
auditing standards.  The report shall be a public record.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the City Treasurer or his or her duly
authorized representative shall have access at all times to all necessary
records, files and papers of the Municipal Court of the city, its Traffic
Violation Bureau and the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 7-132)
§ 33.053  FORENSIC SCIENCE AND LABORATORY ANALYSIS FEES AND CITIZEN-INITIATED
COMPLIANT DEPOSIT.
   (A)   In cases where forensic science or laboratory analysis services of the
Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation or other laboratory are used, then a
Forensic Science and Laboratory Analysis fee of $150 shall be assessed and
collected, which shall be in addition to and not in substitution for any and
all other fines or costs provided herein.
   (B)   For citizen-initiated complaints alleging violations of the code of
ordinances a sworn complaint shall be signed by the complainant alleging the
facts of the violation and a statement of the ordinance allegedly violated.
Such complaints may be verified by a city police officer, Court Clerk, Judge or
Notary. Signing of the verified complaint by the complainant shall constitute a
promise to appear on the scheduled court date to participate in the prosecution
of the violation. A court cost deposit of $30 shall be paid to the Court Clerk
at the time of filing the verified complaint form with the Court Clerk unless
payment is excused by the Court. Upon the appearance by the complainant on the
designated court date the deposit shall be refunded by the Court Clerk to the
person paying the deposit. No deposit will be required where the defendant
named in the complaint is arrested for the alleged offense prior to its filing
with the Court Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 7-133)  (Ord. 1391, passed 12-16-86; Am. Ord. 1462, passed 7-3-
90; Am. Ord. 1600, passed 10-6-98; Am. Ord. 1645, passed 10-3-00; Am. Ord.
1657, passed 8-7-01; Am. Ord. 1728, passed 6-15-04; Am. Ord. 1736, passed 11-2-
04; Am. Ord. 1814, passed 1-6-09; Am. Ord. 1973, passed 7-2-19; Am. Ord. 1984,
passed 12-3-19)
Statutory reference:
   Revised CLEET Assessment, see 20 O.S. § 1313.2
§ 33.054  PAYMENT OF JAIL COSTS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon a defendant’s conviction or upon receiving a deferred or
continued sentence, the Municipal Attorney shall ask the Court to require a
person confined, both before and after a conviction,  in the City Jail or other
jail for which the city pays a fee for incarceration, to pay the costs of
incarceration as set forth below.
      (2)   Costs of incarceration shall include booking, receiving and
processing out, housing, food, clothing, medical care, dental care and
psychiatric services. The costs of incarceration shall be an equal amount to
the costs of the services as determined by the Chief of Police. The costs of
incarceration shall be paid to all jail facilities where the person is held
before and after conviction. The costs of incarceration shall not be assessed
if, in the judgement of the Court, the costs would impose a manifest hardship
on the person or property of the person is needed for the maintenance and
support of immediate family.
      (3)   The amount collected shall be paid by the Court Clerk to the
General Fund of the city.
   (B)   The Court may require a person confined in the City Jail for any
offense to pay the Court Clerk the costs of incarceration, as defined above,
both before and after conviction by order of the Court.
   (C)   Persons being released from the facility on bail prior to conviction
shall be required to post sufficient bail to cover costs of incarceration.
(Prior Code, § 7-134)  (Ord. 1635, passed 5-2-00; Am. Ord. 1900, passed 5-19-
15)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 22 O.S. § 979(a)
§ 33.055  FINE AND FEES IN LIEU OF APPEARANCE.
   A Fine Schedule may be adopted and amended from time to time by resolution
of the Bethany City Council whereby a person charged with violation of a
municipal ordinance may pay the listed fine and fees in lieu of appearance
before the Judge as a final determination of the case. Those offenses with a
fine greater than $500 or those providing for imprisonment will require Court
appearance by the defendant.
(Ord. 1773, passed 11-7-06; Am. Ord. 1899, passed 5-19-15)
§ 33.056  COLLECTION FEE.
   In accordance with 11 O.S. § 22-138, there is hereby imposed an additional
fee of up to 35% on all debts and accounts receivable, i.e.: fines, fees, court
costs, restitution, and other debts owed the city that have been referred to a
private firm for collection. For debts and accounts due for fines, courts costs
and fees the court shall order defendants to reimburse the court fees arising
pursuant to this ordinance and such fee may be collected as provided by law for
the collection of any other civil debt or criminal action. The procedures in
this section shall be cumulative and not in lieu of any other procedures
authorized by law for the collection of debts owed to the city.
(Ord. 1909, passed 11-17-15)
   JUVENILE OFFENDERS
§ 33.065  JURISDICTION.
   The Municipal Court may elect to exercise original jurisdiction to hear and
determine certain offenses committed by those persons under the age of 18 years
of age and penalize those juveniles found guilty, all as authorized by 10 O.S.
§ 7303-1.2.
(Prior Code, § 7-201)  (Ord. 1531, passed 2-7-95)
§ 33.066  CUSTODY AND DETENTION.
   (A)   A child under the age of 18 years who is taken into custody for the
alleged violation of a municipal ordinance relating to the following offenses
may be temporarily detained by the city in a certified municipal juvenile
facility:
      (1)   Vandalism;
      (2)   Shoplifting;
      (3)   Trespassing;
      (4)   Assault;
      (5)   Battery;
      (6)   Assault and battery;
      (7)   Truancy;
      (8)   Curfew violations;
      (9)   Possession of low-point beer;
      (10)   Possession of alcoholic beverages;
      (11)   Disorderly conduct; and
      (12)   Public intoxication.
   (B)   A child under the age of 18 years may be temporarily detained by the
city in a certified municipal juvenile facility under the following conditions:
      (1)   The municipality shall immediately take all reasonable steps to
attempt to locate the child's parent, legal guardian, legal custodian or
attorney, and determine if the parent, legal guardian, legal custodian or
attorney is willing to appear at the municipal juvenile facility and assume
personal custody of the child upon the child's release from the facility.
      (2)   The child shall be released to the personal custody of his or her
parent, legal guardian, legal custodian or attorney as soon as practicable, and
upon the written promise of the parent, legal guardian, legal custodian or
attorney to return the child to Municipal Court to answer the municipal charges
on the date and at the time set by the Municipal Court.
      (3)   The child shall be detained in the municipal juvenile facility for
no longer than 24 hours.  If no parent, legal guardian, legal custodian or
attorney appears at the municipal juvenile facility and assumes personal
custody of the child within the 24-hour period, then custody or release of the
child shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of 10 O.S. § 7003-2.1.
      (4)   The child shall not be held in any jail, adult lockup or adult
detention facility unless total separation exists between juveniles and adult
spatial areas.
      (5)   The child shall be provided with adequate fresh drinking water.
      (6)   The child shall be provided with adequate food not less than three
times in a 24-hour period.
      (7)   The child shall be provided with adequate bathroom facilities and
bedding.
      (8)   The child shall be provided with any necessary medical care and
treatment.
(Prior Code, § 7-202)  (Ord. 1531, passed 2-7-95; Am. Ord. 1538, passed 9-5-95)
§ 33.067  PENALTIES; SENTENCING ALTERNATIVES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Pursuant to interlocal cooperation agreement between the city and the
District Court, as authorized by 10 O.S. § 7303-1.2, a child under 18 years of
age may be charged, prosecuted and, if convicted, fined for violating a
municipal regulation relating to one or more of the offenses listed in
§ 33.066.  The maximum fine which may be imposed shall not exceed the maximum
fine authorized by law.  When assessing punishment, the Court also may require
appropriate community service work, not to exceed 90 hours, in lieu of a fine
if the product of multiplying the number of hours of community service work by
the prevailing minimum wage does not result in a number which exceeds the
maximum fine authorized by law, restitution, or both community service work and
restitution.
   (B)   In addition, the Court may require the child to receive counseling or
other community-based services, as necessary.  If a child is prosecuted for an
offense in the Municipal Court, the child shall not be prosecuted for the
offense in the District Court.  The Municipal Court may also impose costs as
authorized by law.
(Prior Code, § 7-203)  (Ord. 1531, passed 2-7-95)
§ 33.068  CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDS.
   All municipal arrest records, prosecution records, court records and court
proceedings for cases involving children under 18 years of age charged with
violating municipal ordinances relating to one or more of the offenses listed
in
§ 33.066 shall be kept confidential and shall not be open to public inspection,
except by order of the Municipal Court or as otherwise provided by 10 O.S. §§
7005-1.1, 7307-1.7 and 620.6.
(Prior Code, § 7-204)  (Ord. 1531, passed 2-7-95)
§ 33.069  USE OF FUNDS FROM JUVENILE OFFENDER PROSECUTION.
   (A)   Funds generated from fines paid pursuant to prosecutions under this
subchapter shall be earmarked and used by the city only for the following
purposes:
      (1)   To fund local programs which address problems of juvenile crime;
      (2)   To fund the costs of prosecutions authorized by this chapter;
      (3)   To fund the costs of detention authorized pursuant to this chapter;
and
      (4)   To fund administrative costs related to local programs that address
problems of juvenile crime or related to the prosecution, detention or
punishment authorized pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   The earmarked funds shall not be used by the city for any purpose
other than the purposes set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 7-205)  (Ord. 1531, passed 2-7-95)
§ 33.070  FAILURE OF PARENT, GUARDIAN AND THE LIKE TO APPEAR.
   It shall be an offense for the parent or legal custodian or legal guardian
of a child to fail to return a child to Municipal Court to answer the municipal
charges on the date and time set by the Municipal Court where the parent, legal
custodian or legal guardian executes a written promise to return the child to
Municipal Court.  It shall be a defense to a prosecution under this section
where the parent, legal custodian or guardian appears at the appointed Court
date and provides evidence that he or she made a good faith effort to secure
the juvenile's appearance.
(Prior Code, § 7-206)  (Ord. 1531, passed 2-7-95) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 33.071  JUVENILE PROCEEDINGS; PRIVACY.
   All cases under this subchapter involving juveniles shall be heard
separately from cases involving adults.  The hearings shall be private, but
persons having a direct interest in the case may be admitted.  Any victim,
relative or legal guardian of a victim of a juvenile criminal act shall be
deemed to have a direct interest in the case.
(Prior Code, § 7-207)  (Ord. 1531, passed 2-7-95)
§ 33.072  CITATION ISSUED TO JUVENILES.
   If a municipal citation is issued to a juvenile under this subchapter, the
Municipal Court hearing date shall be indicated on the citation and
notification of the citation shall be mailed by the Municipal Court to the
parents, guardian, legal custodian or responsible adult relative of the
juvenile.
(Prior Code, § 7-208)  (Ord. 1531, passed 2-7-95)
§ 33.073  JURISDICTION FOR TRAFFIC OFFENSES.
   The Municipal Court shall retain and exercise original jurisdiction over
juveniles charged with violations of the traffic regulations of the city and
this subchapter shall not apply to prosecution of juveniles for traffic
violations.
(Prior Code, § 7-209)  (Ord. 1531, passed 2-7-95)
   JURY TRIALS
§ 33.085  RIGHT TO TRIAL BY JURY; WAIVER.
   (A)   In all prosecutions for any offense for which the city, with
concurrence of the Court, seeks imposition of a fine of more than $500, plus
costs or imprisonment, trial shall be by jury unless waived by the defendant
and the city. If trial by jury is waived, trial shall be by the Court.
   (B)   An election waiving jury trial may be changed by the defendant at any
time prior to the day for which trial by the Court is set. An election
demanding jury trial may be changed at any time prior to the commencement of
proceedings to impanel the jury for the trial, but if that change occurs after
the case has been set for jury trial, it may not thereafter be changed so as
again to demand trial by jury.
(Prior Code, § 7-301)  (Ord. 1624, passed 11-16-99; Am. Ord. 1772, passed 10-3-
06)
§ 33.086  SELECTION OF JURORS.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever a calendar has been made up for the trial of cases by
jury, the Judge shall request, in writing, the presiding Judge of the District
Court for this judicial district to cause the names of a stated number of
jurors deemed sufficient to dispose of the cases on the calendar to be drawn
from the jury wheel in accordance with the governing statutes of the state, and
to be certified by the Clerk of the District Court to the Judge of the
Municipal Court.
      (2)   The request shall be made in time for the list to be certified and
the jurors to be summoned legally before the trial begins.
   (B)   (1)   If it is anticipated that the completion of the calendar will
require more than two weeks, the request for jurors shall specify the number
required for each two-week period, as provided by law.
      (2)   Additional drawing of other names may also be requested by the
Judge, when necessary, in accordance with the law for additional drawings in
the District Court.
      (3)   If, in the future, provisions of the law respecting the drawing of
jury lists for the District Court are changed, the Judge shall take steps in
requesting jury lists for the Court as are necessary to comply with the state
law.
(Prior Code, § 7-302)  (Ord. 1624, passed 11-16-99)
§ 33.087  SUMMONS OF JURORS; FORM AND SERVICE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the jury list, the Clerk of the Court shall cause a
summons substantially in the following form to be issued and served upon each
person on the list:
   STATE OF OKLAHOMA    )
               )  SS.
   COUNTY OF OKLAHOMA   )
To  (Name of juror)  .  Greetings: You are summoned to appear in the Municipal
Court for the City of Bethany, Oklahoma, to be held at (Specify the address,
room number, etc.) on the          day of                ,              at the
hour of (Specify hour) to serve as a juror in the Court, and to continue in
such service until discharged by the Court.
Hereof fail not, under penalty of law.  Issued under the authority of the Court
this        day of                ,          
                                                                               
 
CLERK OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT Bethany, Oklahoma
Seal of the Court
   (B)   Service shall be made, as the Judge may prescribe by rule or direct by
order, either in person upon the juror, by Marshal of the Court, by any member
of the police force of the city or by the Clerk of the Court through certified
mail directed to the juror at his or her address as given in the jury list with
request for a personally signed return receipt.  In any proceeding wherein
service of summons by mail is an issue, evidence of the due mailing of the
summons by the Clerk, or a member of his or her staff, and the presentation of
an official postal return receipt purportedly signed by the addressee shall be
prima facie evidence that the summons was duly received by the addressee and,
therefore, that he or she was properly served therewith.
   (C)   Failure to comply with the summons for jury duty shall be an offense,
punishable for each day of noncompliance.
(Prior Code, § 7-303)  (Ord. 1624, passed 11-16-99) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 33.088  COMPOSITION OF JURY; DUTIES.
   (A)   A jury in the Court shall consist of six jurors, citizens of the city
possessing the qualifications of jurors in District Court.
   (B)   After the jurors are sworn, they must sit together and hear the proofs
and oral arguments of the parties, which must be delivered in Court and in the
presence of the defendant.
   (C)   A verdict of the jury may be rendered by the concurring vote of five
jurors.
(Prior Code, § 7-304)  (Ord. 1624, passed 11-16-99)
§ 33.089  DETERMINATION OF QUESTIONS OF LAW.
   In all actions tried before a jury, the Judge shall determine all questions
of law, including questions as to the introduction of evidence, arising during
the trial.  He or she also shall instruct the jury as to the law.
(Prior Code, § 7-305)  (Ord. 1624, passed 11-16-99)
§ 33.090  VERDICT.
   (A)   (1)   The verdict of the jury, in all cases, must be general.
      (2)   When the jury has arrived at its verdict,  it must deliver the
verdict in the open Court, and the Judge shall cause it to be entered in the
case.
   (B)   The jury must not be discharged after the cause is submitted to it
until a verdict is rendered unless the Judge, for good cause, discharges it
sooner, in which event the Court may proceed again to trial until a verdict is
rendered.
(Prior Code, § 7-306)  (Ord. 1624, passed 11-16-99)
§ 33.091  JUROR'S FEES.
   (A)   Jurors shall receive for their services a sum per day as set by the
City Council, plus mileage at a rate per mile, as set by the City Council, for
each mile necessarily traveled by the most direct route in going to and from
the Court one time each day from their respective places of residence.
   (B)   The claims for the compensation shall show the location of the juror's
residence, the route and miles traveled and must be verified as other claims
against the city are verified.
(Prior Code, § 7-307)  (Ord. 1624, passed 11-16-99)
§ 33.092  COST BOND FOR JURY TRIAL.
   When an accused requests a jury trial in the Municipal Court, the Court may
fix a reasonable sum as a cost bond and require the accused to deposit the same
prior to trial.
(Prior Code, § 7-308)  (Ord. 1624, passed 11-16-99)
§ 33.093  MISCONDUCT OF JURORS GENERALLY.
   (A)   No juror or person drawn or summoned as a juror in the Municipal Court
shall either make any promise or agreement to give a verdict for or against the
city, permit any communication to be made to him or her or receive any book,
paper, instruments or information relative to any cause pending before him or
her, except in the regular course of proceedings and the trial of the case.
   (B)   No juror summoned by the Court shall ask, receive or agree to receive
any bribe upon any understanding concerning his or her vote or decision upon
any case in which he or she may be selected as a juror in the Court.
   (C)   No person shall attempt to influence a juror summoned to appear in the
Court, or any person summoned as a juror in respect to his or her verdict,
either by means of communication, oral or written, except in the regular course
of proceedings; by means of any books, paper or instruments exhibited otherwise
than in the regular course of proceeding; by any means of threat or
intimidation; by means of any assurance, promise of any pecuniary or other
advantage; or by communicating any statement, argument or observation relating
to the case.
(Prior Code, § 7-309)  (Ord. 1624, passed 11-16-99)
§ 33.094  RESPONSIBILITY OF OFFICER IN CHARGE OF JURY.
   No officer to whose charge any jury is committed by the Municipal Court
shall neglect or wilfully permit the juror, or any of them, either to receive
any communication from any person, to make any communication to any person, to
obtain or to receive any book, paper or refreshment or to leave the jury room
without leave of the Court being first obtained.
(Prior Code, § 7-310)  (Ord. 1624, passed 11-16-99)
CODE ENFORCEMENT
§ 33.110  CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   Code enforcement officers, as designated by the City Manager, are hereby
authorized to enforce the provisions and ordinances of the code.  In carrying
out such duties, code enforcement officers may issue a citation to any person
violating the provisions of the code. 
(Ord. 1684, passed 10-1-02)
§ 33.111  ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS.
   In issuing a citation, the code enforcement officer shall proceed as
follows:
      (A)   Such officer shall prepare a written citation to appear in court
containing the name and address of the cited person, the offense charged, and
stating when the person shall appear in court.
      (B)   One copy of the citation to appear shall be tendered to the person
cited, and the code enforcement officer shall record the date and time of
service.
      (C)   As soon as practicable the officer shall file the original citation
with the Clerk of the Municipal Court.  The signature of the code enforcement
officer shall be acknowledged before the Court Clerk or Deputy. 
      (D)   This section shall not prohibit arrest of a person violating the
provisions of the code.
(Ord. 1684, passed 10-1-02)
§ 33.112  FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   If a cited person fails to appear before the Court in response to the
citation, then a warrant for arrest shall be issued and executed upon the
person.  In addition, any person who willfully fails to appear in response to a
citation is guilty of a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 1684, passed 10-1-02)  Penalty, see §
10.99
APPENDIX A:  MUNICIPAL COURT FINE/BOND LIST
 
Code Section Violation Fine  CLEET AFIS Forensic Costs Total ** *** Bond****
33.032    Contempt of      $ 750 *             $        $ $ 769  $829
          court
33.041    Failure to       500     9           5      5             519    579
          appear
          Use of city
52.09(A)  water after      750   * 9           5      5             769    829
          service
          disconnected
          Water facilities
52.09(B)  not to be        750   * 9           5      5             769    829
          disturbed
          Leaving the
70.02     scene of a minor 500     9           5      5             519    579
          accident
          Notification to
70.021    police of an     500     9           5      5             519    579
          accident
70.024    No proof of      155     9           5      5             174    234
          insurance
          Direction of
70.036    traffic by hand  200     9           5      5             219    279
          or voice
70.041    Eluding an       750   * 9           5      5             769    829
          officer
          Defacement of
70.085    traffic control  200     9           5      5             219    279
          devices
70.095    Improper/unsafe  100     9           5      5             119    179
          equipment
70.096    Improper tag     100     9           5      5             119    179
          Operating a
70.097(A) vehicle without  100     9           5      5             119    179
          lights
          (headlamps)
          Operating a
70.097(B) vehicle without  100     9           5      5             119    179
          lights (tail
          lamps)
          Operating a
70.097(C) vehicle without  100     9           5      5             119    179
          lights (tag
          lamp)
          Operating a
70.097(D) vehicle without  100     9           5      5             119    179
          lights (stop
          lamps)
 
 
Code Section Violation Fine  CLEET AFIS Forensic Costs Total ** *** Bond****
70.097(E) Operating a vehicle without lights (times)   100  9 5 5  119  179
70.098(A) Operating a vehicle with glaring lights      100  9 5 5  119  179
70.098(B) Operating a vehicle with improperly adjusted 100  9 5 5  119  179
          beams
70.098(C) Operating a vehicle with improper use of     100  9 5 5  119  179
          reflector
70.099    Special restriction on lamps                 100  9 5 5  119  179
70.100    Turn signals required (lamps)                100  9 5 5  119  179
70.102    Improper brakes                              100  9 5 5  119  179
70.103    Equipment violation (tires)                  100  9 5 5  119  179
70.104    Equipment violation (windshield)             100  9 5 5  119  179
70.105    Certain window tints prohibited              100  9 5 5  119  179
70.107    Improper exhaust                             100  9 5 5  119  179
70.111    Improper cycle equipment                     100  9 5 5  119  179
70.112    No headgear (MC)                             100  9 5 5  119  179
70.113    Seatbelt - adult                             20          20   20
70.114    Seatbelt - child                             50   9 5 5  69   129
70.127    Disabled vehicle                             100  9 5 5  119  179
70.130    Trespassing/vehicle                          500  9 5 5  519  579
70.131    Parking - prohibited                         15          15   40
71.002    Failure to yield - oncoming traffic          175  9 5 5  194  254
71.003    Approaching a “yield” sign               175  9 5 5  194  254
 
 
Code Section Violation Fine  CLEET AFIS Forensic Costs Total ** *** Bond****
71.004    Failure to yield - from roadway                175  9 5 5  194  254
71.005    Failure to yield - from a private drive        175  9 5 5  194  254
71.006    Yield to pedestrians and stop required         200  9 5 5  219  279
71.007    Failure to yield - from parking                175  9 5 5  194  254
71.008    Failure to yield - emergency vehicle           200  9 5 5  219  279
71.009    Passengers on 2- 3-wheeled vehicles/restricted 200  9 5 5  219  279
71.021(A) Prohibited turn                                175  9 5 5  194  254
71.021(B) Improper U-turn                                175  9 5 5  194  254
71.023    Turning movements and required sign            175  9 5 5  194  254
71.024    Improper turn                                  175  9 5 5  194  254
71.025    Failure to signal turn                         175  9 5 5  194  254
71.040(A) No SDL in possession                           73   9 5 5  92   152
71.040(B) No state driver’s license                    200  9 5 5  219  279
71.040(C) Expired driver’s license                     123  9 5 5  142  202
71.040(D) Violation DL restriction                       123  9 5 5  142  202
71.041    Driving under suspension                       500  9 5 5  519  579
71.042    Allowing unlicensed person to drive            200  9 5 5  219  279
71.044    Negligent and careless driving                 200  9 5 5  219  279
71.045    Inattention to driving                         175  9 5 5  194  254
71.046    Reckless driving                               500  9 5 5  519  579
71.047    Obedience to official traffic-control devices  175  9 5 5  194  254
 
 
Code Section Violation Fine  CLEET AFIS Forensic Costs Total ** *** Bond****
71.049(A)          DUI                             800 * 9 5 5 60  879    879
71.049(A)(3)(b)(1) DUI (with blood test)           800 * 9 5 5 210 1,029  1,029
71.049(B)          DUI (under 21)                  800 * 9 5 5 60  879    879
71.049(B)(1)(b)    DUI (under 21 - with blood      800 * 9 5 5 210 1,029  1,029
                   test)
71.049(A)a         DWI                             800 * 9 5 5 60  879    879
71.049(A)b         APC                             800 * 9 5 5 60  879    879
71.049(A)c         DUI - drugs                     800 * 9 5 5 210 1,029  1,029
71.049(C)          TOC                             260   9 5 5     279    339
71.050             Improper/unsafe backing         175   9 5 5     194    254
71.051             Improper passing/lane change    175   9 5 5     194    254
71.053             Driving across fire hose        175   9 5 5     194    254
71.055             Driving wrong way on divided    175   9 5 5     194    254
                   highway
71.056             Driving on sidewalk             175   9 5 5     194    254
71.057             Driving left of center          175   9 5 5     194    254
71.059             Following too close             175   9 5 5     194    254
71.060             Following emergency vehicles -  200   9 5 5     219    279
                   prohibited
71.064             Turns - using private service   100   9 5 5     119    179
                   drive
71.067             Off-road vehicles prohibited on 200   9 5 5     219    279
                   streets
71.081             Unsafe passing                  175   9 5 5     194    254
71.082             Passing on shoulder             175   9 5 5     194    254
71.083             Passing in a school zone        200   9 5 5     219    279
71.084             Passing a school bus            200   9 5 5     219    279
71.085             Passing a church bus            200   9 5 5     219    279
71.116             Derelict vehicle                200   9 5 5     219    279
 
 
Code Section Violation Fine  CLEET AFIS Forensic Costs Total ** *** Bond****
71.118       Littering prohibited                        200  9 5 5    219  279
71.119       Removal of debris from street               200  9 5 5    219  279
71.121       Too many passengers                         130  9 5 5    149  209
71.135(A)    Driving too fast or too slow for conditions 200  9 5 5 25 244  279
71.135(B)    Speeding--excessive                         100  9 5 5 25 144  179
71.138       Speeding (1-10 mph over)                    10   9 5 5 25 54   89
71.138       Speeding (11-15 mph over)                   20   9 5 5 25 64   99
71.138       Speeding (16-20 mph over)                   35   9 5 5 25 79   114
71.138       Speeding (21-25 mph over)                   75   9 5 5 25 119  154
71.138       Speeding (26-30 mph over)                   135  9 5 5 25 179  214
71.138       Speeding (31-35 mph over)                   155  9 5 5 25 199  234
71.138       Speeding (36 or more mph over)              200  9 5 5 25 249  284
71.137B      Speeding--park zone                         200  9 5 5    219  259
71.139       Speeding--school zone                       200  9 5 5    219  279
71.140       Speeding--contest                           200  9 5 5    219  279
72.01        No parking sign                             15            15   40
72.02        Failure to yield from stop                  175  9 5 5    194  254
72.03        Parking for certain purposes prohibited     100           100  160
72.04(A)(13) Parking where sign prohibits                50            50   110
72.04(A)(18) Parking--handicapped                        50            50   110
72.08        Truck parking prohibited                    100           100  160
 
 
Code Section Violation Fine  CLEET AFIS Forensic Costs Total ** *** Bond****
72.12   Negligent parking                               15          15   40
72.14   Parking too far from curb                       15          15   40
72.19   Illegal parking/declared nuisance               15          15   40
74.05   Right-of-way of pedestrians at crosswalk        100  9 5 5  119  179
74.12   Riding outside passenger compartment prohibited 200  9 5 5  219  279
92.21   Obstructing view of intersection                100  9 5 5  119  179
93.04   Premises to be free of junk and debris          500  9 5 5  519  579
93.07   Commercial vehicle in residential areas         500  9 5 5  519  579
95.001  Keeping animals; required area                  200  9 5 5  219  279
95.002a Animal/fowl/reptile at large (1st offense)      100  9 5 5  119  179
95.002b Animal/fowl/reptile at large (2nd offense)      130  9 5 5  149  209
95.002c Animal/fowl/reptile at large (3rd offense)      200  9 5 5  219  279
95.005  Keeping swine, goats prohibited                 200  9 5 5  219  279
95.008  Cruelty to animals                              500  9 5 5  519  579
95.021  Keeping vicious/ diseased animal                500  9 5 5  519  579
95.035  Dogs/cats vaccinated                            200  9 5 5  219  279
95.037  Harboring a nuisance animal                     200  9 5 5  219  279
 
 
Code Section Violation Fine  CLEET AFIS Forensic Costs Total ** *** Bond****
                                    
95.037a Dogs at large (1st offense)                100   9 5 5  119  179
95.037b Dogs at large (2nd offense)                150   9 5 5  169  229
95.037c Dogs at large (3rd offense)                200   9 5 5  219  279
95.038  Harboring a barking dog                    200   9 5 5  219  279
95.042  Maximum number of dogs and cats            200   9 5 5  219  279
95.066  Interfering with animal control officer    750 * 9 5 5  769  829
96.01   Derelict vehicle                           200   9 5 5  219  279
110.07  Garage sale without a permit               200   9 5 5  219  279
111.07  Sale and delivery of alcohol prohibited    750 * 9 5 5  769  829
116.02  Soliciting without a permit                200   9 5 5  219  279
131.01  Petit larceny                              750 * 9 5 5  769  829
131.02  Pump piracy                                750 * 9 5 5  769  829
131.04  Trespassing                                750 * 9 5 5  769  829
131.05  Illegal entry                              500   9 5 5  519  579
131.07  Destroying or injuring buildings and other 500   9 5 5  519  579
        property
132.001 Disturbing the peace                       500   9 5 5  519  579
132.002 Conduct and language                       500   9 5 5  519  579
132.003 Obscene/threatening/ harassing phone calls 500   9 5 5  519  579
132.005 Fireworks                                  200   9 5 5  219  279
132.008 Disorderly conduct prohibited              750 * 9 5 5  769  829
 
 
Code Section Violation Fine  CLEET AFIS Forensic Costs Total ** *** Bond****
132.021  Possession of CD substance (MJ)           800 * 9 5 5 210 1,029  1,029
132.022  Paraphernalia                             750 * 9 5 5     769    829
132.023  Inhalation of a toxic substance           800 * 9 5 5 210 1,029  1,029
132.051  Cigarettes/selling to minors              200   9 5 5     219    279
132.052  Juvenile possession/purchase of tobacco   100   9 5 5     119    179
         products
132.065a Refusal to compel child to attend school  100   9 5 5     119    179
         (1st)
132.065b Refusal to compel child to attend school  200   9 5 5     219    279
         (2nd)
132.065c Refusal to compel child to attend school  300   9 5 5     319    379
         (3rd)
132.066a Truancy prohibited (1st)                  100   9 5 5     119    179
132.066b Truancy prohibited (2nd)                  200   9 5 5     219    279
132.066c Truancy prohibited (3rd)                  300   9 5 5     319    379
132.076  Maintaining disorderly house              750 * 9 5 5     769    829
132.077  Residents and visitors to disorderly      750 * 9 5 5     769    829
         houses
 
 
Code Section Violation Fine  CLEET AFIS Forensic Costs Total ** *** Bond****
132.091    Loitering/sleeping in public                   200   9 5 5  219  279
132.092    Curfew violation                               200   9 5 5  219  279
132.106    Credit card fraud                              750 * 9 5 5  769  829
132.107(A) Obtaining food/other services by false         750 * 9 5 5  769  829
           pretense
132.107(B) Obtaining public transport service by false    750 * 9 5 5  769  829
           pretense
132.108    Bogus check                                    750 * 9 5 5  769  829
132.136    Prostitution                                   750 * 9 5 5  769  829
132.151    Carrying a concealed weapon                    750 * 9 5 5  769  829
132.160    Discharging firearms                           500   9 5 5  519  579
133.01     Assault and battery                            750 * 9 5 5  769  829
133.02     Throwing injurious substances                  500   9 5 5  519  579
134.01     Interference with a municipal officer          750 * 9 5 5  769  829
134.02     Flight from an officer                         750 * 9 5 5  769  829
134.03     Resisting arrest                               750 * 9 5 5  769  829
134.04     Assault and battery on an officer              750 * 9 5 5  769  829
134.05     Giving false information                       750 * 9 5 5  769  829
134.09     Failure to obey lawful commands of fire/police 750 * 9 5 5  769  829
134.14     Impersonating officer/public employee          500   9 5 5  519  579
134.15     Intimidating municipal witness                 500   9 5 5  519  579
 
 
Code Section Violation    Fine  CLEET AFIS Forensic Costs Total ** *** Bond****
134.16       Harboring a  500   9     5    5              519          579
             fugitive
             Off-street
158.035      parking      100                             100          160
             requirements
             Offenses not
             otherwise    500   9     5    5              519          579
             listed
 
*  Appearance required and maximum penalty includes 60 days’ imprisonment.
**  Defendant may pay this amount at Clerk’s window and close case except those
cases where appearance is required.
***  Totals include required assessment fees, except $35 bail bond fee is not
included and should be added to the total in cases where a bail bond was filed.
****  Bond column includes bail bond fee and court costs and fees.
(Ord. 1773, passed 11-7-06)
CHAPTER 34:  FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Departmental Provisions
   
34.01   Personnel
   
34.02   Appointment and qualifications
   
34.03   Chief; establishment and enforcement of rules
   
34.04   Control of Department
   
34.05   Calls; answer and record
   
34.06   Equipment
   
34.07   Inventory
   
34.08   Itemized statement of needs
Officers and Firefighters; Duties
   
34.20   Duties of volunteer firefighters
   
34.21   Duties of Fire Chief
   
34.22   Duties of Assistant Chief
   
34.23   Duties of company officers
   
34.24   By-laws; contents
GENERAL DEPARTMENTAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01  PERSONNEL.
   The personnel of the Fire Department of the city shall consist of a Fire
Chief and assistant chiefs, officers and personnel as may from time to time be
authorized by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 14-101)
§ 34.02  APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City Manager.
   (B)   He or she shall be a resident of the city and shall have had five
years actual experience as a paid or volunteer firefighter.  The assistant
chiefs and paid members shall be appointed by the Chief, by and with the
consent and approval of the City Manager.  The assistant chiefs shall have had
three years actual experience as a paid or volunteer firefighter.  The Chief
may appoint other or additional non-paid members as in his or her judgment will
be in the best interest of the city.  A list of all appointments shall at all
times be furnished to and kept on file with the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 14-102)
Statutory reference:
   Fire Chief, firefighters' qualifications, see 11 O.S. §§ 29-102 and 29-103
§ 34.03  CHIEF; ESTABLISHMENT AND ENFORCEMENT OF RULES.
   The Fire Chief shall make and enforce all rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with the laws of the state or the regulations of the city, as may
be necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of the Department and the
members thereof.
(Prior Code, § 14-103)
§ 34.04  CONTROL OF DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Fire Chief, and in his or her absence, the administrative
assistant or senior officer on duty, shall have full and absolute control of
the entire Department and the members thereof, and shall see that all members
of the Department conform with all rules and regulations of the Department, the
regulations of the city and the laws of the state.
   (B)   He or she shall have full power and command over all persons whosoever
present at fires, and shall direct the use of all equipment and command all
firefighters in the discharge of their duties.  He or she shall take measures
as he or she deems necessary in the preservation and protection of property and
the extinguishing of fires.
(Prior Code, § 14-104)
Statutory reference:
   Fire departments; operation  and regulations, see 11 O.S. §§ 29-101 et seq.
§ 34.05  CALLS; ANSWER AND RECORD.
   (A)   (1)   The Chief shall see that all fire calls within the city are
answered.  He or she shall use the equipment and firefighters as the occasion
requires.
      (2)   The Fire Chief shall see that all fire calls outside the limits of
the city are answered when so required by a mutual aid agreement made with the
city for fire protection service and he or she shall furnish the personnel or
equipment as may be necessary.
      (3)   When answering any fire call outside the limits of the city, the
city shall be acting in its governmental capacity as an agent of the state.
(Prior Code, § 14-105)
   (B)   (1)   The Fire Chief shall make or cause to be made and maintained a
record of all calls of whatsoever nature made by the Department showing the
nature of the call, the location of the call and whether within or without the
limits of the city, the number of firefighters or other personnel taken,
whether paid or volunteer, and the time spent on the call.
      (2)   A copy of the record shall be filed with the City Clerk each month
covering the month just completed for the use of the Council and City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 14-106)
Statutory reference:
   Calls outside city limits, see 11 O.S. § 29-108
§ 34.06  EQUIPMENT.
   The Fire Chief shall have the care of the equipment, shall see that same is
in proper repair and functioning and shall see that the equipment is properly
housed when not in use.  The Chief shall see that all fire hydrants within the
city are flushed at least once every six months to insure proper function
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 14-107)
§ 34.07  INVENTORY.
   The Fire Chief shall make duplicate inventory of all property in the
Department with its valuation estimated and shall revise the same from time to
time, the original of which shall be filed with the City Clerk for use of the
Council and City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 14-108)
§ 34.08  ITEMIZED STATEMENT OF NEEDS.
   The Fire Chief shall, on or before the date established by the City Manager,
prepare an itemized statement, showing, by item, the wants and needs of the
Department for the ensuing fiscal year, for use of the City Manager in
preparation of the budget each year.
(Prior Code, § 14-109)
   OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS; DUTIES
§ 34.20  DUTIES OF VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS.
   Volunteer members of the Fire Department shall abide by and be subject to
the rules and regulations provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 14-121)
Statutory reference:
   Volunteer Fire Departments, see 11 O.S. §§ 29-201 to 29-205
§ 34.21  DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.
   The following are duties of the Fire Chief:
   (A)   The Chief shall be at the head of the Department, subject to the laws
of the state, regulations of the city and rules and regulations herein adopted;
   (B)   The Chief shall be held responsible for the general condition and
efficient operation of the Department, the training of members and the
performance of all other duties imposed upon him or her;
   (C)   The Chief may inspect or cause to be inspected by members of the
Department, the fire hydrants, cisterns and other sources of water supply at
least twice each year;
   (D)   The Chief shall maintain a library or file of publications on fire
prevention and fire protection and shall make use of it to the best advantage
of all members;
   (E)   The Chief shall make every effort to attend all fires and direct the
officers and members in the performance of their duties;
   (F)   The Chief shall see that the citizens are kept informed on fire
hazards in the community and on the activities of the Department; and
   (G)   The Chief shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to
determine its cause, and in the case of suspicion of incendiarism shall notify
proper authorities and secure and preserve all possible evidence for future use
in the case.
(Prior Code, § 14-122)
§ 34.22  DUTIES OF ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   In the absence of the Chief, the administrative assistant or the assistant
chief on duty shall command the Department and be held responsible therefor in
all respect with the full powers and responsibilities of the Chief.
(Prior Code, § 14-123)
§ 34.23  DUTIES OF COMPANY OFFICERS.
   The company officers shall be selected upon their ability to meet the
following requirements:
   (A)   Their knowledge of fire-fighting;
   (B)   Their leadership ability; and
   (C)   Their knowledge of fire-fighting equipment.
(Prior Code, § 14-124)
§ 34.24  BY-LAWS; CONTENTS.
   The by-laws of the Department shall include the following:
   (A)   All new members shall be on probation for one year after their
appointments.
   (B)   All volunteer firefighters are required, when notified, to respond to
alarms of fire and other emergencies.
   (C)   A volunteer firefighter is required to be present at all regular
meetings, call meetings and schools presented for the benefit of the
firefighters.
   (D)   Any volunteer firefighter having two unexcused absences in succession
or three unexcused absences in a period of three months will be dropped from
the Fire Department rolls.
   (E)   Volunteer firefighters leaving the city for an extended period of time
will be required to notify the Chief.
   (F)   Any volunteer member of the Fire Department shall be dropped from the
rolls for the following offenses:
      (1)   Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
      (2)   Any act of insubordination;
      (3)   Neglect of duty;
      (4)   Any violation of rules and regulations governing the Fire
Department; or
      (5)   Conviction of a felony.
(Prior Code, § 14-125)
CHAPTER 35:  POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
35.01   Composition of Department
   
35.02   Duties
   
35.03   Equipment; duty of Chief
   
35.04   Itemized statement of needs
   
35.05   Delivery of property
   
35.06   Record required
   
35.07   Disposition of personal property
   
35.08   Expungement application fee
§ 35.01  COMPOSITION OF DEPARTMENT.
   The Police Department of the city shall consist of the Chief and police
officers as shall be authorized by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 14-201)  (Ord. 1278, passed 2-7-84; Am. Ord. 1578, passed 10-21-
97)
Statutory reference:
   Police department and services, see 11 O.S. §§ 34-101 et seq.
§ 35.02  DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Chief and all police officers to enforce
all regulations and applicable laws throughout the city, under the direction of
the City Manager.  The City Manager and Chief of Police are hereby authorized
to respond to mutual aid calls under emergency conditions on behalf of other
law enforcement agencies including municipalities, counties, the state or a
federal law enforcement agency, upon request of the agency and under the
regulations and conditions as may be established by the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 14-202)  (Ord. 1278, passed 2-7-84; Am. Ord. 1354, passed 10-15-
85; Am. Ord. 1428, passed 9-6-88; Am. Ord. 1578, passed 10-21-97)
§ 35.03  EQUIPMENT; DUTY OF CHIEF.
   (A)   The Police Chief shall have custody of the equipment and cars of the
Police Department and shall be accountable to the City Manager for their care
and safe keeping.
   (B)   He or she shall inventory all equipment and cars, giving their
estimated value and revise the same from time to time, which he or she shall
furnish to the City Manager, a copy thereof to be filed with the City Clerk for
use by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 14-203)  (Ord. 1278, passed 2-7-84; Am. Ord. 1578, passed 10-21-
97)
§ 35.04  ITEMIZED STATEMENT OF NEEDS.
   The Police Chief shall prepare an itemized statement, showing by item the
needs of his or her Department for the ensuing fiscal year, which shall be
furnished to the City Manager on or before the date set by the Manager for use
in the preparation of the city budget.
(Prior Code, § 14-204)  (Ord. 1278, passed 2-7-84; Am. Ord. 1578, passed 10-21-
97)
§ 35.05  DELIVERY OF PROPERTY.
   When any police officer comes into possession of any property, supposedly
lost or stolen, or when any officer takes any property off of or from any
offender or person believed to be an offender, he or she shall forthwith
deliver the property to the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 14-205)  (Ord. 1278, passed 2-7-84; Am. Ord. 1578, passed 10-21-
97)
§ 35.06  RECORD REQUIRED.
   The Chief of Police shall maintain a complete record of all property
received pursuant to
§ 35.05, showing the date it was received, a description of the article and the
source from which it was received. When any person shall, to the satisfaction
of the Chief of Police, present proof of ownership thereof, the Chief of Police
shall return the article to the owner, taking a receipt therefor, and shall
enter into the record the name of the person to whom it was delivered and the
date of the delivery.
(Prior Code, § 14-206)  (Ord. 1278, passed 2-7-84; Am. Ord. 1578, passed 10-21-
97)
§ 35.07  DISPOSITION OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Chief of Police is authorized to sell personal property, other
than money or legal tender of the United States, which has come into his or her
possession in any manner if:
      (1)   The owner of the personal property is unknown or has not claimed
the property;
      (2)   The property has been in the custody of the Chief of Police for at
least 90 days or for other minimum time, as may be required by state law,
whichever is less; and
      (3)   The property or any part thereof is no longer necessary to be held
as evidence or for any other purpose in connection with any litigation.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall file an application in the District Court of
the county requesting the authority of the Court to conduct a sale of the
personal property which has a fair market value of more than its face value. 
The Chief of Police shall attach to the application a list describing the
property, including any identifying numbers and marks, the date the property
came into the possession of the Chief of Police, and the name of the owner and
the person in last possession, if different, if known.
   (C)   In any instance where the property has an actual or apparent value of
more $250, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, written notice
of the hearing shall be sent by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to each
owner at the address as listed in the application.  If the owner of any
property with an actual or apparent value exceeding $500 is unable to be served
written notice by first-class mail, notice shall be provided by one publication
in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the property is in
custody.  The notice shall contain a brief description of the property of the
owner and the place and date of the hearing.  The notice shall be posted at the
assigned place for the posting of municipal notices, and at two other public
places in the municipality.
   (D)   If no owner appears and establishes ownership to the property at the
hearing, the Court shall enter an order authorizing the Chief of Police to
dispose of the property as follows:
      (1)   Donate the property having value of less than $500 to a not-for-
profit corporation, as defined in Title 18 of the Oklahoma Statutes, for use by
needy families;
      (2)   Sell the personal property for cash to the highest bidder, at least
five days after notice of the sale has been published;
      (3)   Transfer the property to a third-party agent under contract with
the governing body of the Chief of Police for sale by Internet or other
electronic means, regardless of whether the sale structure or distribution site
is within the State of Oklahoma; or
      (4)   By any other means as determined appropriate by the court,
including but not limited to, destruction.
   Regardless of the means of disposition, the Chief of Police shall make a
return of the donation or sale, and the order of the Court confirming the
donation or sale shall vest title to the property in the recipient or
purchaser.  After payment of Court costs and other expenses, the remainder of
money received from the sale of the personal property shall be deposited in the
Municipal General Fund.
   (E)   (1)   All money or legal tender of the United States which has come
into the possession of the Chief of Police pursuant to the circumstances
provided for in division (A) above shall be transferred by the Chief of Police
to the Municipal Clerk for deposit in the Municipal General Fund.  Prior to any
transfer, the Chief of Police shall file an application in the District Court,
requesting the Court to enter an order authorizing the Chief of Police to
transfer the money for deposit in the Municipal General Fund.
      (2)   The application shall describe the money or legal tender, the date
the same came into the possession of the Chief of Police, and the name and
address of the owner, if known.
      (3)   Notice of the hearing shall be given as provided for in division
(C) above.  The notice shall state that, upon failure of anyone to appear to
prove ownership to the money or legal tender, the Court shall order the same to
be deposited in the Municipal General Fund.
      (4)   The notice may be combined with a notice to sell personal property
as provided for in division (B) above.  If no one appears to claim and prove
ownership to the money or legal tender at the hearing, the Court shall order
the same to be transferred to the Municipal General Fund, as provided herein.
   (F)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dangerous or
deadly weapons, narcotic or poisonous drugs, explosives, or any property of any
kind or character, which the possession of is prohibited by law.  By order of
the trial court, any property filed as an exhibit or held by the municipality
shall be destroyed or sold or disposed of, pursuant to the conditions
prescribed in the order.
   (G)   The municipality is hereby authorized to establish a procedure for the
registration of “lost and found” property.  The procedure shall give the finder
of any property the option of relinquishing any future claim to found property
at the time its possession is surrendered to the police or other agent of the
municipality, or of retaining possession of the property after registering its
description and the finder’s identity with the Police Department or other agent
of the municipality.  Only property in which the finder relinquishes any future
claim to its ownership will be stored in municipal police property rooms.
   (H)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to animals.
   (I)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to destroy or donate to
charity those unclaimed personal property items which individual items have no
apparent fair market value and which have been in the possession of the Police
Department for more than 90 days.
(Prior Code, § 14-207)  (Ord. 1278, passed 2-7-84; Am. Ord. 1578, passed 10-21-
97; Am. Ord. 1829, passed 9-1-09; Am. Ord. 1879, passed 1-21-14)
§ 35.08  EXPUNGEMENT APPLICATION FEE.
   A fee of $150 is hereby imposed as a method to recover the cost to the city
of processing an application for expungement of criminal records maintained by
the Municipal Court or Police Department.  The fee shall be paid by the
applicant or his or her representative at the time the court order for
expungement of records is presented to the city for processing.  The fee shall
be deposited into the General Fund of the city.
(Ord. 1870, passed 1-8-13)
CHAPTER 36:  CIVIL DEFENSE; EMERGENCIES
Section
Civil Defense Organization
   
36.01   Establishment of Civil Defense Department; Committee
   
36.02   Powers and duties
   
36.03   Enforcement of rules and regulations
   
36.04   Compensation
Civil Emergencies
   
36.15   Definitions
   
36.16   Declaration of civil emergency
   
36.17   Curfew
   
36.18   Restriction of business
   
36.19   Duration of civil emergencies
CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION
§ 36.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF CIVIL DEFENSE DEPARTMENT; COMMITTEE.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby established the Civil Defense Advisory
Committee.
      (2)   It shall consist of the Mayor as Chairperson and five members
appointed by the Mayor and serving at his or her pleasure.  The Committee shall
select from its members the Vice-Chairperson and Secretary.  It shall hold
meetings as are directed by the Mayor, and its function shall be to act in an
advisory capacity as needed or requested by the Mayor or by the Director of
Civil Defense under the authority of this chapter.
   (B)   The Mayor shall be responsible for carrying out any civil defense
program of the city.  He or she may appoint the Director of Civil Defense to
serve at his or her pleasure and may, from time to time, delegate to the
Director his or her powers, responsibilities and duties.
   (C)   The function of the Committee will be to act in an advisory capacity
as necessary or requested by the Mayor or the Director of Civil Defense.
(Prior Code, § 14-310)
Statutory reference:
   Civil defense programs; local organization and duties, see 63 O.S. §§ 683.11
and 683.12
§ 36.02  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Mayor or the Director of Civil Defense, as the case may be, shall have
the following powers:
   (A)   To formulate written plans, orders, rules and regulations to carry out
the provisions of this chapter and to amend or rescind same;
   (B)   To integrate and coordinate all plans with the plans and program of
the federal government, the state and other public and private agencies and
organizations empowered to act in emergencies;
   (C)   To establish a public warning system;
   (D)   To establish and carry out recruitment and training programs as may be
necessary to develop an adequate, qualified civil defense volunteer corps;
   (E)   To enter into mutual aid arrangements with surrounding communities,
subject to the approval of the City Council;
   (F)   To accept from the federal government or the state government or any
person, firm or organization, any loan or grant of service, equipment,
supplies, materials or funds for the purpose of civil defense, subject to the
terms of the offer and the rules and regulations, if any, of the agency making
the offer; and
   (G)   To call residents of the city into active duty to serve as auxiliary
police, rescue and fire personnel with the same authority as the regular city
employees in those capacities, respectively.
(Prior Code, § 14-311)
§ 36.03  ENFORCEMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In the event of an emergency, as defined in
§ 36.15, the Mayor or Director shall have authority and power to enforce all
promulgated rules and regulations, and, if necessary, take control of
transportation, communications, stocks of food, clothing, medical and public
utilities for the purpose of protecting civilian population.
   (B)   He or she shall coordinate the activities of the civil defense
organization.
(Prior Code, § 14-312)
§ 36.04  COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The Advisory Committee, Director and auxiliary personnel shall serve
without compensation. 
   (B)   However, the Director of Civil Defense and the Advisory Committee may
be reimbursed for expense actually incurred in the performance of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 14-313)
   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
§ 36.15  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIVIL EMERGENCY.
      (1)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual
force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power
to execute by three or more persons acting together without authority at law.
      (2)   Any natural disaster or manmade calamities,  including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate
limits of the city resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken
to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
      (3)   Any inability or failure of the Fire and/or Police Department to
respond to emergency situations or adequately control the emergency situations.
   CURFEW.  A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering,
standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant
premises within the corporate limits of the city, excepting persons officially
designated to duty with reference to the civil emergency.
(Prior Code, § 14-301)
§ 36.16  DECLARATION OF CIVIL EMERGENCY.
   When, in the judgment of the Mayor, a civil emergency is deemed to exist, he
or she shall forthwith proclaim, in writing, the existence of same.
(Prior Code, § 14-302)
§ 36.17  CURFEW.
   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, he or she may order a
general curfew applicable to the geographical areas of the city or to the city
as a whole, as he or she deems advisable and applicable during the hours of the
day or night as he or she deems necessary and advisable to the interest of the
public safety and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 14-303)
§ 36.18  RESTRICTION OF BUSINESS.
   After proclamation of civil emergencies, the Mayor of the city may also in
the interest of public safety and welfare make any or all of the following
orders:
   (A)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores;
   (B)   Order the closing of all beer taverns;
   (C)   Order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof where the
consumption of intoxicating liquor or beer is permitted;
   (D)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of beer;
   (E)   Order the discontinuance of the selling, distributing or giving away
of gasoline, kerosene or other liquid inflammable or combustible products in
any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
   (F)   Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the
chief activity of which is to sell, distribute or dispense liquid flammable or
combustible products;
   (G)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever;
   (H)   Order the closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof the
chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving away of
firearms or ammunition;
   (I)   Order the closing of any streets, alleys, ways, parts of streets,
alleys or ways within the city limits;
   (J)   Restrict the number of persons who may assemble or gather on any
public street, park or other areas in the city, either public or private; and
   (K)   Make orders as may be necessary to provide adequate police and fire
protection for the city, including requests for assistance from other political
subdivisions and the state and federal governments, and restrict access or
entrance onto or into public facilities.
(Prior Code, § 14-304)
§ 36.19  DURATION OF CIVIL EMERGENCIES.
   The civil emergency and restrictions thereof proclaimed by the Mayor, as
herein set forth, shall remain in force and effect until the state of emergency
shall be lifted by proclamation of the Mayor or by order of the Council of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 14-305)
CHAPTER 37:  PERSONNEL
Section
Employment Benefits and Rules
   
37.01   Appointments by City Manager
   
37.02   Accounting for responsibilities
   
37.03   Work week
   
37.04   Wages and hours
   
37.05   Vacation benefits
   
37.06   Sick leave benefits
   
37.07   Holidays
   
37.08   Other leave benefits
   
37.09   Authority of absence
   
37.10   Merit system
   
37.11   Appeal from disciplinary action
Employee Retirement System
   
37.25   General purpose
   
37.26   Administration
   
37.27   Fund
   
37.28   Appropriations
   
37.29   Special income tax treatment for contributions under IRC414
   
37.30   Execution of instruments
Police and Fire Pension Systems
   
37.40   Systems adopted
   
37.41   System membership
Social Security
   
37.55   Declaration of policy
   
37.56   Withholdings
   
37.57   Contributions
   
37.58   Records and reports
   
37.59   Exclusions
EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS AND RULES
§ 37.01  APPOINTMENTS BY CITY MANAGER.
   All appointments to office or employment for the city not reserved by the
Charter of the city to be made by the Council or other officers shall be made
by the City Manager.  All appointments and promotions in service of the city
shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness and removals and
demotions shall be made solely for the good of the service.
(Prior Code, § 2-201)
§ 37.02  ACCOUNTING FOR RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The department heads, in addition to their other duties, shall maintain
complete and accurate records of all employees of the city under their
supervision relating to attendance to work or absence, showing the cause
therefor.  The department heads shall timely report these records to the City
Manager on forms designated by the City Manager and shall certify to the
correctness thereof.  Department heads shall perform other duties in relation
to employment records as may be designated or delegated by the City Manager
from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 2-202)
§ 37.03  WORK WEEK.
   (A)   The normal work week for the Police and Fire Departments shall be as
established in their respective collective bargaining agreements.
   (B)   The normal work week for all other employees is 40 hours per week.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the City Manager from
authorizing any employee time off for less than one-half day when the
circumstances so justify.  The City Manager is authorized to inaugurate a
system of time off for meritorious or extraordinary services.
(Prior Code, § 2-203)  (Am. Ord. 1650, passed 2-6-01)
§ 37.04  WAGES AND HOURS.
   (A)   Wages and salaries for various positions shall be in accordance with
the provisions established by the City Council, including amendments thereto,
and within the limitations of the financial provision for each department as
approved by the City Manager for each fiscal year.
   (B)   Overtime work will be performed only on authorization of the City
Manager to the extent necessary to meet essential operating requirements. For
purposes of determining whether overtime is due, only those hours actually
worked shall be counted. The rate of pay for overtime, when due, shall not
exceed one and one-half times the hourly rate of pay.
   (C)   Department heads and other executive, administrative, supervisory and
professional personnel are expected to work for the number of hours necessary
to properly perform the duties assigned.  The salaries of each group are
determined and established in accordance with this assumption.
   (D)   Part-time employees shall be paid on an hourly rate to be approved by
the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 2-204)  (Ord. 1333, passed 6-18-85)
§ 37.05  VACATION BENEFITS.
   (A)   Each employee shall accrue vacation leave with pay at the following
rate:
      (1)   Zero to five years service:  3.693 hours per payroll period;
      (2)   Six to eleven years of service:  4.616 hours per payroll period;
      (3)   Twelve to fifteen years service:  5.539 hours per payroll period;
and
      (4)   After 15 years of service:  6.462 hours per payroll period.
   (B)   (1)   Vacation leave credit may be accumulated to a maximum of 30
working days determined as of January 1 each year.  No more than 30 vacation
credits shall be paid upon retirement or termination of service.
      (2)   Vacation leave shall be granted at periods of not less than one-
half day nor more than 30 working days in one calendar year.
   (C)   Conditioned upon completion of six months employment, employees in
permanent positions will be eligible for vacation benefits, either as time off
with pay or as terminal pay in cases of separation from city employment in good
standing.
   (D)   Vacation leave may be used to supplement sickness or injury leave
benefits.
   (E)   An employee or his or her beneficiary, in the event of death, shall be
paid for accrued vacation
leave credit upon separation from service at the rate of his or her last
monthly or hourly salary.
   (F)   (1)   Holidays which occur during the period selected by the employee
for his or her vacation leave shall not be charged against the vacation leave.
      (2)   However, the holiday will be charged against holiday leave
regularly due the employee.
   (G)   The period selected by the employee for his or her vacation leave must
have prior approval of the department head.
   (H)   An employee shall not be paid for earned vacation in lieu of his or
her taking the vacation during the calendar year.
   (I)   Except in extreme cases, when provided by departmental budget or when
the approval of the City Manager is obtained, it is not contemplated that
vacation leave will involve nor necessitate the use of extra or relief
employees.  Department heads will arrange vacation schedules and reallocate
duties on the basis as to cause minimum interference with the normal function
and operation of the organization.
(Prior Code, § 2-205)  (Ord. 1333, passed 6-18-85; Am. Ord. 1650, passed 2-6-
01)
§ 37.06  SICK LEAVE BENEFITS.
   (A)   Each employee shall accrue 3.693 hours of sick leave per payroll
period.  Sick leave allowance may be used only by an employee when
incapacitated to perform his or her duties due to a non-work related sickness
or injury, or in the event of a serious illness or death in the employee's
immediate family.
   (B)   Sick leave is not to be taken until the initial six months of service
has been completed.  The leave balance at the time shall be credited
retroactively.
   (C)   Sick leave may accumulate for a total of not more than 120 days. 
(Ord. 1294, passed 6-19-84)
   (D)   No terminal pay shall be authorized for unused sick leave for
terminating employees.  Upon
retirement, employees may convert sick leave which has accumulated over 680
hours to pay at the ratio of two hours sick leave to one hour pay. Maximum
amount of hours paid shall not exceed 140 hours. (Ord. 1294, passed 6-19-84;
Am. Ord. 1777, passed 12-19-06)
   (E)   Employees who are absent due to unconfirmed illness may be required by
the department head or City Manager to submit a physician's statement.
   (F)   Department heads are authorized to make any investigation of benefits
claimed under this rule, which they deem necessary, and to disapprove any
claims not properly substantiated.
   (G)   The City Manager is authorized to conduct the investigations and
inquiries to determine whether the employee meets the physical standards
necessary for the proper performance of his or her duties. Likewise, evidence
of malingering or the abuse of this benefit will constitute grounds for
disciplinary action, including discharge from employment.
   (H)   Fire Department personnel working on the platoon system will be
charged two days sick leave from their sick leave records for each shift absent
from work for the reason of sickness.
   (I)   In the event an employee suffers a catastrophic off-duty injury or
illness and has expended all available paid time off and further faces entering
into a “leave without pay” status, employees may voluntarily donate a maximum
of 24 hours per pay period of their accrued vacation and/or earned compensatory
time to the employee so affected. The affected employee may not receive in
excess of 80 hours per pay period. Fire Department employees working on the
platoon system may not receive in excess of 112 hours per pay period.
(Prior Code, § 2-206)  (Ord. 1333, passed 6-18-85; Am. Ord. 1698, passed 6-17-
03; Am. Ord. 1777, passed 12-19-06)
§ 37.07  HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   All employees of the city, except shift personnel of the Police and
Fire Departments, shall observe the following holidays:
      (1)   New Year's Day;
      (2)   Martin Luther King, Jr. Day;
      (3)   President's Day;
      (4)   Good Friday;
      (5)   Memorial Day;
      (6)   Independence Day;
      (7)   Labor Day;
      (8)   Veteran's Day;
      (9)   Thanksgiving Day;
      (10)   The Day after Thanksgiving;
      (11)   Christmas Eve;
      (12)   Christmas Day; and
      (13)   A floating holiday to be taken at the employee's request and
subject to approval of the Department Director, on either the employee's
birthday, or at a time approved in advance.
   (B)   The holidays identified in division (A) shall be administered as
follows:
      (1)   If any of the holidays fall on Saturday, the preceding Friday shall
be a holiday in that year. If any holiday falls on Sunday, the succeeding
Monday shall be a holiday in that year.
      (2)   If, in the opinion of the City Manager, it becomes necessary for an
employee to work on a scheduled holiday, then the City Manager shall authorize
holiday leave to be taken on some other day, or may, in his or her discretion,
compensate the employee in time or pay for the holiday so worked.
      (3)   The City Manager shall administer the floating holiday so that all
city buildings and facilities remain open and with minimum interference to
normal operations.
      (4)   Police and Fire Department shift personnel shall be granted time
off or paid for holidays as set forth in their respective Collective Bargaining
Agreements.
      (5)   Accumulation of holidays shall not be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 2-208)  (Ord. 1333, passed 6-18-85; Am. Ord. 1480, passed 10-15-
91; Am. Ord. 1779, passed 1-4-07; Am. Ord. 1838, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 1969,
passed 2-19-19)
Statutory reference:
   State holidays, see 25 O.S. §§ 82.1 and 82.2
§ 37.08  OTHER LEAVE BENEFITS.
   (A)   Injury leave.  Injury occurring while in the course of employment
which requires the employee's absence from work may be covered under provisions
of the State Worker's Compensation Act.
   (B)   Emergency leave.  The City Manager may grant emergency leave with pay
for a period not exceeding five working days in any one calendar year to any
employee who has completed six months of satisfactory service with the city. 
The leave should be normally reserved for unusual circumstances such as a death
occurring in immediate family.
   (C)   Military leave.  Any employee with official orders requiring his or
her attendance for active duty  as a member of the United States Armed Forces,
the State Guard or the State Reserves shall be entitled to leave of absence for
the period of the active duty without loss of status or efficiency rating and
without loss of pay during the first 30 calendar days of the leave of absence
during any federal fiscal year. The durational limit of protected military
service as provided for in this section shall not be less than that provided by
federal law.
   (D)   Meritorious leave.  The City Manager shall have the authority, upon
the recommendation of the department head, to grant additional compensatory
time off to any employee as a reward for extraordinary meritorious service to
the city.
   (E)   Conference leave.  The City Manager may grant conference leave with
pay together with the necessary travel expense in order that employees may
attend conferences, schools or similar events designed to improve their
efficiency, if considered to be in the best interests of the city.
   (F)   Jury duty.  An employee who is legally summoned to serve on jury and
in court trials may be permitted absence with pay for the time required by the
duties.  If excused or released from the service, the employee should report to
his or her regular employment; providing, however, that at least one hour
remains during the regular work day.
(Prior Code, § 2-209)
   (G)   Special leave.
      (1)   The City Manager may authorize special leave without pay to an
employee for reasons which do not affect the city.
      (2)   The leave, if granted, shall not exceed three months, except as
provided below:
         (a)   When an employee has used his or her accrued vacation and sick
leave and because of illness or non-service injury is not able to return to
work, the City Manager may extend a leave of absence without pay for a period
not to exceed one year.
         (b)   Leaves of absence without pay for any period of time greater
than one year must have the approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-210)
(Am. Ord. 1887, passed 11-4-14)
§ 37.09  AUTHORITY OF ABSENCE.
   No employee shall be absent from his or her regularly scheduled duties,
except by authority of his or her department head, other responsible supervisor
or the City Manager.  Employees absent due to reasons beyond their control will
be responsible for reporting their absence together with the reason therefor to
the department head or other responsible authority as soon as possible after
the beginning of their assigned shift or regular schedule of duties.  Except in
cases of leave incident to vacation or illness, all absences must be approved
by the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 2-211)
§ 37.10  MERIT SYSTEM.
   (A)   All officers and employees in the merit system shall hold their
respective positions during good behavior and shall be discharged, demoted or
suspended without pay only for good and sufficient cause.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to temporary or
probationary employees.  The probationary period shall be for a minimum of six
months after the date of employment.
(Prior Code, § 2-213)
§ 37.11  APPEAL FROM DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
   Employees in the merit system who are discharged, demoted or suspended
without pay may appeal the action in accordance with the following procedures:
   (A)   Within five days after disciplinary action is taken, the employee
shall be notified in writing of the specific cause therefor.
   (B)   Within ten days from receipt of the notice, the employee affected may
make a written request to the City Manager for a hearing before the Personnel
Board.  If the employee fails to request a hearing, as provided herein, the
discharge, demotion or suspension shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 2-214)  (Am. Ord. 1333, passed 6-18-85)
   EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM
§ 37.25  GENERAL PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to the authority conferred by the laws of the state, and for the
purpose of encouraging continuity and meritorious service on the part of city
employees and thereby promote public efficiency, there is hereby authorized,
created, established, and approved and adopted the amended and restated plan
designated “Employee Retirement System of the City of Bethany, Oklahoma,
Defined Contribution Plan” (hereafter called system), an executed counterpart
of which is incorporated herein by reference.
(Prior Code, § 2-301) (Am. Ord. 1756, passed 11-1-05; Am. Ord. 1771, passed 10-
3-06; Am. Ord. 1820, passed 3-3-09; Am. Ord. 1831, passed 10-20-09; Am. Ord.
1844, passed 11-16-10; Am. Ord. 1851, passed 6-7-11; Am. Ord. 1872, passed 5-
21-13; Am. Ord. 1886, passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 1902, passed 6-2-15; Am. Ord.
1926, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 1927, passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 1982, passed 10-
7-19; Am. Ord. 1983, passed 10-7-19)
Statutory reference:
   Employee retirement system; authority to establish, see 11 O.S. § 48-101
§ 37.26  ADMINISTRATION.
   For the purpose of administration of the system, there is hereby established
a Committee, which shall be the members of the City Council as now existing or
as from time to time duly elected or appointed or constituted.  The powers and
duties of the Committee shall be as set forth in the system instrument.
(Prior Code, § 2-302)  (Am. Ord. 1982, passed 10-7-19)
§ 37.27  FUND.
   (A)   A fund is hereby provided for the exclusive use and benefit of the
persons entitled to benefits under the system. All contributions to the fund
shall be paid over to and received in trust for the purpose by the City. The
fund shall be pooled for purposes of management and investment with similar
funds of other incorporated cities, towns, and municipal trusts in the state as
a part of the State Municipal Retirement Fund, in accordance with the trust
agreement of the State Municipal Retirement Fund, a public trust.
   (B)   (1)   The city shall hold the contributions in the form received, and
from time to time pay over and transfer the same to the State Municipal
Retirement Fund, as duly authorized and directed by the Board of Trustees.
      (2)   The fund shall be non-fiscal and shall not be considered in
computing any levy when the annual estimate is made to the County Excise Board.
(Prior Code, § 2-3030)  (Am. Ord. 1844, passed 11-16-10; Am. Ord. 1886, passed
12-16-14; Am. Ord. 1902, passed 6-2-15; Am. Ord. 1982, passed 10-7-19; Am. Ord.
1983, passed 10-7-19)
§ 37.28  APPROPRIATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The city is hereby authorized to incur the necessary expenses
for the establishment, operation and administration of the system and to
appropriate and pay the same.
      (2)   In addition, the city is hereby authorized to appropriate annually
such amounts as are required in addition to employee contributions to maintain
the system and the fund in accordance with the provisions of the Defined
Contribution Plan.
   (B)   Any appropriation so made to maintain the system and fund shall be for
deferred wages or salaries and for the payment of necessary expenses of
operation and administration to be transferred to the trustees of the State
Municipal Retirement Fund for such purposes and shall be paid into the fund
when available to be duly transferred to the State Municipal Retirement Fund.
(Prior Code, § 2-304)  (Am. Ord. 1844, passed 11-16-10; Am. Ord. 1886, passed
12-16-14; Am. Ord. 1902, passed 6-2-15)
§ 37.29  SPECIAL INCOME TAX TREATMENT FOR CONTRIBUTIONS UNDER IRC414.
   The Plan contains provisions which are intended to constitute a pick-up
program by the employer which satisfied the requirements of § 414(h)(2) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (the “Code”), and the Plan, be, and it is,
approved and adopted as of the date therein stated; and required contributions
described in § 5 of the Joinder are designated as “picked-up” by the employer
so as to not be included in Plan Participants’ gross income for federal income
tax purposes as provided in § 414(h)(2) of the Code. All such required
contributions are to be paid by the employer in lieu of contributions by the
Plan Participant. No Participant in the Plan shall have the option of choosing
to receive the amounts of required contributions directly in lieu of having
such amounts paid by the employer to the Trustees of the Plan.
(Ord. 1963, passed 11-6-18; Am. Ord. 1981, passed 10-7-19; Am Ord. 1982, passed
10-7-19)
§ 37.30  EXECUTION OF INSTRUMENTS.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Clerk are each authorized and directed to execute
(in counterparts, each of which shall constitute an original) the system
instrument, and to do all other acts and things necessary, advisable and proper
to put the system and related trust into full force and effect, and to make
such changes therein as may be necessary to qualify the same under Sections 401
(a) and 501(a) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code.
   (B)   (1)   The counterpart attached to the ordinance enacting this section
as Exhibit “A” and Exhibit “B,” which has been duly executed with the passage
of the ordinance enacting this section and made a part hereof, is hereby
ratified and confirmed in all respects.
      (2)   This Committee is hereby authorized and directed to proceed
immediately on behalf of thecity to pool and combine the fund into the State
Municipal Retirement Fund as a part thereof, with similar funds of such other
cities and towns, for purposes of pooled management and investment.
(Prior Code, § 2-305) (Am. Ord. 1756, passed 11-1-05; Am. Ord. 1844, passed 11-
16-10; Am. Ord. 1886, passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 1902, passed 6-2-15; Am. Ord.
1982, passed 10-7-19; Am. Ord. 1983, passed 10-7-19)
   POLICE AND FIRE PENSION SYSTEMS
§ 37.40  SYSTEMS ADOPTED.
   The city hereby adopts the provisions of the state law governing the Police
Pension and Retirement System and the Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund, and
amendments thereto, for the purpose of providing the police officers and
firefighters of the city with a retirement program.  The city agrees to make
contributions to the systems in the amounts as are required by law.
(Prior Code, § 2-310)
Statutory reference:
   Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund, see 11 O.S. §§ 34-101 et seq.
   Police pension and retirement system, see 11 O.S. §§ 50-101et seq.
§ 37.41  SYSTEM MEMBERSHIP.
   Any person hired as a police officer or firefighter who has qualified under
the provisions of the Police Pension and Retirement System or the Firemen's
Relief and Pension Fund shall be a member of the respective pension system.
(Prior Code, § 2-311)
   SOCIAL SECURITY
§ 37.55  DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to
participate in the benefits of the system of Old Age, Survivors', and
Disability Insurance (OASDI), being 42 USC 401 et seq., as authorized by the
Federal Social Security Act and all amendments thereto, and 51 O.S. §§ 121 et
seq.  In pursuance of this policy, the officers and employees of the city shall
take the action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2-401)
Statutory reference:
   Social security coverage for local governments, see 51 O.S. § 125
§ 37.56  WITHHOLDINGS.
   Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials, for the
purposes provided in
§ 37.55, are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at the times as
may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations and shall
be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by the laws and
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2-402)
§ 37.57  CONTRIBUTIONS.
   Employer contributions shall be paid from amounts appropriated for these
purposes from available funds to the designated state or federal agency in
accordance with applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2-403)
§ 37.58  RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   The city shall keep records and submit reports as may be required by
applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2-404)
§ 37.59  EXCLUSIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to authorize the
extension of social security benefits to any employee, official or position
which:
   (A)   Is compensated on a fee basis; or
   (B)   Is not authorized for social security coverage under applicable state
or federal laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2-405)
CHAPTER 38:  TAXATION
Section
Sales Tax
   
38.01   Citation and codification
   
38.02   Definitions
   
38.03   Purpose of revenues
   
38.04   Classification of taxpayers
   
38.05   Subsisting state permits
   
38.06   Tax rate; sales subject to tax
   
38.07   Purpose for tax
   
38.08   Exemptions
   
38.09   Payment of tax; brackets
   
38.10   Taxes due; returns and records
   
38.11   Vendor's duty to collect tax
   
38.12   Returns and remittances; discounts
   
38.13   Interest and penalties; delinquency; waiver
   
38.14   Tax constitutes debt
   
38.15   Erroneous payments; claim for refund
   
38.16   Fraudulent returns
   
38.17   Records confidential
Utility and Telephone Tax
   
38.30   Utility tax levied; exceptions
   
38.31   Payment
   
38.32   Tax lien
   
38.33   Failure or refusal to pay
   
38.34   Telephone inspection fee levied
   
38.35   Fee in lieu of other concessions
   
38.36   Voice over Internet fees
Use Tax
   
38.45   Excise tax on storage, use and the like
   
38.46   Exemptions
   
38.47   Payments; returns
   
38.48   Tax constitutes debt
   
38.49   Collection
   
38.50   Revoking permits
   
38.51   Remunerative deductions
   
38.52   Interest and penalties; delinquency; waiver
   
38.53   Erroneous payments; claim for refund
   
38.54   Fraudulent returns
   
38.55   Records confidential
   
38.56   Definitions
   
38.57   Tax Collector
   
38.58   Classification of taxpayers
   
38.59   Subsisting state permits
   
38.60   Purposes of revenues
Hotel/Motel Tax
   
38.61   Citation
   
38.62   Definitions
   
38.63   Levied; rate of levy; rooms provided free of charge subject to tax
   
38.64   Exemptions; acknowledgment required; records required
   
38.65   Tax to be separately designated on bills
   
38.66   Operator responsible for collection
   
38.67   Certificates of registration
   
38.68   Records required
   
38.69   Report
   
38.70   Payment of tax
   
38.71   Delinquent taxes
   
38.72   Interest and penalties on unpaid taxes
   
38.73   Bond required
   
38.74   Assessment and determination of tax
   
38.75   Refunds and/or credits
   
38.76   Notices
   
38.77   Remedies exclusive
   
38.78   Failure to file; submitting fraudulent reports; failure to post a bond;
penalties and liens
   
38.79   Operator’s discount
   
38.80   Records confidential
   
38.81   Use of hotel tax funds
   
38.82   General powers of Director
   
38.83   Amendments
   
38.84   Provisions cumulative
SALES TAX
§ 38.01  CITATION AND CODIFICATION.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as “Bethany Sales Tax
Subchapter.”
(Prior Code, § 8-101)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to levy (sales) taxes for municipal purposes, see 68 O.S. § 2701
   State Sales Tax Code, see 68 O.S. §§ 1350 et seq.
§ 38.02  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the State
Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1352, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part
of this subchapter.
   (B)   In addition, for the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      TAX COLLECTOR.  The department of the city or the official agency of the
state duly designated, according to law or contract, authorized by law to
administrator the collection of the tax levied in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-102)
§ 38.03  PURPOSE OF REVENUES.
   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this subchapter to provide
revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 8-103)
§ 38.04  CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the classification of taxpayers
hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the State Sales
Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 8-104)
§ 38.05  SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the State Tax
Commission pursuant to the State Sales Tax Code are, for the purpose of this
subchapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement
for an additional city permit for the same purpose.
(Prior Code, § 8-105)
§ 38.06  TAX RATE; SALES SUBJECT TO TAX.
   There is hereby levied for general government purposes an excise tax of 4%
upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under
the State Sales Tax Code as defined under the State Sales Tax Code as now
exists or is hereinafter amended.
(Prior Code, § 8-106)  (Ord. 1343, passed 8-20-85; Am. Ord. 1460, passed 6-5-
90; Am. Ord. 1639, passed 6-6-00; Am. Ord. 1740, passed 12-7-04)
§ 38.07  PURPOSE FOR TAX.
   (A)   (1)   The additional 1% sales tax levied by this subchapter shall be
allocated and spent solely as follows:
         (a)   Seventy percent of the additional 1% for capital improvements;
and
         (b)   Thirty percent of the additional 1% for general government
purposes.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT.  All items and articles, either new or
replacements, not consumed by use, including, but not limited to roads and
streets, drainage improvements, water and sewerage improvements, machinery,
equipment, furniture and fixtures, all real property, all construction or
reconstruction of buildings, appurtenances and improvements to real property,
the costs and expenses related thereto, including right-of-way or other real
property.
      (3)   This section applies only to the third 1% sales tax approved by a
vote of the public on July 24, 1990, and effective September 1, 1990.
(Prior Code, § 8-106A)  (Ord. 1460, passed 6-5-90)
   (B)   The 4% rate established in § 38.06 includes a levy and continuation of
a 3.3% sales tax, which levy shall be allocated and spent solely for general
government purposes, to include salaries and equipment for all municipal
departments, including police and fire services.  This additional 1% tax levied
by this section shall commence on October 1, 2005.

   (C)   The balance of the sales tax levied in § 38.06 (.7%) shall be spent
solely for capital improvements.
(Prior Code, § 8-106B)  (Ord. 1639, passed 6-6-00; Am. Ord. 1740, passed 12-7-
04)
§ 38.08  EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
subchapter the gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the State Sales
Tax Code inclusive, but not exclusive of, and derived from the:
      (1)   Sale of gasoline or motor fuel on which the motor fuel tax,
gasoline excise tax or special fuels tax levied by state law has been paid;
      (2)   Sale of motor vehicles or any optional equipment or accessories
attached to motor vehicles on which the State Motor Vehicle Excise Tax levied
by state law has been paid;
      (3)   Sale of crude petroleum or natural or casing head gas and other
products subject to gross production tax under state law; and  (This exemption
shall not apply when the products are sold to consumer or user for consumption
or use, except when used for injection into the earth for the purpose of
promoting or facilitating the production of oil or gas.  This division shall
not operate to increase or repeal the gross production tax levied by the laws
of the state.)
      (4)   Sale of aircraft on which the tax levied by state law has been
paid.
(Prior Code, § 8-107)  (Am. Ord. 1288, passed 5-15-84)
   (B)   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
subchapter:
      (1)   Sale of tangible personal property or services to the United States
government or to the state, any political subdivision of the state or any
agency of a political subdivision of the state; (All sales to contractors in
connection with the performance of any contract with the United States
government, state or any of its political subdivisions shall not be exempted
from the tax levied by this subchapter, except as hereinafter provided.)
      (2)   Sales made directly by county, district or state fair authorities
of the state, upon the premises of the fair authority, for the sole benefit of
the fair authority;
      (3)   Sale of food in cafeterias or lunch rooms of elementary schools,
high schools, colleges or universities which are operated primarily for
teachers and pupils and are not operated primarily for the public or for
profit;
      (4)   Dues paid to fraternal, religious, civic, charitable or educational
societies or organizations by regular members thereof; provided, the societies
or organizations operate under what is commonly termed the lodge plan or
system, and provided the societies or organizations do not operate for a profit
which insures to the benefit of any individual member or members thereof to the
exclusion of other members;
      (5)   Sale of tangible personal property or services to or by churches,
except sales made in the
course of business for profit or savings, competing with other persons engaged
in the same or similar business;
      (6)   The amount of proceeds received from the sale of admission tickets
which is separately stated on the ticket of admission for the repayment of
money borrowed by any accredited state-supported college or university for the
purpose of constructing or enlarging any facility to be used for the staging of
an athletic event, a theatrical productions or any other form of entertainment,
edification or cultural cultivation to which entry is gained with a paid
admission ticket;  (The facilities include, but are not limited to athletic
fields, athletic stadiums, field houses, amphitheaters and theaters.  To be
eligible for this sales tax exemption, the amount separately stated on the
admission ticket shall be a surcharge which is imposed, collected and used for
the sole purpose of servicing or aiding in the servicing of debt incurred by
the college or university to effect the capital improvements hereinbefore
described.)
      (7)   Sales of tangible personal property or services to the Council
organizations or similar state  supervisory organizations of the Boy Scouts of
America, Girl Scouts of U.S.A. and the Campfire Girls shall be exempt from
sales tax; or
      (8)   Sale of tangible personal property or services to any county,
municipality, public school district, the institutions of the state system of
higher education, the Grand River Dam Authority or to any person with whom any
of the above named subdivisions or agencies of the state has duly entered into
a public contract pursuant to law, necessary for carrying out the public
contract.  Any person making purchases on behalf of the subdivision or agency
of the state shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales
ticket to be retained by the vendor that the purchases are made for and on
behalf of the subdivision or agency of the state and set out the name of the
public subdivision or agency.  Any person who wrongfully or erroneously
certifies that purchases are for any of the above named subdivision or agencies
of the state or who otherwise violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount equal to
double the amount of the sales tax involved.
(Prior Code, § 8-108)
   (C)   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
subchapter:
      (1)   Transportation of school pupils to and from elementary schools or
high schools in motor or other vehicles;
      (2)   Transportation of persons where the fare of each person does not
exceed $1 or local transportation of persons within the corporate limits of a
municipality, except by taxicab;
      (3)   Carrier sales of newspapers and periodicals made directly to
consumers or other sales of newspapers and periodicals where any individual
transaction does not exceed $.75;  (A carrier is a person who regularly
delivers newspapers or periodicals to subscribers on an assigned route.)
      (4)   Sales for resale to persons engaged in the business of reselling
the articles purchased, whether within or without the state, provided that the
sales to residents of the state are made to persons to whom sales tax permits
have been issued as provided in this subchapter;  (This exemption shall not
apply to the sales of articles made to persons holding permits when the persons
purchase items for their use and which they are not regularly engaged in the
business of reselling.  Neither shall this exemption apply to sales of tangible
personal property to peddlers, solicitors and other salespersons who do not
have an established place of business and a sales tax permit.)
      (5)   Sales of advertising space in newspapers and periodicals and
billboard advertising service and any advertising through the electronic media,
including radio, television and cable television;
      (6)   Eggs, feed, supplies, machinery and  equipment purchased by persons
regularly engaged in the business of raising worms, fish, any insect or any
other form of terrestrial or aquatic animal life and used for the purpose of
raising same for marketing;  (This exemption shall only be granted and extended
to the purchaser when the items are to be used and in fact are used in the
raising of animal life as set out above.  Each purchaser shall certify, in
writing, on the invoice or sales ticket retained by the vendor that he or she
is regularly engaged in the business of raising animal life and that the items
purchased will be used only in the business.  The vendor shall certify to the
State Tax Commission that the price of the items has been reduced to grant the
full benefit of the exemption.  Violation hereof by the purchaser or vendor
shall be a misdemeanor.)
      (7)   Sales of medicine or drugs prescribed for the treatment of human
beings by a person licensed to prescribe the medicine or drugs; and  (This
exemption shall not apply to proprietary or patent medicines, as defined by 59
O.S. § 353.1.)
      (8)   Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting or prohibiting the
city from levying and collecting taxes on the sale of natural or artificial gas
and electricity, whether sold for residential or any other use.  The sales tax
levied by the city on natural or artificial gas and electricity shall be in
effect regardless of any city regulation or contractual provisions referring to
previously imposed state sales tax on the items.
(Prior Code, § 8-109)
   (D)   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
subchapter:
      (1)   Sales of agricultural products in the state by the producer thereof
directly to the consumer or user when the articles are sold at or from a farm
and not from some other place of business, as follows:
         (a)   Farm, orchard or garden products;
         (b)   Dairy products sold by a dairy person or farmer who owns all the
cows from which the dairy products offered for sale are produced;
         (c)   Livestock sold by the producer at a special livestock sale; and
         (d)   The provisions of this division shall not be construed as
exempting sales by florists, nursery persons or chicken hatcheries, or sales of
dairy products by any other business, except as set out herein.
      (2)   Sale of baby chicks, turkey poults and starter pullets used in the
commercial production of chickens, turkeys and eggs, provided that the
purchaser certificates, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket
to be retained by the vendor that the pullets will be used primarily for egg
production;
      (3)   Sale of salt, grains, tankage, oyster shells, mineral supplements,
limestone and other generally recognized animal feeds for the following
purposes and subject to the following limitations:
         (a)   Feed which is fed to poultry and livestock, including breeding
stock and wool-bearing stock, for the purpose of producing eggs, poultry, milk
or meat for human consumption;
         (b)   Feed purchased in the state for the purpose of being fed to and
which is fed by the purchaser to horses, mules or other domestic or draft
animals used directly in the producing and marketing of agricultural products;
         (c)   Any stock tonics, water purifying products, stock sprays,
disinfectants or other agricultural supplies;
         (d)   Poultry shall not be construed to include any fowl other than
domestic fowl kept and raised for the market or production of eggs;
         (e)   Livestock shall not be construed to include any pet animals such
as dogs, cats, birds or other fur-bearing animals; and
         (f)   This exemption shall only be granted and extended where the
purchaser of feed  that is to be used and in fact is used for a purpose that
would bring about an exemption hereunder executes an invoice or sales ticket in
duplicate on a form to be prescribed by the Tax Commission.  The purchaser may
demand and receive a copy of the invoice or sales ticket and the vendor shall
retain a copy.
      (4)   Sales of items to be and in fact used in the production of
agricultural products.  Sale of the following items shall be subject to the
following limitations:
         (a)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming and/or ranching;  (Each
purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket
to be retained by the vendor, that he or she is so engaged in farming and/or
ranching and that the material purchased will be used only in the business.)
         (b)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person engaged in the
business of applying the materials on a contract or custom basis to land owned
or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the
business of farming and/or ranching;  (Each purchaser shall certify, in
writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the
vendor that he or she is engaged in the business of applying the materials to
lands owned or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in
the business of farming and/or ranching, and shall show in the certificate the
name or names of the owner or lessee and operator, the location of the lands on
which the materials are to be applied to each land, and he or she shall further
certify that his or her contract price has been reduced so as to give the
farmer or rancher the full benefit of this exemption.)
         (c)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to persons engaged in the
business of applying the materials on a contract or custom basis shall not be
considered to be sales to contractors under this subchapter, and the sales
shall not be considered to be taxable sales within the meaning of the State
Sales Tax Code;  (Agricultural fertilizer is any substance sold and used for
soil enrichment or soil corrective purposes or for promoting the growth and
productivity of plants.)
         (d)   Sales of agricultural seed or plants to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming and/or ranching;  (This section
shall not be construed as exempting from sales tax, seed which is packaged and
sold for use in noncommercial flower and vegetable gardens.)
         (e)   Sales of agricultural chemical pesticides to any person
regularly engaged, for profit, in the business of farming and/or ranching; and 
(Agricultural chemical pesticides include any substance or mixture of
substances intended for preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating any
insect, snail, slug, rodent, bird, nematode, fungus, weed or any other form of
terrestrial or other microorganism, except viruses, bacterial or other
microorganisms on or in living humans, or any substance or mixture of
substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant or desiccant.)
         (f)   This exemption shall only be granted and extended to the
purchaser where the items are to be used and in fact are used in the production
of agricultural products.  Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the
copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that the
material purchased will only be used in his or her farming occupation.  The
vendor shall certify to the State Tax Commission that the contract price of the
items has been reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption.  Violation
hereof by the purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor, and, upon violation
and conviction for a second offense the State Tax Commission shall revoke the
vendor's sales tax permit.
      (5)   Sale of farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel, oil,
lubricants and other substances used for operation and maintenance of the farm
machinery to be used directly on a farm or ranch in the production,
cultivation, planting, sowing, harvesting, processing, spraying, preservation
or irrigation of any livestock, poultry, agricultural or dairy products
produced from the lands;  (Each purchaser of farm machinery, repair parts
thereto or fuel must certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales
ticket to be retained by the vendor, that he is engaged in farming or ranching
and that the farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel will be used only in
farming and/or ranching.  The exemption provided for herein shall not apply to
motor vehicles. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the
invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that the material
purchased will only be used in his or her farming occupation.  The vendor shall
certify to the State Tax Commission that the price of the items has been
reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption.  Violation hereof by the
purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor, and, upon violation and conviction
for a second offense, the State Tax Commission shall revoke the vendor's sales
tax permit.
(Prior Code, § 8-110)
   (E)   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
subchapter:
      (1)   Goods, wares, merchandise and property purchased for the purpose of
being used or consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding,
processing, assembling or preparing for sale a finished article and the goods,
wares, merchandise or property become integral parts of the manufactured,
compounded, processed, assembled or prepared products or are consumed in the
process of manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling or preparing
products for resale;  (Manufacturing plants are those establishments primarily
engaged in manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as
such.)
      (2)   Ethyl alcohol when sold and used for the purpose of blending same
with motor fuel on which motor fuel tax is levied by state law;
      (3)   Sale of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons
establishing new manufacturing plants in the state and machinery and equipment
purchased and used by persons in the operation of manufacturing plants already
established in the state;  (This exemption shall not apply unless the machinery
and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of
manufacturing property subject to taxation under this subchapter. 
Manufacturing plants are those establishments primarily engaged in
manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such.)
      (4)   Sales of containers when sold to a person regularly engaged in the
business of reselling employ or filled containers or when purchased for the
purpose of packaging raw products of farm, garden or orchard for resale to the
consumer or processor; and  (This exemption shall not apply to the sale of any
containers used more than once and which are ordinarily known as returnable
containers, except returnable soft drink bottles.  Each and every transfer of
title or possession of the returnable containers in the state to any person who
is not regularly engaged in the business of selling, reselling or otherwise
transferring empty or filled containers shall be taxable hereunder.  This
exemption shall not apply to the sale of labels or other materials delivered
along with items sold but which are not necessary or absolutely essential to
the sale of the sold merchandise.)
      (5)   Sale of tangible personal property manufactured in the state when
sold by the manufacturer to a person who transports it to another state for
immediate and exclusive use in some other state.
(Prior Code, § 8-111)
   (F)   There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied in this
subchapter:
      (1)   The transfer of tangible personal property,  as follows:
         (a)   From one corporation to another corporation pursuant to a
reorganization, a statutory merger or consolidation or the acquisition by a
corporation of substantially all of the properties of another corporation when
the consideration is solely all or a part of the voting stock of the acquiring
corporation, or of its parent or subsidiary corporation;
         (b)   In connection with the winding up, dissolution or liquidation of
a corporation only when there is a distribution in kind to the shareholders of
the property of the corporation; and
         (c)   From a partnership to the members thereof when made in kind in
the dissolution of the partnership.
      (2)   Sale of an interest in tangible personal property to a partner of
other person who, after the sale, owns a joint interest in the tangible
personal property where the state sales or use tax has previously been paid on
the tangible personal property.
(Prior Code, § 8-112)
§ 38.09  PAYMENT OF TAX; BRACKETS.
   The bracket system for the collection of the tax herein levied and the time
and manner for payment shall be the same as is provided for payment of State
Sales Tax under the State Sales Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 8-113)
§ 38.10  TAXES DUE; RETURNS AND RECORDS.
   The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the State
Sales Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 8-114)
§ 38.11  VENDOR'S DUTY TO COLLECT TAX.
   (A)   The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the
vendor.  It shall be the duty of each and every vendor in the city to collect
from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this subchapter
or an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average
equivalent thereof.
   (B)   Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent
thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added, the tax shall constitute
a part of the price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to
vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other
debts.
   (C)   A vendor, as defined hereunder, who wilfully or intentionally fails,
neglects or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied by this
subchapter, or wilfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply
with the provisions or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly
or indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein
levied, or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any
statement which infers that he or she is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax
for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the
tax, or in any manner whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction, shall be fined.
(Prior Code, § 8-115) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 38.12  RETURNS AND REMITTANCES; DISCOUNTS.
   Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made
to the Tax Collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as
prescribed for returns and remittances of tax collected hereunder and shall be
subject to the same discount as may be allowed by the State Sales Tax Code for
collection of state sales taxes.
(Prior Code, § 8-116)
§ 38.13  INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY; WAIVER.
   (A)   (1)   68 O.S. § 217 is hereby adopted and made a part of this
subchapter, and interest and penalties as the rates and in amounts as therein
specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in
reporting and paying the tax levied by this subchapter.
      (2)   The failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the
reports and remittances of tax, in the time and manner required by this
subchapter, shall cause the tax to be delinquent.
      (3)   In addition, if the delinquency continues for a period of five
days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his or her claim to any discount allowed
hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 8-117)
   (B)   The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
taxpayer's failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived or remitted
in the same manner as provided for the waiver or as applied in administration
of the state sales tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220.  To accomplish the purposes
of this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 220 are hereby adopted
by reference and made a part of this subchapter.  (Prior Code, § 8-118)
§ 38.14  TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT.
   The taxes, penalty and interest due under this subchapter shall at all times
constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of
unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt.
(Prior Code, § 8-119)
§ 38.15  ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND.
   (A)   Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax herein levied may be
made to any taxpayer making the erroneous payment in the same manner and
procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for
administration of the state sales tax, as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227.
   (B)   To accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions
of 68 O.S. § 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-120)
§ 38.16  FRAUDULENT RETURNS.
   In addition to all civil penalties provided by this subchapter, the wilful
failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein
required or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of
avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under
this subchapter shall be an offense, and, upon conviction thereof, the
offending taxpayer shall be subject to a fine.
(Prior Code, § 8-121) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 38.17  RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same the provisions of the State Sales Tax Code,
68 O.S. § 205, and each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted by reference and
made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city sales tax as
if here set forth in full.
(Prior Code, § 8-122)
   UTILITY AND TELEPHONE TAX
§ 38.30  UTILITY TAX LEVIED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax in the amount
of 2% of the gross receipts from residential and commercial sales of power,
light, heat, water, gas or electricity within the city, which tax shall be in
lieu of any other franchise, license, occupation or excise tax.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person, firm,
association or corporation operating under a valid franchise from the city, nor
shall it apply to any person, firm or corporation operating within the city
under implied contract following expiration of a franchise.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed as the surrender of the
right of the city to regulate and control its public streets, easements and
rights-of-way for the benefit of the citizens, nor shall any provision of this
section be construed as granting a franchise to any person, firm or corporation
within the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-201)  (Ord. 1472, passed 6-4-91)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to level utility tax, see 68 O.S. §§ 2601 et seq.
§ 38.31  PAYMENT.
   (A)   The annual tax provided under
§ 38.30 shall be payable quarterly and placed in the General Fund of the city.
   (B)   Every person, firm association or corporation subject to the
provisions thereof shall, with the payment, furnish a statement of all gross
receipts from residential and commercial sales, power, light, heat, gas or
water, within the city during the period for which the report is made.
   (C)   The statement and payment shall be made to the City Clerk not later
than 30 days after the expiration of the quarterly period when due.
(Prior Code, § 8-202)
§ 38.32  TAX LIEN.
   The tax imposed hereunder shall constitute a first and prior lien upon all
assets located within the city upon any person, firm or corporation engaged in
the business of selling the power, light, heat, gas or water therein.
(Prior Code, § 8-203)
§ 38.33  FAILURE OR REFUSAL TO PAY.
   Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to pay the tax when
levied shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from the city and,
in addition thereto, an action may be maintained against the person, firm or
corporation for the amount of the tax and all expenses of collection same
including a reasonable attorney's fee.
(Prior Code, § 8-204)
§ 38.34  TELEPHONE INSPECTION FEE LEVIED.
   (A)   There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge
upon each and every person, firm and corporation operating a telephone exchange
in the city in an amount equal to 2% of the gross revenue for each current year
for exchange telephone transmission service rendered wholly within the limits
of the city to compensate the city for the expenses incurred and services
rendered incident to the exercise of its police power, supervision, police
regulations and police control of the construction of lines and equipment of
the telephone company in the city.
   (B)   (1)   The inspection fee and charge shall be due and payable to the
city on or before May 1 of each year.
      (2)   The inspection fee and charge shall be paid into and appropriated
and expended from the General Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-205)
§ 38.35  FEE IN LIEU OF OTHER CONCESSIONS.
   (A)   During continued substantial compliance with the terms of §
38.34, of the owner of any telephone exchange, the charge levied hereby shall
be and continue to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, franchise,
license, privilege and permit fees or taxes or assessments, except ad valorem
taxes.
   (B)   However, it is not intended hereby to extinguish or abrogate any
existing arrangement whereby the city is permitted to use underground conduit,
duct, space or pole contacts of the company for the fire alarms and/or police
call system of the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-206)
§ 38.36  9-1-1 VOICE OVER INTERNET FEES.
   A 9-1-1 service fee is hereby adopted and imposed by the City Council of
Bethany, Oklahoma upon Interconnected Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP)
telephone service customers, whose businesses or residences are located within
the city limits, at the rate of $.50 per month for each VoIP service user,
pursuant to 63 O.S. §§ 2851 et seq. In addition, all VoIP carriers having
customers within the city shall provide a census of customers of the city no
later than 60 days after the first day of each calendar year.
(Ord. 1775, passed 11-21-06)
   USE TAX
§ 38.45  EXCISE TAX ON STORAGE, USE AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person
storing, using or otherwise consuming within the municipality tangible,
personal property purchased or brought into the municipality, and excise tax on
the storage, use or other consuming within the municipality of the property at
the rate of 4% of the purchase price of the property.  The tax shall be paid by
every person storing, using or otherwise consuming, within the municipality,
tangible, personal property purchased or brought into the municipality.
   (B)   The additional tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time of
importation or storage of the property within the municipality and shall be
assessed to only property purchased outside state.  The tax levied herein shall
not be levied against tangible, personal property intended solely for use
outside the municipality, but which is stored in the municipality pending
shipment outside the municipality or which is temporarily retained in the
municipality for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing, alternation,
maintenance or other service.
   (C)   (1)   Any person liable for payment of the tax authorized herein, may
deduct from the tax any local or municipal sales tax previously paid on the
goods or services.
      (2)   The amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that would have
been due if the taxes imposed by the municipality had been levied on the sale
of the good or services.
(Prior Code, § 8-301)
§ 38.46  EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply:
   (A)   In respect to the use of an article of tangible, personal property
brought into the municipality by a nonresident individual visiting in the
municipality for his or her personal use or enjoyment while within the
municipality;
   (B)   In respect to the use of tangible, personal property purchased for
resale before being used;
   (C)   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property on
which a tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both the State Use Tax
Code and this subchapter, has been paid by the person using the tangible,
personal property in the municipality, whether the tax was levied under the
laws of the state or some other state or municipality of the United States; 
(If any article of tangible, personal property has already been subjected to a
tax by the state or any other state or municipality in respect to its sale or
use, in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the State Use Tax Code and
this subchapter, the provisions of this subchapter shall also apply to it by a
rate measured by the difference only between the rate provided by both the
State Use Tax Code and this subchapter, and the rate by which the previous tax
upon the sale or use was computed.  No credit shall be given for taxes paid in
another state or municipality, if that state or municipality does not grant
like credit for taxes paid in the state and the municipality.)
   (D)   In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by
persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the
municipality, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons to the
operation of manufacturing plants already established in the municipality; 
(This exemption shall not apply unless the machinery and equipment is
incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of manufacturing
property subject to taxation under the Sales Tax Code of the municipality.
Manufacturing plants are those establishments primarily engaged in
manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such.)
   (E)   In respect to the use of tangible, personal property now specifically
exempted from taxation under the Sales Tax Code of the municipality;
   (F)   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property
brought into the municipality by an individual with intent to become a resident
of the municipality where the personal property is for the individual's
personal use or enjoyment;
   (G)   In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property
used or to be used by commercial airlines or railroads; and
   (H)   In respect to livestock purchased outside the state and brought into
the municipality for feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later resold.
(Prior Code, § 8-302)
§ 38.47  PAYMENTS; RETURNS.
   The tax levied by this subchapter is due and payable at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under the Use Tax
Code of the state.
(Prior Code, § 8-303)
§ 38.48  TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT.
   The taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute
a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors and may be collected by suit as any other debt.
(Prior Code, § 8-304)
§ 38.49  COLLECTION.
   (A)   (1)   Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both
within and without the state, and making sales of tangible, personal property
from a place of business outside the state for use in the municipality shall,
at the time of making the sales, collect the use tax levied by this subchapter
from the purchaser and give to the purchase a receipt therefor in the manner
and form prescribed by the Tax Commission, if the Tax Commission shall, by
regulation, require the receipt.
      (2)   Each retailer or vendor shall list with the Tax Commission the name
and address of all his or her agents operating in the municipality and location
of any and all distribution or sales houses or offices or other places of
business in the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-305)
   (B)   (1)   The Tax Commission may, in its discretion, upon application,
authorize the collection of the tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not
maintaining a place of business within the state, but who makes sales of
tangible personal property for use in the municipality and by the out-of-state
place of business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both
within and without the state and making sales of tangible, personal property at
the out-of-state place of business for use in the municipality.
      (2)   The retailer or vendor may be issued, without charge, a permit to
collect the taxes, by the Tax Commission in a manner and subject to the
regulations and agreements as it shall prescribe.
      (3)   When so authorized, it shall be the duty of the retailer or vendor
to collect the tax upon all tangible, personal property sold to his or her
knowledge for use within the municipality.
      (4)   The authority and permit may be canceled when, at any time, the Tax
Commission considers that the tax can more effectively be collected from the
person using the property in the municipality.
      (5)   In all instances where the sales are made or completed by delivery
to the purchaser within the municipality by the retailer or vendor in the
retailer's or vendor's vehicle, whether owned or leased, not by common carrier,
the sales or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable
municipality sales tax at the point of delivery and the tax shall be collected
and reported under taxpayer's sales tax permit number accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 8-306)
§ 38.50  REVOKING PERMITS.
   Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in the
state, or both within and without the state, and authorized to collect the tax
herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter or
the State Use Tax Code or any order, rules or regulations of the Tax
Commission, the Tax Commission may, upon notice and hearing, as provided for in
68 O.S. § 1408, by order, revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued to the
retailer or vendor, and if any the retailer or vendor is a corporation
authorized to do business in the state may, after notice and hearing above
provided, cancel the corporation's license to do business in the state and
shall issue a new license only when the corporation has complied with the
obligations under this subchapter, the State Use Tax Code or any order, rule or
regulation of the Tax Commission.
(Prior Code, § 8-307)
§ 38.51  REMUNERATIVE DEDUCTIONS.
   (A)   Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall
be made to the Tax Commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as
prescribed for returns and remittances required by the State Use Tax Code.
   (B)   Remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same
discount as may be allowed by the code for the collection of state use taxes.
(Prior Code, § 8-308)
§ 38.52  INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY; WAIVER.
   (A)   (1)   68 O.S. § 217 is hereby adopted and made a part of this
subchapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as
therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of
delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this subchapter.
      (2)   The failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and
transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by
this subchapter shall cause the tax to be delinquent. In addition, if the
delinquency continues for a period of five days, the retailer or vendor shall
forfeit his or her claim to any discount allowed under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-309)
   (B)   The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
retailer's or vendor's failure to pay the municipality tax herein levied may be
waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver or remittance,
as applied in administration of the state use tax provided in 68 O.S. § 227,
and accomplish the purposes of this section to applicable provisions of 68 O.S.
§ 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter. 
(Prior Code, § 8-310)
§ 38.53  ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND.
   Refund of erroneous payment of the municipality use tax herein levied may be
made to any taxpayer making the erroneous payment in the same manner and
procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for
administration of the state use tax, as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, and to
accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. §
227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-311)
§ 38.54  FRAUDULENT RETURNS.
   (A)   In addition to all civil penalties provided by this subchapter, the
wilful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances
herein required, of the making of any false and fraudulent report for the
purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof
rightfully due under this subchapter shall be an offense and upon conviction
thereof the offending taxpayer shall be punished by a fine and costs.
   (B)   Each day of noncompliance with this subchapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 8-312) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 38.55  RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the municipality use tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, of the State
Use Tax Code and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and
made fully effective and applicable to administration of the municipality use
tax as is herein set forth in full.
(Prior Code, § 8-313)
§ 38.56  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the State Use
Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1401, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this subchapter.
   (B)   In addition, for the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY.  The City of Bethany, Oklahoma.
      TRANSACTION.  Sale.
(Prior Code, § 8-316)
§ 38.57  TAX COLLECTOR.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TAX COLLECTOR.  The department of the municipality government or the
official agency of the state, duly designated according to law or contract
authorized by law, to administer the collection of the tax herein levied.
(Prior Code, § 8-317)
§ 38.58  CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the classification of taxpayers
hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the State Use Tax
Code.
(Prior Code, § 8-318)
§ 38.59  SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Tax
Commission, pursuant to the State Use Tax Code, are for the purpose of this
subchapter hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement
for an additional municipality permit for the same purpose.
(Prior Code, § 8-319)
§ 38.60  PURPOSES OF REVENUES.
   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this subchapter to provide
revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government and any
and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the governing body of the
municipality for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended, as
authorized.
(Prior Code, § 8-320)  (Ord. 1467, passed 9-7-90; Am. Ord. 1638, passed 6-6-00)
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
§ 38.61  CITATION.
   Sections
38.61 through
38.84 shall be known and cited as the Bethany Hotel Tax subchapter.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.62  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DIRECTOR. The Finance Director or his or her designated representative.
   HOTEL.  Any building(s), structure(s), trailer(s), or any other facility
(ies) of any kind or nature, in which the public may, for consideration, obtain
sleeping accommodations and in which two or more rooms are used for the
accommodation of such guests (regardless of whether such rooms are located in
one or several buildings, structures, trailers, or facilities). The term shall
include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses, or courts of any kind or nature,
lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, bed and breakfast inns, corporate
lodgings, trailer houses, trailer motels, dormitory spaces where bed space is
rented to individuals or groups, apartments of any kind or nature, and all
other similar facilities where rooms or any other space with sleeping
facilities are furnished for a consideration. The term shall not include
hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes.
   HOTEL TAX.  The tax levied pursuant to this subchapter.
   INDIVIDUAL.   A human being.
   OCCUPANCY.  The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of
any room in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings
or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of
the room.
   OCCUPANT.  A person, who for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the
right to the use or possession of any room in a hotel under any lease,
concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement.
   OPERATOR.  Any person operating a hotel in this city, including but not
limited to the owners, proprietor, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession,
licensee, manager, or similar agent.
   PERMANENT RESIDENT.  An individual who has resided in a room in a hotel for
not less than 30 consecutive days, with permanent residency to end when any
break in such residency occurs.
   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, voluntary
association, firm, club, society, organization, or any other entity of whatever
kind or nature.
   RENT.  The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether
received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and
property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for which
credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction(s)
whatever.
   REPORT.  The monthly room tax report filed or required to be filed as
provided in this subchapter.
   ROOM.  Any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel that
are available for or let out for use or possessed for any purpose other than a
place of assembly. As used herein, “place of assembly” means a room or space
which is capable of being occupied by 75 or more persons, and which is used for
educational, recreational, or amusement purposes and shall include: dance
halls, cabarets, nightclubs, restaurants, any room or space for public or
private banquets, feasts, socials, card parties, weddings, lodge and meeting
halls or rooms, skating rinks, gymnasiums, swimming pools, billiards, bowling
and table-tennis rooms, halls or rooms used for public or private catering
purposes, funeral parlors, markets, recreational rooms, concert halls,
broadcasting studios, and all other places of similar type of occupancy.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.63  LEVIED; RATE OF LEVY; ROOMS PROVIDED FREE OF CHARGE SUBJECT TO TAX.
   There is hereby levied an excise tax of 5.5% upon the gross proceeds or
gross receipts derived from all rent for every occupancy of a room or rooms in
a hotel in this city. Rooms provided free of charge, through barter, trade, or
any other arrangement or agreement of any kind or nature, are also subject to
such tax at the sales value of the room so provided (with “sales value” to mean
the price at which the room would be rented to the operator’s best customer in
the ordinary course of business).
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.64  EXEMPTIONS; ACKNOWLEDGMENT REQUIRED; RECORDS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the hotel tax levied in
this subchapter:
      (1)   A permanent resident as defined in §
38.62; provided any individual who qualifies as a permanent resident shall be
entitled to the exemption retroactive to the first day of residency.
      (2)   The United States government or any agency or division thereof when
paid directly by the United States government.
      (3)   The State of Oklahoma or any political subdivision thereof when
paid directly by the State of Oklahoma or any political subdivision.
   (B)   Acknowledgment required.  Every hotel claiming exemptions shall submit
a monthly exemption form, as provided by the Director, with each monthly room
tax report. This exemption form shall indicate beginning and ending occupancy
dates, number of rooms, number of nights, room(s) occupied, room rate, exempted
amount, the name of the occupant seeking exemption, the exempt organization
with which they are affiliated, reason for the exemption, and any other
information required by the Director. Every exemption form shall be signed by
the hotel manager or authorized agent so that the signature shall serve as an
acknowledgment that all information contained on the exemption form is true and
correct. Upon submission of these forms to the city, the Director shall make a
final determination as to the validity of all claimed exemptions. Should the
Director determine that a claimed exemption is not valid, the hotel shall be
assessed the 5.5% hotel tax plus applicable interest and penalties. The hotel
claiming such exemption is liable for payment of the hotel tax. For purposes of
this section, an exemption will not be validated by the Director unless the
exemption is claimed for the month in which it accrues. For good cause shown,
the Director may grant an extension for claiming an exemption.
   (C)   Records required. Every operator shall be required to maintain copies
of monthly room tax reports, monthly exemption forms, and individual exemption
forms upon the business premises of the hotel for a period of three years. Such
records shall be available for inspection and examination at any time upon
demand by the Director or a duly authorized agent or employee of the city. For
purposes of this section, individual exemption forms shall be available from
the Director and shall include the following:
      (1)   A statement declaring the reason for exemptions; name of the exempt
organization.
      (2)   The occupant's name, signature, business address, and pertinent
contact information (including but not limited to telephone numbers and e-mail
addresses) of the occupant claiming the exemption.
      (3)   The method of payment (must list the exempt entity who directly
paid).
      (4)   The name on which the exemption form is executed.
      (5)   An acknowledgment, by signature, of the exemption by an employee or
agent of the hotel.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.65  TAX TO BE SEPARATELY DESIGNATED ON BILLS.
   The operator shall separately designate, charge, and show the tax on all
bills, statements, receipts, or any other evidence of changes or payment of
rent for occupancy issued or delivered by the operator.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.66  OPERATOR RESPONSIBLE FOR COLLECTION.
   The operator shall be responsible for the collection of the tax from the
occupant and shall be liable to the city for the tax.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.67  CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Prior to commencement of business or opening every hotel operator
shall file with the Director:
      (1)   A certificate of registration;
      (2)   An affidavit and designation of operator.
   The required filings shall be made on forms prescribed by the Director.
   (B)   The Director shall, within five days after receipt of the required
certificate of registration and affidavit, issue, without charge to the
operator, a certificate of authority empowering such operator to collect the
tax from the occupant. The certificate of registration shall state the hotel to
which it is applicable. Such certificate of authority shall be permanently
displayed by the operator in such manner that it may be seen and come to the
notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificate of
authority shall be non-assignable and nontransferable, and shall be surrendered
immediately to the Director upon the cessation of business at the hotel named,
or upon its sale or transfer, or upon the change of designated operator.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.68  RECORDS REQUIRED.
   Every operator shall keep records of every occupancy and of all rent paid,
charged, or due thereon, and of the tax payable thereon in such form as the
Director may by regulation require. Such records shall be available for
inspection and examination at any time upon demand by the Director, or a duly
authorized agent or employee of the city, and shall be preserved for a period
of three years, except that the Director may consent to their destruction
within that period or may require that they be kept longer.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.69  REPORT.
   (A)   Every operator shall file with the Director a report of occupancy and
of rents, and of the taxes payable thereon for the monthly period ending the
last day of every month of each year. Said report is to be filed monthly with
the City Treasurer and is due no later than the fifteenth day of the month
directly following the reporting period.
   (B)   The Director may permit or require the report to be made by shorter or
longer periods and upon such dates as he or she may specify. The form of the
report shall be prescribed by the Director and shall contain such information
as he or she may deem necessary for the proper administration of this Hotel Tax
subchapter. The Director may require an amended report to be filed within ten
days after notice, and to contain the information specified in the notice.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.70  PAYMENT OF TAX.
   At the time of filing a report of occupancy and of rents, each operator
shall pay to the City Treasurer the taxes imposed by this Hotel Tax subchapter
upon the rents included in such report, as well as all other monies collected
by the operator acting or purporting to act under the provisions of this Hotel
Tax subchapter. All the taxes for the period for which a report is required to
be filed shall be due from the operator and payable to the City Treasurer on or
before the date fixed for the filing of the report for such period without
regard to whether a report is filed or whether the report which is filed
correctly shows the amount of rents and the taxes due thereon.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.71  DELINQUENT TAXES.
   All taxes not paid within 15 calendar days following the last day of the
period shall be delinquent.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.72  INTEREST AND PENALTIES ON UNPAID TAXES.
   (A)   If any tax levied by this Hotel Tax subchapter becomes delinquent, the
operator responsible and liable for such tax shall pay interest on such unpaid
tax at the rate of 2% per month on the unpaid balance from the date of
delinquency; and,
   (B)   If any tax levied by this Hotel Tax subchapter shall not be paid by
the last calendar day of the month due, the operator responsible and liable for
such tax shall pay a penalty on such unpaid tax at the rate of 10% per month on
the unpaid balance from the date of delinquency to a maximum of 50% of the tax.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.73  BOND REQUIRED.
   Where the Director believes that any operator is about to cease business,
leave the state, or remove or dissipate assets, or is habitually late in filing
reports and/or payments three of the latest six months, or for any other
similar reason he or she deems it necessary in order to protect revenues under
this Hotel Tax subchapter, he or she may require such operator to file with the
city a bond issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this
state in such amount as the Director may fix to secure the payment of any tax
or penalties and interest due, or which may become due from such operator. In
the event that the Director determines that an operator is to file such bond,
he or she shall give notice to such operator specifying the amount of bond
required. The operator shall file such bond within five days after the giving
of such notice, unless within such five days the operator shall request in
writing a hearing before the City Council at which the necessary propriety and
amount of the bond shall be determined by the City Council. Such determination
shall be final and shall be complied with within 15 days thereafter. In lieu of
such bond, securities approved by the Director, or cash in such amount as he or
she may prescribe, may be deposited with the Director, who may at any time,
after five days’ notice to the depositor, apply them to any tax or penalties
and interest due and for that purpose the securities may be sold at private or
public sale.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.74  ASSESSMENT AND DETERMINATION OF TAX.
   If a report required by this Hotel Tax subchapter is not filed, or if a
report when filed is incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be
assessed by the Director from such information as may be obtainable; and, if
necessary, the tax may be estimated on the basis of external indices such as
number of rooms, location, scale of rents, comparable rents, types of
accommodations and services, number of employees, or other factors. Written
notice of such assessments shall be given to the operator liable for the
collection and payment of the tax. Thirty days after the tax is delinquent, the
Director shall send such operator a letter outlining the legal action to be
taken at the end of 60 days. Such assessment shall finally and irrevocably fix
and determine the tax, unless the operator against whom it is assessed within
60 days after the giving of notice of such assessment shall apply in writing to
the City Council for a hearing, or unless the Director on his or her own motion
shall reassess the same. After such hearing, the City Council shall give
written notice within 30 days of its determination to the operator against whom
the tax is assessed, and such determination shall be final.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.75  REFUNDS AND/OR CREDITS.
   (A)   The Director shall refund or credit any tax erroneously, illegally, or
unconstitutionally collected if written application to the Director from the
operator with the reasons therefor stated for such refund or credit is made
within one year from the date of payment thereof. For like causes, and in the
same period, a refund or credit may be so made upon the initiative and the
order of the Director. No refund of money shall be made to the operator until
he or she has repaid to the occupant the amount for which the application for
refund is made. The Director, in lieu of any refund required to be made, may
allow credit therefor on payments due from the operator.
   (B)   Upon application for a refund or credit, the Director may require
evidence with respect thereto, and make such investigation as he or she deems
necessary. After making a determination as to the refund or credit, the
Director shall provide notice thereof to the operator. Such determination shall
be final unless the operator, within 30 days after such notice, shall apply in
writing to the City Council for a hearing. After such hearing, the City Council
shall give written notice of its decision to the operator.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.76  NOTICES.
   Notices provided for under this Hotel Tax subchapter shall be deemed to have
been given when such notice has been delivered personally to the operator or
deposited in the United States mail to the last known address of the operator.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.77  REMEDIES EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided in this Hotel Tax subchapter shall be exclusive
remedies available to any operator for the review of tax liability imposed by
the Hotel Tax subchapter.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.78  FAILURE TO FILE; SUBMITTING FRAUDULENT REPORTS; FAILURE TO POST A
BOND; PENALTIES AND LIENS.
   (A)   The failure or refusal of any operator to file reports and remittances
herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the
purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof
rightfully due under this Hotel Tax subchapter, or failure to post a bond,
shall be guilty of an offense punishable by the maximum fine allowed by state
law to be imposed by the City of Bethany. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense and is subject to all penalties herein; and,
   (B)   The Director shall have the ability to file a lien for non-payment of
taxes, penalties, and/or interest as provided by 68 O.S. §§  2701 and 2704.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.79  OPERATOR'S DISCOUNT.
   In order to remunerate an operator for maintaining tax records, filing
reports, and remitting the tax when due a 3% discount shall be allowed upon
hotel taxes paid prior to the time they become delinquent. In order to be
eligible for the discount, the report and any monthly exemption forms must
accompany payment.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.80  RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and file concerning
the administration of the tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to
protect the same the provisions of 68 O.S. §  205 and each subsection thereof,
are hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to
administration of the tax as if herein set forth.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.81  USE OF HOTEL TAX FUNDS.
   All hotel tax revenues collected pursuant to the provisions of this Hotel
Tax subchapter shall be used for the general government purposes, including
promoting and/or fostering cultural, recreational, and/or tourism and economic
development of the city.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.82GENERAL POWERS OF DIRECTOR.
   In addition to all other powers granted to the Director, he or she is hereby
authorized and empowered:
   (A)   To make, adopt, and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the
carrying out of this subchapter for the purposes thereof.
   (B)   To extend, for cause shown, the time for filing any report for a
period not exceeding 30 days; and for cause shown to waive, remit, or reduce
penalties or interest.
   (C)   To delegate his or her functions hereunder to an assistant or other
employee or employees of the city.
   (D)   To assess, reassess, determine, revise, and readjust the taxes imposed
by this Hotel Tax subchapter.
   (E)   To prescribe methods for determining the taxable and nontaxable rents.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.83  AMENDMENTS.
   The people of the City of Bethany, Oklahoma, have, by their approval of this
Hotel Tax subchapter at an election, authorized the City Council, by ordinances
duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in
the method and manner of administration and enforcement of this Hotel Tax
subchapter as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness, except
that the rate of the tax herein provided shall not be changed without approval
of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
§ 38.84  PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all
other ordinances.
(Ord. 1774, passed 11-21-06)
CHAPTER 39: EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
Section
   
39.01   Emergency medical service restrictions and violations
 
   
39.99   Penalties
Cross-reference:
   Monthly emergency service utility service charge, see
Ch. 55
§ 39.01  EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE RESTRICTIONS AND VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to commit any of
the following acts:
      (1)   To perform or permit anyone to perform duties as an ambulance
driver, attendant (EMT-Basic, EMT-D, or Paramedic), system status controller,
or first responder except duly qualified employees of the City of Bethany or
personnel of the Emergency Medical Services operating under contract with the
City of Bethany.
      (2)   To use, or cause to be used, an ambulance service other than the
Emergency Medical Services operating under contract with the City of Bethany,
except for those services described in division (B) of this section;
      (3)   For any person, firm or organization to respond to emergency calls
originating within the regulated service area, other than the Emergency Medical
Services operating under contract with the City of Bethany;
      (4)   For any person, firm or organization to provide special events
ambulance standby service within the regulated service area, other than the
Emergency Medical Services operating under contract with the City of Bethany;
      (5)   For any person, firm or organization to respond to routine
transport calls originating within the regulated service areas other than the
Emergency Medical Services operating under contract with the City of Bethany;
      (6)   To knowingly give false information to induce the dispatch of an
ambulance, or first responder unit;
   (B)   It shall not be a violation of this Code, if the vehicle or ambulance
is:
      (1)   A privately-owned vehicle not used in the business of transporting
patients who are sick, injured, wounded, incapacitated or helpless;
      (2)   A vehicle rendering services as an ambulance in the event of a
major catastrophe or emergency when ambulances with certifications based in the
locality of the catastrophe or emergency are incapacitated or insufficient in
number to render the services needed;
      (3)   An ambulance owned or operated by, or under contract with, the
federal or state government;
      (4)   An ambulance transporting a patient to a location within the
regulated service area (City of Bethany or City of Warr Acres), which transport
originated from a point outside the regulated service area;
      (5)   An ambulance responding to a call pursuant to a mutual aid
agreement with the Emergency Medical Services operating under contract with the
City of Bethany;
      (6)   A vehicle engaged in a routine transport call to transport a
patient from a hospital, nursing home or free-standing dialysis center (i.e., a
dialysis center not located on hospital grounds) which is located within the
regulated service area to any jurisdiction outside the regulated service area
(the "receiving jurisdiction");
      (7)   A vehicle engaged in a routine transport call to transport a
patient from a hospital, nursing home, or free-standing dialysis center located
within the regulated service area to any unincorporated area.
      (8)   A vehicle engaged in the interstate transport of a patient.
(Ord. 1944, passed 11-7-17) Penalty, see §
39.99
§ 39.99  PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be punished by fine and costs not to exceed the sum of $500
excluding costs.
   (B)   Each day that any violation of the provisions of this chapter is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1944, passed 11-7-17)
TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
      
51.   GARBAGE
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   SEWERS
      
54.   STORM WATER UTILITIES
      
55.   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
Section
Rates and Billings
   
50.01   Classification; appeal and payment
   
50.02   Review and recommendation on rates
   
50.03   Other utility fees and charges
   
50.04   Water charges for private fire service
   
50.05   Billings in general
   
50.06   Disconnection for late payment; policy and procedures
   
50.07   Failure to receive statement; change of ownership
   
50.08   Water service surcharge
   
50.09   Utility deposits; account
   
50.10   Meter exchange fee
RATES AND BILLING
§ 50.01  CLASSIFICATION; APPEAL AND PAYMENT.
   (A)   The City Manager shall assign customers to the various classes as he
or she deems fair and proper. The customer's class assignment shall be
indicated on the monthly bill.  Any customer objecting to the class assignment
may appeal to the City Council in writing or in person, stating the objection,
reason for same and the desired class.  The City Council shall hear the appeal
during a regular open Council meeting.  Their decision shall be final.
   (B)   Any fees, bills or payments due and payable during the appeal of a
classification shall be paid under protest to the city.  The funds shall placed
in an escrow account pending the outcome of the appeal, at which time the funds
shall be distributed according to the Council's decision.
(Prior Code, § 17-201)
§ 50.02  REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION ON RATES.
   (A)   The City Manager shall annually review the city's water rate
structures to insure that the city's income shall be sufficient to meet the
city's need.  The City Manager shall, from time to time, recommend a rate
structure to the City Council.  The proposed rate structure shall include water
fees, late payment penalties, deposits and any other fees or payments deemed
necessary.
   (B)   A sewer use fee structure shall be established according to the
following requirements:
      (1)   Fees shall be reviewed at least bi- annually and revised
periodically to reflect actual operation and maintenance costs of the treatment
works so as to:
         (a)   Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and
maintenance costs among users; and
         (b)   Generate sufficient revenue for total operation and maintenance
costs.
      (2)   The city shall prepare and maintain all records necessary to
document compliance with the provisions of this section.
   (C)   (1)   The City Council shall, by resolution, approve and set an
effective date for any water rate structure or sewer use fee structure before
it shall become effective.  The structure shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city at least once 15 days prior to the effective
date as set by the Council.
      (2)   Users of the sanitary sewer system shall be notified monthly of the
wastewater treatment service charge portion of utility billing.  The City Clerk
shall keep a copy of the structures in the City Clerk's office for public
inspection.
(Prior Code, § 17-202)
§ 50.03  OTHER UTILITY FEES AND CHARGES.
   The City Council, from time to time by resolution, shall have the power to
establish rates and charges governing other aspects of the city utility
services, including monthly service fees, connection fees and charges and
deposits.
(Prior Code, § 17-203)
Cross-reference:
   Emergency medical services fee, see
Ch. 55
   Storm sewer utility user fee, see
Ch. 54
§ 50.04  WATER CHARGES FOR PRIVATE FIRE SERVICE.
   Each private fire service, such as water sprinkling system or similar
private fire service, shall pay an annual standby cost on its fire service to
be based on the size of each service, and shall be due and payable on or before
January 1 of each year for the calendar year ending December 31 of each year. 
Where a service is installed after January 1 of any year the charge shall be
based on a pro rata part of the annual bill.
 
Size of Fire Service Annual Rate
2-inch  $22.50
3-inch  $30.00
4-inch  $45.00
6-inch  $60.00
8-inch  $90.00
10-inch $150.00
12-inch $225.00
 
(Prior Code, § 17-204)
§ 50.05  BILLINGS IN GENERAL.
   (A)   (1)   All fees and charges in connection with the use of the city's
sanitary sewer system, the city's water facility system or the city's
sanitation service are billed to the owner or occupant of the premises to which
the services are available.  The owner or occupant shall be the person whose
name is on file with the City Clerk as the city water customer, and in whose
name the water deposit was made, and who is chargeable for the water bill for
the premises.
      (2)   The owner or occupant shall be billed in accordance with applicable
rates set by the City Council pursuant to
§§ 50.01 through
50.03.  All fees and charges owing for any of these utility services shall be
billed on one monthly bill submitted to the customer each month.
   (B)   The bill shall give notice to the customer of his or her right to
discuss errors in utility charges or billings with the Utility Billing
Supervisor who is hereby empowered to adjust and/or correct the errors. The
utility bills submitted under the terms of this section shall be due and
payable to the City Clerk upon the billing date noted on the bill.  The City
Clerk is hereby directed not to accept payment of the water bill unless the
payment is accompanied with the payment of the sewer use fee.
(Prior Code, § 17-205)
§ 50.06  DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT; POLICY AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills.  The city's form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth
on the bill; and
      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, service will
be discontinued for nonpayment; and
      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his bill shall have
a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in person and
by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may present orally or
in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city official in charge
of utility billing.  This official shall be authorized to order that the
customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a
final determination of the customer's complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered.  In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service
to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after
all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on charge in
an amount as set by City Council.
§ 50.07  FAILURE TO RECEIVE STATEMENT; CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP.
   Failure to receive a utility statement by mail or otherwise will not be
recognized as a valid excuse for failure to pay utility charges when due.  A
change in ownership of any property must be filed in writing with the City
Clerk on forms provided for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 17-207)  (Ord. 1365, passed 4-1-86)
§ 50.08  WATER SERVICE SURCHARGE.
   (A)   Legislative Findings. Certain pollutants are migrating into the
Bethany Water Supply Well Field in the area generally described as west of
Council Road and near NW 50th Street. The pollutants are moving through the
groundwater under the lands owned or controlled by the Oklahoma City Airport
Trust and pose an immediate risk of contaminating the Bethany public water
supply well field. Numerous wells have been shut down in order to prevent
introducing the pollutants into the water processing plant.
      (1)   The water wells located south of a line 1200 feet North of and
parallel to NW 50th Street (known as South Well Field) are in immediate risk of
pollution and the scientific data available dictates that these wells not be
pumped at capacity in order to lessen the risk of their contamination. The city
is currently engaged in a project of pumping two of its contaminated wells and
disposing of the contaminated water in an attempt to maintain a hydraulic
barrier to stop the westward migration of the contaminants but the results of
the use of the hydraulic barrier have not yet been determined. By reason of the
loss of use ofthe South Well Field the Bethany well field is incapable of
producing water to meet the peak demand of the summer months and the loss of
water impairs the ability to provide sufficient reserves for emergency use such
as fire protection or unplanned line breaks.
      (2)   At this point in time the city may be required to supplement its
water supply by purchasing water from the City of Oklahoma City in order to
insure the capacity of the system provides for an adequate supply of water for
human consumption and fire protection. In order to provide adequate water
supply to meet the peak demand of the system and to provide for adequate fire
protection the City Council has declared an emergency situation and has
directed that the city open the existing valves to the connections with the
Oklahoma City public water supply as necessary to make up for the production
lost in the south well field. The cost of the water obtained from the City of
Oklahoma City exceeds the costs of production of water by Bethany and will
result in a substantial increase in operating costs for the Bethany Water
System which costs will be passed to the consumers of Bethany water with those
customers using in excess of 20,000 gallons per month paying the excess cost to
maintain capacity of the water system by the imposition of a surcharge of those
customers. The reasoning therefor being that the primary cause of peak demand
in summer months is outside watering and similar seasonal uses and this
surcharge to excess users allows the Bethany consumers to restrict their own
water usage and avoid the payment of surcharges and thereby decreasing the
demand for excess water from the City of Oklahoma City.
   (B)   Surcharge Imposed. Effective August 1, 2016, for any month in which
the total monthly water usage for Bethany exceeds the production capacity of
the Bethany water system a surcharge per 1,000 gallons of water used by all
classes of customers above 20,000 gallons per month is imposed for the
following monthly billing cycle and will be part of the billed rate for those
users. A resolution of the City Council adopting the revised rate schedule and
reflecting the surcharge is attached. This surcharge shall remain in effect
until rescinded by the City Council.
(Ord. 1903, passed 6-23-15; Am. Ord. 1916, passed 7-5-16)
§ 50.09  UTILITY DEPOSITS; ACCOUNT.
   (A)   (1)   Applicants for Bethany utility services, transfer of utility
service or where any premises has had utility service discontinued so as to
render the application for the reinstatement of utility service necessary, are
hereby required to make a cash deposit to the city.
      (2)   The deposit for commercial accounts shall be based on two times the
average total monthly bill for the past two years for the services. For new
commercial accounts with no billing history the deposit shall be based upon the
average usage for similar sized comparable businesses taking into account the
size of the water meter serving the property. For purposes of this section,
COMMERCIAL ACCOUNT shall mean: commercial businesses, industrial uses,
institutional uses, and any other uses other than one- and two- family
residential.
      (3)   The deposit for non-commercial utility accounts shall be:
         (a)   $80 for resident homeowner accounts; and
         (b)   $120 for non-owners of property accounts.
   (B)   (1)   There is hereby created and established the utility service
deposit account into which there shall be deposited all utility deposits
required to be made by utility customers and users.
      (2)   The account shall be disbursed and used first, where utility
service has been discontinued on the premises, or where the customer has
removed from the premises on which the deposit was made, by applying the
deposit in payment of any unpaid balance owing to the city for utility services
and charges, at the time of the discontinuance or removal.
      (3)   Second, the balance of the deposit, if any, shall be refunded to
the party in whose name the deposit was made.
      (4)   Upon written request of the depositor the utility deposit will be
refunded after 36 months of good credit with the city. The refund will be
credited to the utility account as a payment. If an account is closed, the
deposit will be applied to the final bill. Any credit balance will be mailed.
(Ord. 1916, passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord. 1925, passed 12-20-16)
§ 50.10  METER EXCHANGE FEE.
   In the event the water customer requests that a meter be replaced by reason
of suspected inaccuracy a fee will be charged in advance to cover the costs of
removal and testing of meter. In the event the meter is tested as registering
usage greater than actual usage then the meter shall be deemed defective and
the meter exchange fee will be refunded however if the meter tests as accurate
in reading then the fee will be retained by the city to defray the costs of the
removal and testing.
(Ord. 1916, passed 7-5-16)
CHAPTER 51:  GARBAGE
Section
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Solid waste services required
   
51.03   Private services prohibited; exceptions
   
51.04   Location and conditions of disposal
   
51.05   Fees
   
51.06   Proper disposal required
   
51.07   Unlawful disposal of prohibited solid wastes
   
51.08   Reduction and reuse of volume
   
51.09   Scavenging recyclables prohibited
   
51.10   Abandoned items
   
51.11   Use of city dump grounds
   
51.12   Administration of services
§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTAINER.
      (1)   A weather-proof metal or plastic receptacle designed and suited for
the disposal of solid waste, not exceeding 40 gallons in size.
      (2)   PERMANENT CONTAINERS shall be considered suitable for use in
disposal if equipped and maintained with tight lids and side handles.
   GARBAGE.  A class of solid waste which includes every accumulation of animal
or vegetable matter, or both, or refuse matter from kitchens, pantries, dining
rooms or other parts of hotels,
restaurants, boarding houses, dwelling houses, market houses, public
institutions, butcher shops, poultry stores and fish stores.
   PROHIBITED SOLID WASTE.  Garbage, refuse, trash or any other solid waste or
waste material, including solids, semi-solids, liquids or a contained gas that,
because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to or increase in
mortality or an increase in serious personal injury or illness, or poses a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health and the environment
when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or otherwise
managed, or which poses a threat of causing serious personal injury or illness
to personnel collecting the solid waste.  (Ord. 1515, passed 7-18-94)
   REFUSE.  A class of solid waste which includes inflammable and combustible
material, paper, boxes, excelsior, waste, tin cans, broken ware, clothing,
shoes and ordinary waste accumulated by family residents.
   RESIDENT, OWNER or RENTAL AGENT.  Any person, firm or corporation having
charge of, supervision of or the manufacture of any dwelling house, apartment
house, rooming house or business of any nature in the city.
   SOLID WASTE.  All manner of matter, other than sanitary sewer, dirt, rock or
building materials which any resident, owner or rental agent seeks to discard
or dispose for any reason.
   TRASH.  A class of solid waste which includes trees, limbs, leaves and grass
and excessive boxes, papers and other combustible material.
(Prior Code, § 9-201) (Am. Ord. 1806, passed 7-15-08)
§ 51.02  SOLID WASTE SERVICES REQUIRED.
   (A)   The city has determined there are persons within the city who are
disposing of solid wastes in locations other than permitted sites.  The
unauthorized disposal constitutes a health hazard.  It is the policy of the
city to control unauthorized disposal by requiring all persons with the need
for disposal of solid wastes to do so through services of the city.
   (B)   Every resident, owner or rental agent shall dispose of garbage and
refuse through the exclusive use of the city's solid waste service.  It shall
be unlawful and an offense:
      (1)   To fail to make provision for the use of city service; and
      (2)   For any person to store or retain garbage upon his or her property
for more than one week without allowing or providing for city disposal.
   (C)   Any property maintained in violation of this section is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 9-202) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.03  PRIVATE SERVICES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or
corporation not under contract with the city to haul any solid wastes over the
city streets, provided that this section shall not apply to the hauling of
grass, limbs, tree trimmings or other organic yard wastes, nor shall this
section apply to the hauling of hazardous wastes or prohibited solid wastes
being transported in accordance with applicable state and federal laws for
transportation to appropriate disposal facilities.
   (B)   The City Manager is authorized to permit persons, upon request, to
arrange with private haulers for the removal of solid waste which the city is
unable to handle or which the city is prohibited from discarding at its
disposal site or facility.
(Prior Code, § 9-203)  (Ord. 1515, passed 7-18-94) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.04  LOCATION AND CONDITIONS OF DISPOSAL.
   (A)   (1)   Except in those cases where the City Council prescribes
differently, all solid waste shall be placed at the curbside for collection by
the city.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         CURBSIDE.  Within ten feet of the curb of edge of street pavement and
not concealed or enclosed by a fence, vegetation or other barrier.
   (B)   Every resident, owner or rental agent in the city shall provide
satisfactory containers for the disposal of garbage and refuse.  Any garbage or
refuse not placed in containers, as defined in
§ 51.01, or in containers which constitute a hazard to solid waste personnel,
shall not be subject to collection.
   (C)   The disposal of prohibited solid wastes shall be accomplished by the
individual having possession of the prohibited solid waste and the disposal
shall be by methods and at places as disposal is authorized under federal and
state laws.
(Prior Code, § 9-204)  (Ord. 1515, passed 7-18-94) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.05  FEES.
   (A)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to collect and dispose of any
solid waste from the owner or occupant of any premises within or without the
corporate limits of the city.  For these services, a monthly charge and deposit
shall be payable as determined by the City Council from time to time by
resolution.
   (B)   For the monthly fee so established, the city shall collect and dispose
of the following:
      (1)   All solid waste placed in containers; and
      (2)   Tree limbs and cuttings not exceeding four inches in diameter or
five feet in length and which are bundled and securely tied.
   (C)   Limbs not bundled and trash not in a container, including furniture
and appliances, shall constitute an additional charge to be established by the
City Manager according to volume.  The minimum charge for loose limbs or trash
shall be $25. Any items of furniture, appliances, trash or solid waste not in
containers or bundled which are placed or remaining at curbside on trash
collection day shall be deemed abandoned for pickup by the city and may be
removed by the city with the charge therefor added to the utility bill of the
resident for the next billing cycle.
   (D)   For business establishments or multiple dwelling units, the City
Manager may provide for containers other than those defined in
§ 51.01 and may fix a fee based upon the volume hauled, the frequency of pick-
ups and the type of container used.  The cost of container rental or
amortization shall be added to the fee.
   (E)   All fees for solid waste services shall be paid monthly in advance.
(Prior Code, § 9-205)  (Am. Ord. 1806, passed 7-15-08)
§ 51.06  PROPER DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to throw or dispose any
solid waste:
   (A)   Upon his or her own property without placing garbage and refuse in
containers or disposing of trash in a manner to assure that the substances will
not be blown or scattered;
   (B)   Upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or rights-of-way; and
   (C)   Upon the property of another or in the receptacles or containers on
the property of another.
(Prior Code, § 9-206) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.07  UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL OF PROHIBITED SOLID WASTES.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to dispose of prohibited solid wastes by
placing same in residential or commercial trash containers placed so as to be
picked up by city's solid waste services or to dispose of prohibited solid
waste by any other method which would be reasonably expected to allow the
prohibited solid waste to be collected by city solid waste services.
      (2)   This prohibition would include placing the materials in bags, boxes
or other containers at curbside, or in or near commercial trash bins or
dumpsters.  The City Manager is hereby granted the authority to adopt the rules
and regulations as are necessary to provide for enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   Any prohibited solid waste placed for collection at a property
location within the city shall create a rebuttable presumption that the
prohibited solid waste was placed there by or for the benefit of the owner and/
or occupant of the property where the prohibited solid waste is located.
(Prior Code, § 9-207)  (Ord. 1515, passed 7-18-94) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.08  REDUCTION AND REUSE OF VOLUME.
   (A)   (1)   The city has determined that the volume of solid waste it is
transporting to landfills is excessive and constantly growing and that the cost
of disposal for that volume continues to increase.
      (2)   Landfilling of solid waste has a negative impact on the environment
and the rising cost of disposal places undue strain on the city's finances.
      (3)   It is the policy of the city to seek and implement methods for the
reduction of the solid waste stream, including, but not limited to recycling,
composting and incentives for source reduction.
   (B)   (1)   The City Council may establish, by resolution, the measures as
it deems appropriate for the control and reuse of solid waste.
      (2)   To that end, the Council may regulate, alter or limit the types of
solid waste disposed, the frequency and location of disposal, the type and
style of containers to be used, the disposition of the solid waste collected or
the solid waste byproducts generated, volume based fees and other conditions as
may be necessary to achieve the purpose of the measures.
   (C)   When a resolution, adopted pursuant to this section, requires the
segregation of solid waste or specifies a type and style of container for
certain solid waste, then it shall be unlawful and an offense for any resident,
owner or rental agent to fail to segregate the solid waste, to dispose or
attempt to dispose of other solid waste in the same container as the solid
waste to be segregated or to use containers other than those specified.
(Prior Code, § 9-208) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.09  SCAVENGING RECYCLABLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Recyclable materials placed at curbside for collection or in any
recycling receptacle placed by the city or its authorized collector are the
property of the city or its authorized collection agent.  It is hereby declared
a violation of the section for any person unauthorized by the city to collect,
pick up, remove, cause to be collected, picked up or removed, any recyclable
materials or receptacles for the materials.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.  Any types of solid waste designated by the city to
be separated for recycling.
(Prior Code, § 9-209)  (Ord. 1470, passed 1-5-91) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.10  ABANDONED ITEMS.
   All items situated with other solid waste at curbside on designated pick-up
days or during specially designated periods for city-wide beautification shall
be deemed abandoned property by the resident, owner or rental agent and shall
be subject to collection by the city.  This section shall not apply to
permanent containers originally manufactured for solid waste disposal or
permanent containers clearly marked for the purposes.
(Prior Code, § 9-210)
§ 51.11  USE OF CITY DUMP GROUNDS.
   (A)   The city dump grounds shall be used only by officials of the city for
proper purposes, except the City Council may, by resolution, allow for private
use of the grounds for compensation.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or
corporation other than an official of the city to attempt to use the city dump
grounds for any purpose other than as may be authorized by the City Council. 
Any attempt or trespass thereon shall be and constitute an offense.
(Prior Code, § 9-211) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.12  ADMINISTRATION OF SERVICES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Manager to establish and maintain the
organization, personnel, equipment and resources required for execution of the
policies expressed in this chapter and for fulfillment of the solid waste
objectives adopted in the program budget.  The annual expenditures for the
purposes shall be subject to appropriation by the City Council.
   (B)   The City Manager is authorized to take actions and promulgate rules
and regulations as are necessary and proper for the efficient and effective
administration of the city's solid waste services which are not inconsistent
with the provisions herein.
(Prior Code, § 9-212)
CHAPTER 52:  WATER
Section
   
52.01   Policy
   
52.02   Users
   
52.03   Application for service
   
52.04   Installation; fee
   
52.05   Meters
   
52.06   [Reserved]
   
52.07   Shut-off of service
   
52.08   Connection to water main
   
52.09   Use of facilities; disturbance
   
52.10   Authority of City Manager
Cross-reference:
   Water service surcharge, see §
50.08
§ 52.01  POLICY.
   (A)   (1)   The city's water service is operated by the city as a public
utility provided at the expense of the citizens of the city.  It is determined
that the health and welfare of the citizens of the city may be best promoted by
providing water service to all persons to whom it is available.
      (2)   The city water service shall be considered to be available if the
city water service is within 150 feet of single-family residence property
needing water service.
   (B)   (1)   The service shall be connected to the city water supply under
the provisions as provided by ordinance.  In lieu of connecting to the city
water supply, all persons within 150 feet of water service may pay the minimum
water service charge as provided by ordinance.
      (2)   This section shall not be construed to allow any deviation from the
development requirements hereof.
(Prior Code, § 17-301)
§ 52.02  USERS.
   All users other than single-family residential users shall be required to
connect and use the city water service.
(Prior Code, § 17-302)
§ 52.03  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   Any person desiring to have premises connected with the water system of the
city and all water customers whose water service has been cut-off, or where any
premises has had the water service discontinued so as to render the application
for the reinstatement thereof necessary, shall make application to the City
Clerk, giving his or her name and the official house number of the premises on
which water is desired.  The information shall be filed by the City Clerk in
his or her record kept for this purpose.  At the time of application, the
applicant should pay to the City Clerk and take his or her receipt therefor,
the fees or deposits for the water service.
(Prior Code, § 17-303)
§ 52.04  INSTALLATION; FEE.
   (A)   The applicant shall have a licensed plumbing contractor make the
installation and set the water meter.  Water meters shall be purchased from the
city in all cases.
   (B)   The purchase price for water meters of all sizes shall be established
from time to time at actual costs by the City Manager and a schedule of the
charges shall be filed with the City Clerk.
   (C)   Service installations, including any boring or the removal and
replacement of pavement, shall be performed in accordance with the standards
and specifications approved by the City Council for the work and on file with
the City Clerk.
   (D)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to exempt a
plumbing contractor performing service installations from the permit, license
or inspection requirements herein.
(Prior Code, § 17-304)  (Ord. 1248, passed 9-6-83; Am. Ord. 1474, passed 8-6-
91)
§ 52.05  METERS.
   (A)   No premises shall be connected with the city's water system, nor shall
any premise be served with the city water, without the installation of a water
meter suitable in size and properly functioning so as to correctly determine
the amount of water used; nor shall it be permissible to serve two or more
premises with one meter.  (Prior Code, § 17-305)
   (B)   (1)   In connecting any premises with the city's water supply system,
the Water Superintendent shall require a sufficiently-sized copper service line
from the water main to the water meter.
      (2)   The meter shall be located near the property line of the premises
to be served.
      (3)   The water meter shall be of sufficient depth in the ground to
prevent freezing and shall be protected and covered with a meter box whose
design has been approved by the Utility Superintendent.
      (4)   All connections to the water system shall be made to a public main
adjacent to or abutting the property being served. No water service lines shall
be constructed across adjacent properties in private easements in order to
connect to a water main which is not adjacent to or abutting the property being
served.
(Prior Code, § 17-306)
   (C)   (1)   All water meters installed by the city shall be and remain the
property of the city, and shall not be removed unless the use of water on the
premises is to be entirely stopped or the service connection discontinued or
abandoned.
      (2)   In all cases where meters are lost, injured or broken by
carelessness or negligence of the owner or occupant of the premises, they shall
be replaced or repaired by or under the direction of the Water Superintendent,
and the cost thereof charged against the owner or occupant of the premises.
      (3)   In the event a water meter becomes inoperative or defective then
billing shall be based upon an estimate made by the City Manager on the average
monthly consumption during the last three months that the same was in good
order, or from the other date as the City Manager considers to be the most
reliable.
(Prior Code, § 17-307) (Am. Ord. 1930, passed 5-16-17)
§ 52.06  RESERVED.
§ 52.07  SHUT-OFF OF SERVICE.
   The city reserves the right, at any time without notice, to shut off the
water supply for repairs, extensions or for any other reason, or for the non-
payment of charges after giving written notice, and the city shall not be
responsible for any damages resulting therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 17-310)
§ 52.08  CONNECTION TO WATER MAIN.
   It is unlawful for any person to make any connection with any water main or
pipe belonging to the water supply system belonging to the city.
(Prior Code, § 17-311) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.09  USE OF FACILITIES; DISTURBANCE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to turn on any water meter
or connect into any water supply of the city or to use any water, water lines
or water meters of the city, without permission from the city.
      (2)   It is unlawful for a person to reconnect or use any water in the
city, when the services have been discontinued, for any cause by the city,
until so authorized by the proper authority of the city.
(Prior Code, § 17-312)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, unless duly authorized by the
Water Superintendent, to disturb, interfere with or damage any water, water
pipe, hydrant, machinery, tools, building or implements connected with or under
the control of the city water works or distribution system of the city.  (Prior
Code, § 17-313)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.10  AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   The City Manager is authorized to establish restrictions on the use of
water whenever he or she determines that:
      (1)   The water supply or the capacity to treat and distribute water is
depleted or limited to an extent that it is anticipated that sufficient water
will not be available for ordinary domestic consumption; or
      (2)   A water emergency exists due to failure of equipment or material or
a loss of system pressure.
   (B)   In the case of inadequate supply or treatment capacity, the
restrictions shall first be imposed on all users of water, restricting the use
of water in outdoor use to certain times.  Should additional measures become
necessary to ensure the availability of sufficient water, and, in all other
cases of water emergencies, restrictions may prescribe the purposes for which
water may be used, prohibit the use of water by major businesses or
institutions or prohibit entirely certain uses of water.  The City Manager may
exempt certain users from the restrictions on the use of water where
appropriate.
   (C)   Any order of the City Manager establishing restrictions on the use of
water shall take effect immediately following its announcement and shall remain
in effect until the time as it is determined that sufficient water is available
for domestic consumption or until the emergency has passed.  The announcement
of a water restriction order shall be given by reasonable notice.
   (D)   Any person who in any manner violates or permits others under his or
her supervision, custody or control to violate any terms of an order
restricting the use of water issued pursuant to this section shall be guilty of
an offense.  (Prior Code, § 17-314)  (Ord. 1489, passed 5-5-92) 
   (E)   The City Manager shall have the authority to decide any question which
may arise and which is not covered by any of the provisions contained in this
chapter and his or her decision in the cases shall be final.  (Prior Code, §
17-315)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 53:  SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
53.001   Purpose and policy
   
53.002   Definitions
   
53.003   Disposal requirements
   
53.004   Physical connection to public sewer
   
53.005   Holding tanks
   
53.006   Clogging sewers
Discharge and Permits
   
53.020   Application
   
53.021   Determination of significant industrial users
   
53.022   Industrial wastewater discharge permits
   
53.023   Discharge prohibitions
   
53.024   Wastewater strength; restrictions
   
53.025   Treatment plant influent; protection
   
53.026   Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards
   
53.027   Establishment of restrictive criteria; authority
   
53.028   Special agreements
   
53.029   Pretreatment facilities
   
53.030   Accidental discharge
Industrial User Monitoring
   
53.040   Monitoring facilities
   
53.041   Inspection and sampling
   
53.042   Order for entry
   
53.043   Confidential information
   
53.044   Compliance date report
   
53.045   Periodic compliance report
   
53.046   Maintenance of records
Enforcement and Abatement
   
53.055   Wastewater Appeals Board
   
53.056   Plant Manager; duties and authority
   
53.057   Procedure; complaints and orders
   
53.058   Violations and penalties
   
53.059   Public notification
   
53.060   Assessment for noncompliance
   
53.061   Falsifying information
   
53.062   Judicial proceedings and relief
   
53.063   Public nuisance
   
53.064   Remedies cumulative
   
53.065   Enforcement officials
Fees and Billings
   
53.075   Purpose
   
53.076   Types of charges and fees
   
53.077   Fees for application and discharge
   
53.078   Surcharge fees
   
53.079   Industrial wastewater discharge permit fee
   
53.080   Fees for industrial discharge monitoring
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.001  PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for the disposal of
wastewater in the service area of the publicly-owned wastewater treatment
system.  The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To protect the public health;
      (2)   To provide problem free wastewater collection and treatment
service;
      (3)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater treatment system which will interfere with the system operation,
will cause the city's discharge to violate its national pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) permit or other applicable state requirements or
will cause physical damage to the wastewater treatment system facilities;
      (4)   To provide full and equitable distribution of the cost of the
wastewater treatment system;
      (5)   To enable the city to comply with the provisions of the Federal
Clean Water Act, as amended, and the general pretreatment regulations, 40 CFR
403, as amended, and other applicable federal regulations; and
      (6)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the wastewater treatment system.
   (B)   (1)   In meeting these objectives, this chapter provides that all
persons in the service area of the city must have adequate wastewater treatment
either in the form of a connection to the municipal wastewater treatment system
or, where the system is not available, an appropriate private disposal system.
      (2)   The chapter also provides for the issuance of permits to system
users, for the regulation of wastewater discharge volume and characteristics,
for monitoring and enforcement activities and for the setting of fees for the
full and equitable distribution of costs resulting from the operation,
maintenance and capital recovery of the wastewater treatment system and from
other activities required by the enforcement and administrative program
established herein.
   (C)   (1)   This chapter shall apply to the city and to persons outside the
city, who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the municipal
wastewater treatment system.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the plant manager shall
administer, implement, interpret and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17-401)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.002  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT or THE ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  Administrator of the EPA or the state director, when
the state has an approved pretreatment program.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER.  An authorized representative
of an industrial user may be:
      (1)   A president, secretary, treasurer or vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, any other person who
performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation or
the manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities
employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures
exceeding $25 million in second quarter 1980 dollars, if authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures;
      (2)   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or sole proprietorship, respectively; or
      (3)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above
if the authorization is made in writing by the individual described herein; the
authorization specifies either an individual or a position having
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the
industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager,
operator of a well, well field superintendent, a position of equivalent
responsibility or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for
the company; and the written authorization is submitted to the city.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD.  The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under approved laboratory procedures,
as specified in 40 CFR 136, five days at 20°C, expressed in terms of weight and
concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)).
   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.
   BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of waste- streams from any portion of an
industrial user's treatment facility.
   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS.  National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or
pretreatment standard, as specified in Title 40 CFR, Protection of the
Environment.
   CITY.  The City of Bethany, Oklahoma, or the City Manager, Mayor and Council
of the city.
   COLLECTOR LINE.  The sanitary sewerage line that receives the sewage
effluent from the individual residences/businesses via lateral lines.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE.  A combination of individual samples obtained at regular
intervals over a specified time period.  The volume of each  individual sample
may be either proportional to the flow rate during the sample period (flow
proportional composite) or constant and collected at equal time intervals
during the composite period.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY.  The “approval authority,” defined hereinabove, or the
plant manager when the city has an approved pretreatment program under the
provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
   CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANT.  As defined by federal law, these include, BOD, TSS,
fecal coliform bacteria, oil and grease and pH.
   COOLING WATER.  The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE.  The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly
to the waters of the state.
   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER.  Wastewater that is generated by a family residence,
apartment, dwelling unit or other user containing contributions from only
sanitary facilities.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA.  The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for
the Administrator or other duly authorized official of the Agency.
   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   GRAB SAMPLE.  A sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis
with no regard to the flow in the wastestream and without consideration of
time.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE.  Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE.  The introduction of pollutants from any non-domestic
source regulated under Section 307(b) or (c) or (d) of the Act, including
holding tank waste discharged into the system.
   INDUSTRIAL USER.  A source of indirect discharge.
   INTERCEPTOR OUTFALL SEWER.  A sewer that receives wastewater from a
collecting system or from a treatment plant and carries it to a point of final
discharge.  The size of these lines is generally greater than 18 inches in
diameter.
   INTERFERENCE.  The inhibition or disruption of the municipal wastewater
treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any
requirement of the city's NPDES permit.  The term includes prevention of sewage
sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act,
33 USC 1345, or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to
the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act or more stringent state criteria applicable to the method of
disposal or use employed by the municipal wastewater treatment system.
   LATERAL.  The sanitary sewerage line running from the property line, where
it is hooked to the service line from the individual residence/business, to the
sanitary sewerage collector line.
   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STANDARD.  Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, 33  USC 1347, which applies
to a specific category of industrial users.
   NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD. 
Any regulation developed under the authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and
40 CFR 403.5.
   NEW SOURCE.  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c)
of the Act which will be applicable to the source if the standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that the
building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which
no other source is located, the building, structure, facility or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source or the production of wastewater generating
processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site.  In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the
extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source should be considered.
   NON-CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANT.  All pollutants which are not included in the
list of conventional or toxic pollutants in 40 CFR 401.
   NON-DOMESTIC SOURCE.  Any source of discharge of wastewater from any
facility other than a residential unit.
   NPDES or NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM. The program for
issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the discharge of pollutants from
point sources into  navigable waters, the contiguous zone and the oceans,
pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended.
   PASS THROUGH.  A discharge which exits the POTW into the waters of the state
in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge
or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement
of the POTW's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation.
   PERSON.
      (1)   Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns.
      (2)   The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context.
   pH.  The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of the
hydrogen ions measured in grams per liter of solution and expressed in standard
units (SU).
   PLANT MANAGER.  The person designated by the Bethany-Warr Acres Public Works
Authority to supervise the operation of the publicly-owned treatment works and
who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities hereby, or the
Pretreatment Coordinator of the Bethany-Warr Acres Public Works Authority.
   POLLUTANT.  Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, heat,
wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial,
municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water.
   POLLUTION.  The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
   POTW TREATMENT PLANT.  The portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment
to wastewater.
   PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing the pollutants into a POTW.  The reduction or alteration can be
obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or
other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on
an industrial user.
   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer controlled or maintained by the city.
   PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY.  The Bethany- Warr Acres Public Works Authority.
   PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS.  A treatment works, as defined by Section
212 of the Act, 33 USC 1292, which is owned, in this instance, by the city. 
This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not
connected to a facility providing treatment.  For the purposes of this chapter,
POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users
of the city's POTW.  The term also means the municipality which has
jurisdiction over the indirect discharges from a treatment works.
   SERVICE AREA.  Any area serviced by the Bethany-Warr Acres publicly-owned
treatment works including, but not limited to those areas the city holds
easements for the service.
   SERVICE LINE.  The sanitary sewerage line running from the individual
residence/business to the lateral at the property line, or other place of
disposal.
   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE.  Substantial physical damage to property, damage to
the treatment facilities which cause them to be inoperable, or substantial and
permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur
in the absence of a bypass.  SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not mean economic loss
caused by delays in production.
   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   Any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who is
subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N;
      (2)   Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day
of process wastewater to the POTW, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and
boiler blowdown wastewater, or contributes a process wastestream which makes up
5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant;
      (3)   Is designated as such by the control authority, as defined in 40
CFR 403.12(a), on the basis that the industrial user has reasonable potential
for adversely affecting the POTW's operation, or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6) or amendments
thereto; and
      (4)   Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria herein
has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time,
on it's own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial
user or POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that the
industrial user is not a SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
   SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.  An industrial user will be considered in
significant noncompliance if its discharge meets one or more of the following
criteria.  (40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii))
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all measurements taken during a six-month period
exceed, by any magnitude, the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the
same pollutant, parameter;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of all measurements for each pollutant parameter taken
during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum
limit or the average multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS,
fats, oil and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except pH);
      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit, daily maximum
or longer-term average, that the control authority determines has caused, alone
or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through,
including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's
exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B), to halt or
prevent a discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order
for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final
compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance-reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations which the control
authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.
   SLUG.  Any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature, including but not
limited to an accidental spill or non-customary batch discharge or any
discharge violating the specific prohibitions under 40 CFR 403.5(b).
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION or SIC.  A classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the
President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
   STATE.  The State of Oklahoma.
   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN.  A pipe or conduit which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes; it may,
however, carry cooling waters and unpolluted waters, upon approval of the plant
manager.
   STORMWATER.  Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of,
or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable
by laboratory filtering by approved procedures according to 40 CFR 136.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT.  Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic
in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other Acts.
   TRUNK LINE.  The sanitary sewerage line that receives the sewage effluent
from the various collector lines.
   USER.  Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the city's POTW.
   WASTEWATER.  The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted
to enter the POTW.
   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT.  A control document issued by the plant manager
authorizing the conditional discharge of certain non-domestic pollutants into
the city's POTW system as specified herein.
   WATERS OF THE STATE.  All streams, lakes and ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 17-402)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.003  DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
service area of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any waters of the state within
the service area of the city any sewage or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions
of this chapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
this section, the building shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with all local and state regulations.
   (E)   (1)   Except as provided in this section, the owner of all houses,
buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or
other purposes situated within the service area and abutting on any street,
alley or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer, is
hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein and to connect the facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and §§ 150.070 et seq. within 90
days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that the sewer is
within 300 feet of the property.
      (2)   Any residence, business or industrial establishment having had
sewers available for 90 days shall be considered a user whether connected or
not and shall be subject to paying the appropriate user fees and charges or
industrial recovery charges as set by ordinance or resolution.
   (F)   An industrial facility may discharge wastewater to the waters of the
state provided that it obtains an NPDES permit and meets all the requirements
of the Federal Clean Water Act, the NPDES permit and any other applicable
local, state or federal statutes and regulations.  The facility shall be
considered a user of the public sewers or the POTW only if it contributes,
causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW.
   (G)   (1)   Trunk and interceptor lines and appurtenances outside the city
limits must be installed to meet the code specifications then in effect.  Upon
completion and prior to acceptance, each project or addition must be inspected
to ensure code compliance.
      (2)   The transfer of each addition must include easements for
maintenance and the exclusive right to control the lines and appurtenances as
set forth in the governing codes.
   (H)   No person or user shall discharge wastewater which exceeds the
following set of standards unless an exception is permitted as provided
herein.  Dilution of any wastewater discharge for the purpose of satisfying
these requirements shall be considered in violation hereof.
(Prior Code, § 17-403)    (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 53.004  PHYSICAL CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER.
   (A)   All connections to the sanitary sewer system of the city shall be made
under the direction of the city.
   (B)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with,
openings into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
   (C)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and
inspection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.  The owner shall
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
   (D)   Each building connected with a sanitary sewer shall have its own
separate building sewer connecting it with the sanitary sewer main.
   (E)   Building sewers and service lines shall conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city.
   (F)   All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. 
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
   (G)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, basement drains or other sources of surface
runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or service line, which in turn, is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (H)   Each individual property owner or user of the POTW shall be entirely
responsible for the maintenance of their service line and lateral that leads to
the public sewer collector line.  This maintenance will include repair or
replacement of the service line as deemed necessary by the building official.
   (I)   All sewer connections shall be made directly to a sewer main adjacent
to or abutting the property being served. No sewer service lines shall be
constructed across adjacent properties in private easements in order to connect
to a sewer main which is not adjacent to or abutting the property being served.
(Prior Code, § 17-404)    (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93; Am. Ord. 1931, passed 5-
16-17)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.005  HOLDING TANKS.
   (A)   No person, firm, association or corporation shall clean out, drain or
flush any septic tank or any other type of wastewater or excreta disposal
system unless the person, firm, association or corporation obtains a permit
from the plant manager to perform the acts or services.  Any person, firm,
association or corporation desiring a permit to perform the services shall file
an application on the prescribed form.  Upon any application, the permit shall
be issued by the plant manager when the conditions of this division have been
met, and providing the plant manager is satisfied the applicant has adequate
and proper equipment to perform the services contemplated in a safe and
competent manner.
   (B)   For each permit issued under the provisions of this division, an
annual permit charge therefor shall be paid to the city.  The applicable fee
schedule shall be adopted by the City Council by resolution.
   (C)   The plant manager shall designate approved locations for the emptying
and cleansing of all equipment used in the performance of the services rendered
under the permit herein provided for, and it shall be a violation hereof for
any person, firm, association or corporation to empty or clean the equipment at
any place other than a place so designated.
   (D)   Failure to comply with all provisions of this chapter shall be
sufficient cause for the revocation of the permit by the plant manager.
(Prior Code, § 17-405)    (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 53.006  CLOGGING SEWERS.
   It is unlawful for anyone to purposely clog or stop up any sewer above
mentioned or to throw any substance in any sewer or toilet or any other
receptacle leading to any sewer above mentioned which substance is likely to
clog or stop up the sewer.
(Prior Code, § 17-406)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
   DISCHARGE AND PERMITS
§ 53.020  APPLICATION.
   (A)   All users or prospective users which generate domestic or non-domestic
wastewater shall make application to the plant manager for written
authorization to discharge to the municipal wastewater treatment system.  The
application shall be in a form and require information about the user as the
plant manager may prescribe.  Applications shall be required from all new
dischargers as well as for any existing discharger desiring additional service.
Connection to the municipal sewer shall not be made until the application is
received and approved by the plant manager and the building sewer is installed
in accordance with
§ 53.004 and an inspection has been performed by the proper city official.
   (B)   The receipt by the city of a prospective customer's application for
service shall not obligate the city to render the service.  If the service
applied for cannot be supplied in accordance with the chapter and the city's
rules and regulations and general practice, the application shall be rejected,
and there shall be no liability of the city to the applicant for the service,
except that conditional waivers for additional services may be granted by the
plant manager for interim periods if compliance may be assured within a
reasonable period of time.
(Prior Code, § 17-410)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.021  DETERMINATION OF SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS.
   (A)   All users or prospective users which generate non-domestic wastewater
shall, when making application for discharge, pursuant to
§ 53.020, provide the following information:
      (1)   Name of owners and operators;
      (2)   Address;
      (3)   Location, if different from the mailing address, the Standard
Industrial Classification SIC of the operation(s) carried out by the applicant;
      (4)   Wastewater volume;
      (5)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics;
      (6)   Discharge variations;
      (7)   A description of all toxic materials handled on the premises; and
      (8)   Any other information deemed necessary by the plant manager,
including, but not limited to site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans and details of existing and proposed pretreatment and/or equalization
facilities.
   (B)   If the plant manager determines that the applicant constitutes a
significant industrial user, then the conditions of
§ 53.022 shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 17-411)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.022  INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required.  All significant industrial users proposing to
connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge
permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW.  Proposed new users
shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the
POTW.
   (B)   Information.
      (1)   The following additional information shall be required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit:
         (a)   A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the
facility;
         (b)   A brief description of the nature and average rate of production
of the facility;  (This description should include a schematic process diagram
which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.)
         (c)   Information showing the measured average daily flow and maximum
daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each regulated process stream
and other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream
formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e);  (The city may allow for verifiable estimates of
these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations.)
         (d)   Identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated
process;
         (e)   Results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration or mass, where required by the city or pretreatment standard, of
regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process;  (Both daily
maximum and average concentration or mass, where required, shall be reported. 
The sample shall be representative of daily operations.)
         (f)   Four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols,
oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organics;  (For all other pollutants, 24-
hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite
sampling techniques where feasible.  The city may waive flow-proportional
composite sampling for any industrial user that demonstrates that flow-
proportional sampling is infeasible.  In such cases, samples may be obtained
through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of
four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged.)
         (g)   A minimum of one representative sample to compile that data
necessary to comply with the requirements of this section;
         (h)   For categorical industrial users, samples should be taken
immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or
immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists; 
(If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to
pretreatment the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to
allow the use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order
to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate
concentration or mass limit has been calculated, in accordance with 40 CFR
403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with the supporting data shall be submitted
to the control authority.  For non-categorical industrial users, samples should
be taken just prior to connection with the POTW.  Where an alternate
concentration or mass limit has been calculated, in accordance with 40 CFR
403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with the supporting data shall be submitted
to the control authority.)
         (i)   Sampling and analysis, performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, and amendments thereto;  (Where 40 CFR 136
does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, or where the Administrator determines that 40 CFR 136 sampling and
analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling
and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any
other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures
suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by the Administrator.)
         (j)   Submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical
data so long as the data is sufficient to determine the need for industrial
pretreatment measures;
         (k)   The baseline report indicating the time, date and place of
sampling and methods of analysis, certifying that the sampling and analysis is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the
POTW;
         (l)   A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if
not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O and M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements;
         (m)   Any user who elects or is required to construct new or
additional facilities for pretreatment shall as a part of the application for
wastewater discharge permit submit plans, specifications and other pertinent
information relative to the proposed construction to the plant manager for
approval;  (Plans and specifications submitted for approval must bear the seal
of a professional engineer registered to practice engineering in the state.  A
wastewater discharge permit shall not be issued until the plans and
specifications are approved.  Approval of the plans and specifications shall in
no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as
necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of
this chapter.)
         (n)   If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards;  (The application shall include
the shortest schedule by which the user will provide additional pretreatment. 
The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable pretreatment standard.  For the purpose of
this division, pretreatment standards shall include either a national
pretreatment standard or a pretreatment standard imposed by this chapter.  The
following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
            1.   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for
major components, commencing construction, completing construction and the
like).
            2.   No increment referred to herein shall exceed nine months.
            3.   Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
plant manager including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on the date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for the delay and
the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule
established.  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between the
progress reports to the plant manager.
         (o)   Where the industrial user's categorical pretreatment standard
has been modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined
wastestream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)) and/or fundamentally different factors
variance (40 CFR 403.13) at the time the user submits the report required
hereby, the information required hereby shall pertain to the modified limits;
and
         (p)   If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a
removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (40 CFR
403.6(e)), and/or fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13)
after the user submits the report required by division (A) above, any necessary
amendments to the information requested hereby shall be submitted by the user
to the city within 60 days after the modified limit is approved.
      (2)   The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the city may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms
and conditions provided herein.
      (3)   The plant manager will act only on applications containing all the
information required in this section.  Persons who have filed incomplete
applications will be notified by the plant manager that the application is
deficient and the nature of the deficiency and will be given 30 days to correct
the deficiency.  If the deficiency is not corrected within the extended period
as allowed by the plant manager, the plant manager shall submit the application
to the City Engineer with a recommendation that it be denied and notify the
applicant in writing of the action.
   (C)   Permit conditions.  Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations,
user charges and fees established by the city.
      (1)   Permits shall specify the following:
         (a)   Statement of duration, in no case more than five years;
         (b)   Statement of non-transferability without, at a minimum, prior
notification to the POTW and provision of copy of the existing control
mechanism to the new owner or operator;
         (c)   Effluent limits based on applicable general pretreatment
standards listed in 40 CFR 403, categorical pretreatment standards, local
limits and state and local law;
         (d)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record-
keeping
requirements, including identification of the pollutants to be monitored,
sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type, based on the applicable
general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR 403 categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits and state and local law;
         (e)   Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements; and
         (f)   Compliance schedules, if applicable.  The schedules may not
extend the compliance date beyond applicable federal deadlines.
      (2)   These control documents may also specify the following:
         (a)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;
         (b)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
         (c)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspections and
sampling facilities; and
         (d)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure
compliance with this program.
   (D)   Permit modifications.
      (1)   Within nine months of the promulgation of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to the
standards shall be revised to require compliance with the standard within the
time frame prescribed by the standard.  Where a user subject to a national
categorical pretreatment standard has not previously submitted an application
for a wastewater discharge permit as required by division (B) above, the user
shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the
promulgation of the applicable national pretreatment standard.  A user with an
existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the plant manager within
180 days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical
pretreatment standard the information required by divisions (B)(2) and (3)
above.
      (2)   The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to
modification by the plant manager during the term of the permit as limitations
or requirements are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be
informed of any proposed changes in this permit at least 30 days prior to the
effective date of change.  Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall
include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
   (E)   Permit duration.  Permits shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years.  A permit may be issued for a period less than a year
or may be stated to expire on a specific date.  The user shall apply for permit
reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
permit.
   (F)   Permit transfer.  Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation.  A wastewater discharge permit shall
not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises or new or changed operation without the approval of the city.  Any
succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the
existing permit.
   (G)   Revocation of permit.  Any permit issued under the provisions of this
chapter is subject to be modified, suspended or revoked in whole or in part
during its term for cause including, but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit or other applicable federal, state or local regulation;
      (2)   Obtaining a permit by misrepresentation or failure to disclose
fully all relevant facts;
      (3)   A change in any condition that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge;
      (4)   Failure of a user to accurately report the discharge constituents
and characteristics or to report significant changes in plant operations or
wastewater characteristics; and
      (5)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection or monitoring.
   (H)   Revocation procedure.  Should conditions arise requiring permit
revocation, the procedure outlined herein will be followed.
(Prior Code, § 17-412)    (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 53.023  DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   A user may not introduce into the POTW any pollutant(s) which cause
pass through or interference.  These general prohibitions and the specific
prohibitions in division (B) below apply to each user introducing pollutants
into the POTW whether or not the user is subject to national pretreatment
standards or any national, state or local pretreatment requirements.
   (B)   A user shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against
it alleging a violation of the general prohibitions established in division (B)
(1) below and the specific prohibitions in divisions (C)(3), (4), (5), (6) and
(7) below where the user can demonstrate that:
      (1)   It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources would cause
pass through or interference;
      (2)   A local limit designed to prevent pass through and/or interference,
as the case may be, was developed in accordance with 40 CFR 403.5(c) for each
pollutant in the user's discharge that caused pass through or interference, and
the user was in compliance with each local limit directly prior to and during
the pass through or interference; or
      (3)   If a local limit designed to prevent pass through and/or
interference, as the case may be, has not been developed in accordance with 40
CFR 403.5(c) for the pollutants that caused the pass through or interference,
the user's discharge directly prior to and during the pass through or
interference did not change substantially in nature and constituents from the
user's prior discharge activity when the POTW was regularly in compliance with
the POTW's NPDES permit requirements and, in the case of interference,
applicable requirements for sewage sludge use or disposal.
   (C)   In addition, the following pollutants shall not be introduced into the
POTW:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less
than 140°F. or 60°C. using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
      (2)   Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the
POTW, but in no case discharges with pH lower than 5.0, or greater than or
equal to 12.5 standard units, unless the works is specifically designed to
accommodate, the discharges;
      (3)   Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction
to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, such as, but not limited to
grease, garbage with particles greater than ½-inch in any dimension, paunch
manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers,
ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood,
plastics, gas, tar, asphalt, residues, residues from refining or processing of
fuels or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes;
      (4)   Any pollutant, including oxygen- demanding pollutants (BOD and the
like) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which will cause interference with the POTW;
      (5)   Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
resulting in interference, but in no case heat in the quantities that the
temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 40°C., (104°F.), unless the
approval authority, upon request of the POTW, approves alternate temperature
limits;
      (6)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW;
      (9)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes, of a
half life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the plant
manager in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (10)   Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance;
      (11)   Any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage or uncontaminated cooling water unless specific approval is
obtained from the plant manager;  (Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage
shall be discharged to the sewers as are specifically designated as storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the plant manager and the state. 
Industrial cooling waters may be discharged on approval of the plant manager
and the state to a storm sewer or natural outlet.)
      (12)   The use of enzymes, hot water, emulsifiers or other agents to
cause oil and/or grease to pass through the user's grease trap or treatment
unit designed to remove oil and/or grease; and
      (13)   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any
way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific
limitation developed by the city or state.
(Prior Code, § 17-413)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 53.024  WASTEWATER STRENGTH; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No person or user shall discharge wastewater which exceeds the
following set of standards unless an exception is permitted as provided in this
chapter.  Dilution of any wastewater discharge for the purpose of satisfying
these requirements shall be considered in violation of this chapter.
 
Pollutant Daily Maximum (mg/l)
Arsenic (total)    0.424
Cadmium (total)    0.208
Chromium (total)   2.494
Copper (total)     0.472
Cyanide (total)    0.304
Lead (total)       0.319
Mercury (total)    0.039
Molybdenum (total) 0.223
Nickel (total)     3.157
Phenols (total)    60.980
Selenium (total)   0.580
Silver (total)     3.931
Thallium (total)   0.168
Zinc (total)       1.060
 
   (B)   Due to analytical constraints, the following method detection limit
shall be used to determine compliance:  Mercury - 0.0002 mg/l: (EPA Test Method
245.1 or 245.2–40 CFR 136)
(Prior Code, § 17-414)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.025  TREATMENT PLANT INFLUENT; PROTECTION.
   (A)   The plant manager shall monitor the treatment works influent for each
parameter in the table in § 53.024.
   (B)   Industrial users shall be subject to reporting and monitoring
requirements regarding these parameters as set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   In the event that the influent at the POTW reaches or exceeds
established levels, the plant manager shall initiate technical studies to
determine the cause of the influent violation and shall recommend to the city
the necessary remedial measures, including, but not limited to recommending the
establishment of new or revised pretreatment levels for these parameters.
   (D)   The plant manager shall also recommend changes to any of these
criteria in the event that the POTW effluent standards are changed, there are
changes in any applicable law or regulation affecting same or changes are
needed for more effective operation of the POTW.
(Prior Code, § 17-415)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.026  FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standards, if
more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that
subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this
chapter.
   (B)   The plant manager shall notify all affected users of the applicable
reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
(Prior Code, § 17-416)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.027  ESTABLISHMENT OF RESTRICTIVE CRITERIA; AUTHORITY.
   No statement in this chapter is intended or may be construed to prohibit the
plant manager from establishing specific wastewater discharge criteria more
restrictive where wastes are determined to be harmful or destructive to the
facilities of the POTW or to create a public nuisance or to cause the discharge
of the POTW to violate effluent or stream water quality standards, to interfere
with the use or handling of sludge, to pass through the POTW resulting in a
violation of the NPDES permit or to exceed industrial pretreatment standards
for discharge to municipal wastewater treatment systems as imposed by the State
Department of Public Health and/or the United States Environmental Protection
Agency.
(Prior Code, § 17-417)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.028  SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to prevent any special
agreement or arrangement between the city and any user of the wastewater
treatment system whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character is
accepted into the system and specially treated subject to any payments or user
charges as may be applicable.  The making of the special agreements or
arrangements between the city and the user shall be strictly limited to the
capability of the POTW to handle the wastes without interfering with the unit
operations or sludge use and handling or allowing the pass through of
pollutants which would result in a violation of the NPDES permit.  No special
agreement or arrangement may be made without documentation by the industry of
the use of good management practice in the reduction of wastewater volume and
strength.
(Prior Code, § 17-418)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.029  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   (A)   The industrial user shall, at all times, properly operate and maintain
all facilities and systems of treatment and control and related appurtenances
which are installed or used by the permittee to achieve compliance with the
conditions of this permit.  Proper operation and maintenance includes, but is
not limited to effective performance, adequate funding, adequate operator
staffing and training and adequate laboratory and process controls, including
appropriate quality assurance procedures.  This provision requires the
operation of back-up or auxiliary or similar system only when necessary to
achieve compliance with the conditions of this permit.
   (B)   Upon reduction, loss or failure of the pretreatment facility, the
industrial user shall, to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with its
permit, control production or all discharges or both until the operation of the
treatment facility is restored or an alternate method of treatment is
provided.  This requirement applies, for example, when the primary source of
power of the treatment facility fails or is reduced.  It shall not be a defense
for the permittee in an enforcement action that it would have been necessary to
halt or reduce the permitted activity in order to maintain compliance with the
conditions of this permit.
   (C)   Bypass of treatment facilities:
      (1)   An industrial user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the reporting requirements of this section.
      (2)   If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the city, if possible at least ten days before the
date of the bypass.
      (3)   An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the city within 24
hours from the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass.  A written
submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the industrial
user becomes aware of the bypass.  The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass and its cause, the duration of the bypass, including
exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.  The city may waive
the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received
within 24 hours.
      (4)   Bypass is prohibited unless:
         (a)   It was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or
severe property damage;
         (b)   There was no feasible alternative, such as the use of auxiliary
treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance during
normal periods of equipment downtime; and  (This condition is not satisfied if
adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during
normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance.)
         (c)   The industrial user submitted the notices as required hereby.
      (5)   The city may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the city determines that it will meet the conditions listed
in division (C)(4) above.
(Prior Code, § 17-419)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 53.030  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.
   (A)   (1)   All industrial users shall provide the facilities and institute
the procedures as are reasonably necessary to prevent or minimize the potential
for accidental discharge into the POTW of waste regulated by this chapter from
liquid or raw material storage areas, from truck and rail car loading and
unloading areas, from in-plant transfer or processing and materials-handling
areas and from diked areas or holding ponds of any waste regulated by this
chapter.
      (2)   The wastewater discharge permit of any user who has a history of
significant leaks, spills or other accidental discharge of waste regulated by
this chapter shall be subject on a case-by-case basis to a special permit
condition or the requirement for the construction of facilities and
establishment of procedures which will prevent or minimize the potential for
such accidental discharge.
      (3)   (a)   Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense.  Detailed
plans showing facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
plant manager before the facility is constructed.
         (b)   The review and approval of the plans and operating procedures
will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the
facility to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of this
chapter.
      (4)   At least once every two years, all significant industrials users
will be evaluated to determine if there is a need for plan to control slug
discharges.  If the plan is required, it will contain, at a minimum, the
following elements:
         (a)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
         (b)   Description of stored chemicals;
         (c)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug
discharges, including any discharge that would violate a discharge a
prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b) with procedures for follow-up written
notification within five days; and
         (d)   If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from
accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control
of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including
solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
   (B)   Any person causing or suffering from any accidental discharge shall
immediately notify the POTW treatment plant by telephone to enable
countermeasures to be taken by the plant manager to minimize damage to the
POTW, the health and welfare of the public and the environment.  This
notification shall be followed, within five days of the date of the occurrence,
by a detailed written statement describing the cause of the accidental
discharge and measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. The
notification will not relieve the user of liability for any expense, loss or
damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall the notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other
liability which may be imposed by this chapter or state or federal law.
   (C)   Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer a
dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification
procedure.
(Prior Code, § 17-420)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
   INDUSTRIAL USER MONITORING
§ 53.040  MONITORING FACILITIES.
   (A)   The installation of a monitoring facility shall be required for all
industrial users having wastes which receive pretreatment, are otherwise
altered or regulated before discharge or are unusually strong and thereby
subject to a surcharge.  The monitoring facility shall be a manhole or other
suitable facility approved by the plant manager.
   (B)   When, in the judgment of the plant manager, there is a significant
difference in wastewater constituents and characteristics produced by different
operations of a single user, the plant manager may require that separate
monitoring facilities be installed for each source of discharge.
   (C)   Monitoring facilities that are required to be installed shall be
constructed and maintained at the user's expense.  The purpose of the facility
is to enable inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the wastewater,
produced by a user.  If sampling or metering equipment is also required by the
plant manager, it shall be provided and installed at the user's expense.
   (D)   The monitoring facility will normally be required to be located on the
user's premises outside of the building.  The plant manager may, however, when
the location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow
the facility to be constructed in the public street right-of-way with the
approval of the public agency having jurisdiction of that right-of-way and
located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
   (E)   (1)   There shall be ample room in or near a sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. 
      (2)   The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the
user.
   (F)   (1)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the
monitoring facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the plant
manager's requirements and all applicable local agency construction standards
and specifications.
      (2)   Construction must be completed within 180 days following written
notification unless an extension is granted by the plant manager.
(Prior Code, § 17-430)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.041  INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   (A)   All users generating wastewater classified as a non-domestic source,
as defined in
§ 53.002, shall allow the plant manager and/or his or her authorized
representative, the approval authority, state officials and EPA upon
presentation of proper credentials:
      (1)   To enter upon the user's premises where a discharge source to the
POTW is located or where records are required to be kept under the terms
and conditions of this chapter and at reasonable times to copy these records;
      (2)   To inspect at reasonable times any monitoring equipment or method
or any collection, treatment, pollution management or discharge facilities
required under this chapter; and
      (3)   To sample at reasonable times any discharge of pollutants to the
POTW.
   (B)   (1)   At least annually, the city shall sample and inspect the
facilities of all significant industrial users to ascertain whether the purpose
of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being complied with.
      (2)   The city, state and EPA shall have the right to set up on the
user's property devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection,
compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.  Where a user has security
measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance
before entry into their premises, the user shall make the necessary
arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from the city, approval authority and EPA will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their
specific responsibilities.
(Prior Code, § 17-431)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.042  ORDER FOR ENTRY.
   Upon the failure or refusal of the user to permit entry to his or her
premises by the plant manager and/or his or her authorized representative for
purposes of determining compliance with this chapter or to conduct compliance
sampling, as provided for by
§ 53.041, the Plant Manager or his or her designated representative, through
counsel, shall apply to the District Court of the county for an order
authorizing entry to the premises for purposes of determining compliance with
this chapter.  The application shall be brought pursuant to the authorization
of 63 O.S. § 1-909A, Section 308 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as
amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977, 40 CFR 403, and other applicable
federal and state laws, regulations, amendments and supplements thereto.
(Prior Code, § 17-432)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.043  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit
applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be
made available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the city that the release of the information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets of the user.
(Prior Code, § 17-433)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.044  COMPLIANCE DATE REPORT.
   (A)   Within 90 days following the date of final compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement
of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to
pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the plant manager a
report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the
discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment
standards and requirements.
   (B)   The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards
or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional operations and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring
the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of
the industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional.
(Prior Code, § 17-434)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.045  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORT.
   (A)   (1)   Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment
standard, after the compliance date of the pretreatment standard, or in the
case of a new source, after the commencement of the discharge into the POTW,
shall submit to the plant manager during the months of June and December,
unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the plant
manager, a report indicating the nature and concentration, of pollutants in the
effluent which are limited by the user's wastewater discharge permit and/or the
pretreatment standards.
      (2)   At the discretion of the plant manager and in consideration of the
factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles and the like,
the plant manager may agree to alter the months during which the above reports
are to be furnished submitted.
   (B)   (1)   The plant manager may impose mass limitations on users where the
imposition of mass limitations are appropriate.
      (2)   In such cases, the report required by division (A) above shall
indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by the wastewater discharge permit
and/or pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user.
   (C)   (1)   The reports required by this chapter shall contain the results
of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature
and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the plant manager,
of the pollutants contained therein which are limited by the wastewater
discharge permit and/or applicable pretreatment standards.  The frequency of
monitoring shall be prescribed in the wastewater discharge permit or in the
pretreatment standard.
      (2)   All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR 136
does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, or where the Administrator determines that the 40 CFR 136 sampling
and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods
or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including
procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by the
Administrator.
   (D)   (1)   If the industrial user monitors any pollutant more frequently
than required by the wastewater discharge permit, using test procedures
approved under 40 CFR 136 or as specified by the permit, the results of the
monitoring shall be included in the calculation and results will be reported on
the next scheduled report to the city.
      (2)   The increased monitoring frequency shall also be indicated on the
report.
   (E)   If the industrial user receives any laboratory analysis, using test
procedures approved under 40 CFR 136 or as specified by this chapter, that is
in violation of the standards, as set in this chapter or the wastewater
discharge permit, the permittee will notify the Plant Manager of this violation
within 24 hours of the receipt of the report.
   (F)   (1)   If the industrial user receives any laboratory analysis, using
test procedures approved under 40 CFR l36 or as specified by their wastewater
discharge permit, that is in violation of the standards as set in their permit,
the industrial user has 30 days to resample the wastestream for the parameter
(s) in violation and submit the results of both sets of data to the Plant
Manager.
      (2)   This 30-day period begins on the day the industry receives the data
in violation, except the industrial user is not required to resample if:
         (a)   The city performs sampling at the industrial user at a frequency
of at least once per month; or
         (b)   The city performs sampling at the user between the time when the
user performs its initial sampling and the time the user receives the results
of this sampling.
   (G)   All reports required by this chapter shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user.
   (H)   If an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a
different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation
of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, a new authorization must be submitted to the city prior to or together
with any reports to be signed by an  authorized representative.
   (I)   The following certification will accompany all reports submitted under
this chapter:
“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted.  Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information submitted
is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete.  I am
aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
(Prior Code, § 17-435)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.046  MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   (A)   (1)   Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements
established by this chapter shall maintain records of all information resulting
from any monitoring activities required hereby.
      (2)   The records shall include for all samples:
         (a)   The date, exact plan, method and time of sampling and the names
of the persons taking the samples;
         (b)   The dates analyses were performed;
         (c)   Who performed the analyses;
         (d)   The analytical techniques/methods used; and
         (e)   The results of the analyses.
   (B)   (1)   Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements
established in this chapter shall be required to retain for a minimum of three
years all
records of monitoring activities and results whether or not the monitoring
activities are required by this chapter and shall make records available for
inspection and copying by the plant manager, Director of the Division of Water
Quality Management, State Department of Public Health or the Environmental
Protection Agency.
      (2)   This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any
unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or when requested by the
city, the approval authority or the Environmental Protection Agency.
(Prior Code, § 17-436)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
   ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT
§ 53.055  WASTEWATER APPEALS BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby created and established the BWAPWA Wastewater Appeals
Board, hereinafter referred to as the “Board,” which shall be a three-member
Board composed as follows:
      (1)   The Mayor of Warr Acres;
      (2)   The City Manager of Bethany; and
      (3)   One other person to be selected by the city in which the
enforcement action is being taken.
   (B)   (1)   The Wastewater Appeals Board is responsible for the
administration and enforcement of the pretreatment program.
      (2)   Additionally, the Board shall have and exercise the power, duty and
responsibility to:
         (a)   Hear appeals from orders issued by the plant manager or permit
revocations or modifications by him or her;
         (b)   Affirm, modify or revoke the actions or orders of the plant
manager;
         (c)   Issue notices of appeals and subpoenas requiring attendance of
witnesses and the production of evidence;
         (d)   To receive evidence under oath;
         (e)   Take the testimony as the Board deems necessary; and
         (f)   Hold hearings where requested by the permittee or applicant for
the purpose of reviewing the denial or imposition of terms or conditions in
permits.
   (C)   Any hearing or rehearing before the Board shall be conducted in
accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   Upon receipt of a written petition from the alleged violator
pursuant to this section, the plant manager shall give the petitioner 30 days'
written notice of the time and place of the hearing, but in no case shall the
hearing be held more than 60 days from the receipt of the written petition
unless the plant manager and the petitioner agree to a postponement.
      (2)   The hearing herein provided may be conducted by the Board at a
regular or special meeting.  A quorum of the Board must be present at the
regular or special meeting in order to conduct the hearing herein provided.
      (3)   A record of the proceedings of the hearings shall be taken and
filed with the Board, together with the findings of fact and conclusions of law
made, pursuant to division (C)(6) below.  The transcript so recorded shall be
made available to the petitioner or any party to a hearing upon payment of a
charge set by the plant manager to cover the costs of preparation.
      (4)   In connection with the hearing, the Board shall issue subpoenas in
response to any reasonable request by any party to the hearing requiring the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant
to any matter involved in the hearing.  In case of refusal to obey a notice of
hearing or subpoena issued under this section, the County District Court shall
have jurisdiction upon the application of the Board to issue an order requiring
the person to appear and testify or produce evidence as the case may require
and any failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court as
contempt thereof.
      (5)   Any member of the Board may examine witnesses.
      (6)   (a)   On the basis of the evidence produced at the hearing, the
Board shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law and enter the
decisions and orders as in its opinion will best further the purposes of the
pretreatment program and shall give written notice of the decisions and orders
to the alleged violator.
         (b)   The order issued under this division shall be issued no later
than 30 days following the close of the hearing by the person or persons
designated by the Board.
      (7)   The decision of the Board shall become final and binding on all
parties unless appealed to the courts as provided in division (D) below.
      (8)   Any person to whom an emergency order is directed pursuant to
§ 53.057(B) shall comply therewith immediately but on petition to the Board
shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
   (D)   An appeal may be taken from any final order or other final
determination of the Board by any party, who is or who may be adversely
affected thereby, to the District Court within 30 days from the date the order
or determination is made.
(Prior Code, § 17-450)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.056  PLANT MANAGER; DUTIES AND AUTHORITY.
   In addition to any power, duty or responsibility given to the plant manager
under this chapter, the plant manager shall have the following powers, duties
and responsibilities:
   (A)   Administer and enforce the pretreatment program in accordance with 40
CFR 403, federal pretreatment program requirements and the provisions of this
chapter;
   (B)   Issue notices of violation whenever it is found that a user has
violated, or is violating any permit requirement, any order or any section of
this chapter;  (The notice of violation may require submittal of a plan for
correction.)
   (C)   Sign and issue consent orders assuming voluntary compliance, including
necessary remedial or preventive action, according to a fixed time schedule;
   (D)   Issue, modify or revoke permits, subject to rights of appeal
established herein;
   (E)   Conduct show-cause hearings to review facts of alleged violations in
order to determine and pursue any appropriate enforcement remedy;
   (F)   Authorize filing of complaints with appropriate court, on behalf of
the Board, seeking both civil and criminal penalties for violations of the
pretreatment program;
   (G)   Issue emergency orders; and
   (H)   Issue subpoenas requiring witness attendance at hearings.
(Prior Code, § 17-451)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.057  PROCEDURE; COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.
   (A)   Complaint issued by plant manager.
      (1)   Whenever the plant manager has reason to believe that a violation
of any provision of the pretreatment program or orders of the Board issued
pursuant thereto has occurred, or is occurring, the plant manager may cause a
written complaint to be served upon the alleged violator or violators.
      (2)   The complaint shall specify the provision or provisions of the
pretreatment program or order alleged to be violated, the facts alleged to
constitute a violation thereof, may order that necessary corrective action be
taken within a reasonable time to be prescribed in the order, and shall inform
the violators of the opportunity for a hearing before the Board.
      (3)   Any order shall become final and not subject to review unless the
person or persons named therein request by written petition a hearing before
the Board, as provided in § 53.055(C), no later than 30 days after the date the
order is served.  The Board may review the final order on the same grounds upon
which a court of the state may review default judgments.
   (B)   Emergency circumstances.
      (1)   Whenever the plant manager finds that an emergency exists
imperatively requiring immediate action to protect the public health, safety or
welfare, the health of animals, fish or aquatic life, a public water supply or
the facilities of the publicly-owned treatment works, the plant manager may,
without prior notice, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that the action be taken as the plant manager deems
necessary to meet the emergency.
      (2)   If the violator fails to respond or is unable to respond to the
plant manager's order, the plant manager may take the emergency action as he or
she deems necessary including termination of service or contract with a
qualified person or persons to carry out the emergency measures.  The plant
manager may assess the person or persons responsible for the emergency
condition for actual costs incurred by the city in meeting the emergency.
   (C)   Service of notice.  Except as otherwise expressly provided, any
notice, complaint, order or other instrument issued by or under authority of
this chapter may be served on any person affected thereby personally, by the
plant manager or any person designated by him or her or the service may be made
in accordance with state statutes authorizing service of process in civil
action. Proof of service shall be filed in the office of the plant manager.
(Prior Code, § 17-452)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.058  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who does any of the following acts or omissions, upon conviction,
shall be subject to a fine per day and costs for each day during which the act
or omission continues or occurs:
   (A)   Violates an effluent standard or limitation imposed by the
pretreatment program;
   (B)   Violates the terms or conditions of a permit issued pursuant to the
pretreatment program;
   (C)   Fails to complete a filing requirement of the pretreatment program;
   (D)   Fails to allow or perform an entry, inspection, monitoring or
reporting requirements of the pretreatment program;
   (E)   Fails to pay user or cost recovery charges imposed by the pretreatment
program; or
   (F)   Violates a final determination or order of the Board or plant manager.
(Prior Code, § 17-453)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.059  PUBLIC NOTIFICATION.
   As required by 40 CFR 403.8, the city will publish annually in the Daily
Oklahoman the names of all industrial/commercial users which at any time during
the year were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 17-454)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.060  ASSESSMENT FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The plant manager may assess the liability of any polluter or violator
for damages to the city resulting from any person's or industrial user's
pollution or violation, failure or neglect in complying with any permits or
orders issued pursuant to the provisions of the pretreatment program or this
subchapter.
   (B)   If an appeal from the assessment is not made to the Board by the
polluter or violator within 30 days of notification of the assessment, he or
she shall be deemed to have consented to the assessment and it shall become
final.
   (C)   Damages may include any expenses incurred in investigating and
enforcing the pretreatment program or the provisions of this subchapter, in
removing, correcting and terminating any pollution, and also compensation for
any actual damages caused by the pollution or violation.
   (D)   (1)   Whenever any assessment has become final because of a person's
failure to appeal within the time provided, the plant manager may apply to the
appropriate court for a judgment, and seek execution on the judgment.
      (2)   The court, in the proceedings, shall treat the failure to appeal
the assessment as a confession of judgment in the amount of the assessment.
(Prior Code, § 17-455)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.061  FALSIFYING INFORMATION.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of the pretreatment program for any person to
knowingly make any false statement, representation or certification in any
application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be
maintained pursuant to this chapter or waste water discharge permit, or to
falsify, tamper with or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or
method required under this chapter.
   (B)   Any violator found to be falsifying information shall be subject to
any of the enforcement provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 17-456)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 53.062  JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS AND RELIEF.
   (A)   The plant manager may initiate proceedings in the County District
Court against any person or industrial user who is alleged to have violated the
pretreatment program or orders of the Board or plant manager.
   (B)   In the action, the plant manager may seek, and the Court may grant,
injunctive relief and any other relief available in law or equity.
(Prior Code, § 17-457)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.063  PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   Discharges of wastewater in any manner in violation of this chapter or
of any order issued by the plant manager as authorized by this chapter is
hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed
by the plant manager.
   (B)   Any persons creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the
provisions of the city codes or ordinances governing the nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 17-458)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
Cross-reference:
   Health and Sanitation; Nuisance, see
Ch. 93
§ 53.064  REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   (A)   All remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative.
   (B)   The use of one remedy shall not be a bar to the use of any other
remedy provided by law or by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17-460)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.065  ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.
   The following persons are hereby vested with full authority to enforce the
provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Plant manager;
   (B)   Pretreatment Coordinator for Bethany-Warr Acres Public Works
Authority;
   (C)   An authorized representative of the City- County Health Department;
   (D)   Any duly authorized employee or officer of the city; and
   (E)   Other persons as authorized under specific provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17-461)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
   FEES AND BILLING
§ 53.075  PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide for the equitable recovery
of costs from users of the city's wastewater treatment system, including costs
of operation, maintenance, administration, bond service costs, capital
improvements, depreciation and equitable cost recovery of EPA-administered
federal wastewater grants.
(Prior Code, § 14-470)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.076  TYPES OF CHARGES AND FEES.
   The charges and fees as established in the city's schedule of charges and
fees may include, but not be limited to:
   (A)   Fees for applications for discharge;
   (B)   Inspection fee and tapping fee;
   (C)   Sewer use charge;
   (D)   Surcharge fees;
   (E)   Industrial wastewater discharge permit fees;
   (F)   Fees for industrial discharge monitoring; and
   (G)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 14-471)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.077  FEES FOR APPLICATION AND DISCHARGE.
   A fee may be charged when a user or prospective user makes application for
discharge as required hereby.
(Prior Code, § 14-472)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.078  SURCHARGE FEES.
   If it is determined by the city that the discharge of other loading
parameters or wastewater substances are creating excessive operation and
maintenance costs within the wastewater system, whether collection or
treatment, then the monetary effect of a parameter or parameters shall be borne
by the discharger of the parameters in proportion to the amount of discharge.
(Prior Code, § 14-473)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.079  INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT FEE.
   A fee may be charged for the issuance of an industrial wastewater discharge
permit in accordance with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 14-474)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
§ 53.080  FEES FOR INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE MONITORING.
   Fees may be collected from industrial users having pretreatment or other
discharge requirements to compensate the city for the necessary compliance
monitoring and other administrative duties of the pretreatment program.
(Prior Code, § 14-475)  (Ord. 1505, passed 7-6-93)
CHAPTER 54:  STORM WATER UTILITIES
Section
   
54.01   Legislative findings
   
54.02   Monthly storm water utility service charge
   
54.03   Definitions
   
54.04   Stormwater management program established
   
54.05   Responsibility for administration
   
54.06   Applicability and right of entry
   
54.07   Construction activities
   
54.08   Permit fees
   
54.09   Post construction activities
   
54.10   Illicit discharges
   
54.11   Administrative remedies and penalties for violations
Cross-reference:
   Flood damage prevention, see
Ch. 156
§ 54.01  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   The City Council of the City of Bethany, Oklahoma, makes the following
findings in the consideration and adoption of this chapter:
   (A)   Storm water flooding causes a significant risk to the property,
health, and safety of the citizens of Bethany, Oklahoma.
   (B)   The City of Bethany has large areas within its city limits which may
be subject to flooding during heavy rains.
   (C)   The drainage facilities of the City of Bethany, Oklahoma, consist
largely of natural drainage ways, barrow ditches, and improved storm drainage
facilities.
   (D)   The public storm water drainage facilities are in need of maintenance,
repair, and improvement, but there is insufficient revenue of the city to
perform the required improvements, maintenance, and repair.
   (E)   A monthly utility service charge should be imposed on the users of the
storm sewer system to assist in the maintenance, repair, and improvement of the
storm sewer system of the City of Bethany.
(Ord. 1767, passed 6-20-06; Am. Ord. 1865, passed 8-21-12)
§ 54.02  MONTHLY STORM WATER UTILITY SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   A monthly utility service charge of $1 per month for each utility unit
within the corporate limits of the City of Bethany is hereby imposed, payable
in advance, commencing July 1, 2006. This fee may be amended in amount by
resolution adopted by the City Council of the City of Bethany. The fee shall be
charged on the same classification of accounts as water and sewer services,
i.e., multiple-family dwelling units shall pay based on the number of units
multiplied by the storm water utility fee.
   (B)   The monthly service charge for storm sewers shall be billed by the
City of Bethany, Oklahoma. Payments received on utility bills shall be applied
in the following priority:
      (1)   First, to storm sewer fee;
      (2)   Second, to sanitation service;
      (3)   Third, to sanitary sewer service; and
      (4)   Finally, to water service.
   (C)   Failure to pay may result in discontinuation of service of utilities
in accordance with the current policies of the City of Bethany.
(Ord. 1767, passed 6-20-06; Am. Ord. 1865, passed 8-21-12)
§ 54.03  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or
reduce the pollution of waters of the state.  BMPs also include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control runoff, spillage
or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
   CONSTRUCTION SITE OPERATOR.  The party or parties that meet one or more of
the following descriptions: (1) has operational control over construction plans
and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans
and specifications or; (2) has day-to-day operational control of those
activities at a project that are necessary to ensure compliance with a
stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions
(e.g., they are authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities
required by the SWP3 or comply with other permit conditions).
   CONTROL MEASURE.  As used refers to any Best Management Practice or other
method used to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
state.
   CWA or THE ACT.  The Clean Water Act (formerly referred to as the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments
of 1972).
   DIRECTOR.  The Executive Director or Chief Administrator of the Department
of Environmental Quality or an authorized representative.
   DISCHARGE.  When used without a qualifier, refers to "discharge of a
pollutant" as defined at 40 CFR § 122.2.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION.  Any man-made conveyance connecting an illicit discharge
directly to a municipal separate storm sewer.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE.  Defined at 40 CFR § 122.26(b)(2) and refers to any
discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer that is not entirely composed of
stormwater, except discharges authorized under an OPDES or NPDES permit (other
than the OPDES permit for discharges from the MS4) and discharges resulting
from fire-fighting activities.
   INFALL.  A place where stormwater from another MS4 enters our city limits.
   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY.  Refers to any land change which may result in
soil erosion from water and wind and the movement of sediments into community
waters or onto lands and roadways within the community, including, but not
limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, storing,
stockpiling, mining, disposing, and filling of soil, earthen materials, or
land.
   LAND DISTURBING PERMIT.  Required for development activities on parcels over
one acre in size that have the potential to become stormwater program
violations.
   MEP.  An acronym for "Maximum Extent Practicable," the technology-based
discharge standard for municipal separate storm sewer systems to reduce
pollutants in stormwater discharges that was established by CWA § 402(P).  A
discussion of MEP as it applies to MS4s is found at 40 CFR § 122.34.
   MS4.  An acronym for "Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System" and is used to
refer to either a large, medium, or small municipal separate storm sewer
system.  The term is used to refer to either the system operated by a single
entity or a group of systems within an area that are operated by multiple
entities (e.g., the Oklahoma City MS4 includes MS4s operated by Oklahoma City,
the Oklahoma Department of Transportation, and others).
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM.  Defined at 40 CFR § 122.26(b)(8) and
means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains): (i) owned or operated by a state, city, town,
borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created
by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage,
industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts
under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage
district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal
organization, or a designated and approved management agency under § 208 of the
CWA that discharges to waters of the United States; (ii) designed or used for
collecting or conveying stormwater; (iii) which is not a combined sewer; and
(iv) which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined at
40 CFR § 122.2.
   NOI.  An acronym for "Notice of Intent" to be covered by this permit and is
the mechanism used to register for coverage under a general permit.
   NPDES.  An acronym for National Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
   OPDES.  An acronym for Oklahoma Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
   OUTFALL.  A place where stormwater from our MS4 leaves the Bethany city
limits.
   RECHARGE AREA.  An area where stormwater drains into groundwater and
resurfaces as a spring or flows to a well.
   STORMWATER.  Defined at 40 CFR § 122.26(b)(13) and means stormwater runoff,
snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.  Refers to a comprehensive program to manage
the quality of stormwater discharged from the municipal separate storm sewer
system.
   SWMP.  An acronym for "Stormwater Management Program".
   SWP3.  An acronym for Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.
   WATERSHED.  Area of land that drains to a river or lake.
(Ord. 1865, passed 8-21-12)
§ 54.04  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to establish stormwater management
program in order to regulate discharges to the city's stormwater drainage
system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. 
This section establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants
into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with
requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES)
permit requirements.  The objectives of this section are:
      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system by stormwater discharges by any person;
      (2)   To control the introduction to the municipal separate storm sewer
system of spills, dumping, or the disposal of materials other than stormwater;
      (3)   To prohibit illicit connections and illicit discharges to the
municipal separate storm sewer system;
      (4)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to determine compliance and
noncompliance with this part;
      (5)   To establish procedures for enforcement of this chapter;
      (6)   To establish abatement and remediation procedures for this chapter;
and
      (7)   To establish penalties for non- compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   The intent of the program is to address regulations of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) which recognizes stormwater runoff to be
one of the major contributors to water pollution worldwide.
(Ord. 1865, passed 8-21-12)
§ 54.05  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The City Manager shall have executive authority for the implementation
and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and he or she may delegate
all or part of the authority to the stormwater program manager, administrator,
enforcement official and/or building inspector or other municipal employee.
   (B)   The standards and forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this
chapter are minimum standards; therefore this not does intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. 1865, passed 8-21-12)
§ 54.06  APPLICABILITY AND RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the stormwater drainage
system generated on any developed or undeveloped land within the city limits
unless explicitly exempted by the city.
   (B)   While the city does not own all drainage facilities within its
jurisdiction, it does own or control a sufficiently comprehensive system in
each of the major drainage basins so as to make a unified approach to
stormwater drainage issues a desirable and achievable goal.  When any new
drainage control facility is installed on private property, or when any new
connection is made between private property and a public drainage control
system, the property owner shall grant to the city the right to enter the
property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of
inspection and maintenance.
   (C)   The administrator shall be permitted to enter facilities, premises,
watercourses and waterways subject to regulation under this chapter for the
purpose of observing, measuring, sampling, testing and inspecting as often as
may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.  If a discharger
has security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the
necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives for the authorized
enforcement agency.
   (D)   The administrator shall have the right to establish on any site such
devices that are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency
to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
If the administrator has been refused access to any part of the premises from
which stormwater is discharged and the city is able to demonstrate probable
cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter or that there is
a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the
community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court
of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1865, passed 8-21-12)
§ 54.07  CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   General performance standards.  Any person subject to a construction
activity NPDES and/or OPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all
provisions of the permits.  Proof of compliance with the permits may be
required in a form acceptable to the administrator prior to the allowing of
discharges to the MS4.  All construction activities including, but not limited
to, the development, excavation, clearing, grading, re-grading, paving,
landfilling, berming, and diking of land shall be conducted in a manner as to
minimize erosion and prevent the discharge of pollutants, including, but not
limited to, rock, sand, soil, discarded building materials, concrete truck
washout, chemicals, litter and sanitary waste into the city municipal separate
storm sewer system.  Persons conducting the construction shall implement and
maintain adequate structural and/or nonstructural BMPs for controlling erosion
and preventing the discharge of pollutants to the MS4.
   (B)   Responsible person.  The person with overall responsibility of the
construction such as the general contractor shall be jointly responsible with
the person at whose direction the construction is being conducted for
compliance.
   (C)   Record keeping.  The person or persons responsible shall retain and
make available to the building inspector, code enforcement officer or the
stormwater program manager for inspection and copying, all records and
information required to be retained under this section or order issued
hereunder.
   (D)   Permitting purpose.  The purpose of permitting is to protect urban
streams from sediment pollution by obtaining and reviewing proposed sediment
and erosion control plans for major construction activities and to monitor all
land disturbing activities.
   (E)   Land disturbing permit.
      (1)   Applicability.  Unless specifically exempted, a land disturbing
permit, as defined and regulated by this chapter, shall be obtained from the
building inspector for any construction activities causing land disturbance on
parcels over an acre in size within the city limits.  The land disturbing
permit must be obtained prior to commencement of any construction activities
including, but not limited to, any development excavation, clearing, grading,
regarding, landfilling, berming, and diking of land. The applicant is expected
to keep sediment on the site.
      (2)   Application for a land disturbing permit.  For each land disturbing
permit, a written application from the owner of the site, or his or her
authorized representative, shall be provided to the building inspector and
submitted with the required land disturbing permit fee.
      (3)   Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3) or sediment and erosion
control plan requirements.  For every construction site over an acre unless
otherwise exempted, an SWP3 plan shall be prepared and shall include sufficient
information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the affected
areas, the potential impacts of the proposed construction activities on water
resources and the best management practices and other measures proposed to
minimize soil erosion and prevent off-site sedimentation.  All sediment and
erosion control measures must be properly selected, installed, and maintained
in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and good engineering
practices.  All construction activities including, but not limited to the
development, excavation, clearing, grading, landfilling, berming and diking of
land shall be performed in accordance with the approved plan.
      (4)   A copy of all required state and federal stormwater discharge
permits for the construction site shall be posted on site with the building
permit.
      (5)   Permit duration.  The permittee shall fully perform and complete
all of the work required in the sequence shown on the plans.  Permits issued
under this section shall be valid for the period during which the proposed land
disturbing or filling activities and soil storage takes place or is scheduled
to take place, whichever is shorter, but in no event shall such a permit be
valid for more than one year after cessation of construction activity.
      (6)   Responsibility of permittee.  The permittee shall maintain a copy
of the construction site stormwater discharge permit, approved site plan and
other applicable paperwork on the work site and available for public inspection
during all working hours.  The permittee shall, at all times, be in conformity
with the approved stormwater pollution prevention plan.
      (7)   General.  Notwithstanding other conditions or provisions of the
construction site, stormwater discharge permit, approved site plan and other
applicable paperwork on the work site and available for public inspection
during all working hours.
      (8)   Public ways.  The permittee shall be responsible for the prompt
removal of, and correction of damages resulting from any soil, miscellaneous
debris or other materials washed, spilled, tracked, dumped or otherwise
deposited on public streets, highways, sidewalks or other public thoroughfares,
during transit to and from the construction site; and
      (9)   Liability.  The permittee is responsible for safely and legally
completing the project.  Neither the issuance of a land disturbing permit under
the provisions of this section, nor compliance with the provisions of this
section, nor compliance with the provisions hereto or with any condition
imposed by the city, shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to
persons or property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor
impose any liability upon the city for damages to persons or property.
      (10)   Inspection and supervision.  The city shall conduct construction
site inspections upon receiving a complaint of violation of this section or
otherwise as needed to evaluate compliance with this section.
      (11)   Maintenance during and after construction.  For any property on
which grading or other work has been done pursuant to a construction site
stormwater discharge permit granted under the provisions of this section, the
permittee or owner or an agent of the owner shall inspect all sediment and
erosion control measures and other protective measures identified in the SWP3
at least once every 14 calendar days and within 24 days of the end of a storm
event of one-half inch or greater and shall maintain and repair all sediment
and erosion control measures, graded surfaces and erosion control facilities,
drainage structures or means and other protective devices, plantings, and
ground cover installed while construction is active.
(Ord. 1865, passed 8-21-12)
§ 54.08  PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Permit will be required to facilitate the effectiveness of the
stormwater management program. Permit fees are as follows.
   (B)   Land disturbing permit fees:
      (1)   For all sites less than five acres in size: $50.
      (2)   For all sites equal to or greater than five and less than ten acres
in size: $75.
      (3)   For sites equal to or greater than ten acres in size: $100.
(Ord. 1865, passed 8-21-12)
§ 54.09  POST CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
   To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff, the city has adopted a
set of performance standards that must be met after development.
   (A)   Maintenance after construction.  After construction is complete, their
owner or their agent shall take measures to apply and establish adequate ground
cover to ensure that the erosion on the site is stabilized and not contributing
to polluted runoff.
   (B)   Inspections after construction.  After construction is complete, the
owner or their agent shall continue to regularly inspect the vegetation until
adequate turf establishment or other suitable vegetative cover is established.
   (C)   Drainage control facilities.  Drainage control facilities such as
detention and retention ponds shall be maintained by the property owner or by
the designated property owners’ association.  When any new drainage control
facility is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made
between private property and a public drainage control system, the property
owner shall grant to the city the right to enter the property at reasonable
times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection.  Failure to
maintain drainage facilities may result in abatement procedures, if deemed a
public nuisance.
   (D)   Waterway maintenance.  Every person owning property though which a
watercourse passes shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris and other obstacles that may pollute,
contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse.  In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that the
structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity
of the watercourse.
(Ord. 1865, passed 8-21-12)
§ 54.10  ILLICIT DISCHRAGES.
   (A)   Allowable and occasional incidental discharges.
      (1)   The following non-storm water sources are allowed and which the
city has determined not to be substantial contributors of pollutants to the
MS4:
         (a)   Water line flushing;
         (b)   Landscape irrigation;
         (c)   Diverted stream flows;
         (d)   Rising ground waters;
         (e)   Residential building wash water without detergents;
         (f)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
         (g)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration;
         (h)   Discharges from potable water sources;
         (i)   Foundation drains;
         (j)   Air conditioning condensate;
         (k)   Irrigation water;
         (l)   Springs;
         (m)   Water from crawl space pumps;
         (n)   Footing drains;
         (o)   Lawn watering;
         (p)   Individual residential car washing;
         (q)   De-chlorinated swimming pool discharges;
         (r)   Street wash water;
         (s)   Fire hydrant flushings;
         (t)   Non-commercial or charity car washes;
         (u)   Discharges from riparian areas and wetlands;
         (v)   Discharges in compliance with a separate Oklahoma Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (OPDES) or National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit; and
         (w)   Discharges or flows from emergency fire-fighting activities
provided that the Incident Commander, Fire Chief or other on-scene fire-
fighting official in charge makes an evaluation regarding potential releases of
pollutants from the scene.  Measures will be taken to reduce any pollutant
releases to the maximum extent practicable subject to all appropriate actions
necessary for public health and safety.
      (2)   Any discharge that has a current NPDES discharge permit with ODEQ
shall be an allowable discharge with the following exceptions:
         (a)   A discharge that results in the city violating its MS4 permit;
         (b)   A discharge the Director determines causes contamination of
surface water, stormwater or groundwater within the city; or
         (c)   A discharge that could block or damage the MS4.
      (3)   Other types of discharges determined allowable by the Director.
   (B)   Prohibited discharges.  No person shall discharge to a MS4 conveyance,
water body, directly or indirectly, any substance other than stormwater or an
exempted discharge.  Any person discharging stormwater shall effectively
prevent pollutants from also being discharged with the stormwater, through the
use of best management practices (BMPs), except as permitted in §
54.10(A).
      (1)   It is a violation for any person to improperly dispose of any
contaminant into the MS4.  Contaminants include, but ane not limited to the
following:
         (a)   Trash or debris;
         (b)   Petroleum products, including but not limited to oil, gasoline,
grease, fuel oil or hydraulic fluids;
         (c)   Antifreeze and other automotive products;
         (d)   Metals in either particulate or dissolved form;
         (e)   Flammable or explosive materials;
         (f)   Batteries;
         (g)   Paints, stains, resins, lacquers or varnishes;
         (h)   Pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers;
         (i)   Soaps, detergents or wastewater containing the like;
         (j)   Heated water or steam cleaning wastes;
         (k)   Animal waste or animal carcasses;
         (l)   Leaking sanitary sewers and connections;
         (m)   Recreational vehicle waste;
         (n)   Medical wastes;
         (o)   Collected or loose lawn clippings, leaves or branches;
         (p)   Silt, sediment or gravel;
         (q)   Washing of fresh concrete residue;
         (r)   Junk motor vehicles;
         (s)   Wastewater from the cleaning of fueling stations, auto repair
garages or other types of auto repair facilities;
         (t)   Wastewater from mobile auto washing, steam cleaning, mobile
carpet cleaning, and other mobile commercial and industrial operations;
         (u)   Discharge from the washing or rinsing of restaurant mats, roof
vents, grease traps, garbage bins or cans in such a manner that causes non-
storm water to enter the storm drain system;
         (v)   Any hazardous material or waste not listed above;
         (w)   Any spilled pollutants, unless it can be demonstrated that
failure to allow the discharge will result in a great peril or hazard to the
life, health, welfare, or safety of the public; and
         (x)   Any material that is disposed of in a manner to cause pollutants
to be discharged.
      (2)   It is a violation for any person to place, store or locate any
material in a manner that causes pollutants to be unreasonably transported by
usual atmospheric conditions into the city’s MS4.
      (3)   Storage or stockpiling of hazardous or toxic material within any
drainage way, or in its associated floodway or floodplain, is strictly
prohibited.  Storage or stockpiling of hazardous or toxic  material on active
construction sites must include adequate protection and/or containment so as to
prevent any materials from entering any temporary or permanent stormwater
conveyance or drainage way.
      (4)   Spills that have the potential to enter or have entered the city’s
MS4 shall be contained, and remediation activity will be implemented which will
consists of deploying absorbents, chemical neutralizers and/or booms and water
skimmers to contain, neutralize and/or remove the chemicals.  Remediation
activities shall be the responsibility of the offending party.
(Ord. 1865, passed 8-21-12)
§ 54.11  ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Action for non-compliance on construction and demolition sites:
      (1)   Stop work order.  If the city finds any existing condition not as
stated in the application, SWP3, or approved plans, the administrator may issue
a stop work order requiring that all construction activities halt when a
construction site is in violation of this section.  The stop work order may
apply to all construction activity on the subject property which may be
directly or indirectly related to site drainage and which is being performed
pursuant to any permits, licenses, franchises or contracts issued or approved
by the city.  The stop work order may order a work stoppage on all construction
activity on buildings or structures and appurtenances thereto, including, but
not limited to, building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, street work, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, gas lines, and all utilities including, but not
limited to, gas, electric, telephone and cable television.  The administrator
may also suspend or revoke any sediment and erosion control, site preparation,
grading, earth change, construction or any other permit when any part of this
section is violated.  A stop work order may be accompanied with a notice of
violation.
      (2)   Notice of violation.  In the event work does not conform to the
plans and specifications or to any conditions imposed by the city, a notice of
violation shall be given to the permittee in writing. The notice shall set
forth a notification and compliance period for the permittee to comply with the
requirements of the notice, except that when an imminent hazard exists the
administrator may require that corrective work begin immediately.  The
administrator may order an immediate abatement action to abate the violation. 
The notice shall further advise that should the permittee fail to comply with
the requirements of the notice by the established deadline, the work necessary
to achieve compliance may be done by the city or by a designated contractor and
the expense thereof shall be charged to the permittee. Issuance of a notice to
comply shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other enforcement action.
      (3)   Fines.  The violation of any provision of this section, upon
conviction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or up to 30 days
in jail or both plus court costs as set by the city.  Each day or any portion
of a day during which any violation of this section shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
      (4)   Other actions.  Other actions may be taken by the city, including,
but not limited to, suspension of MS4 access, suspension of licenses and future
permits, water supply severance, injunctive relief, abatement, remediation, and
restoration of lands.  The permittee shall be responsible for the costs
incurred by the city.  Failure to pay will result in the city seeking recovery
of costs and damages pursuant to the conditions set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Action for illicit discharges and illegal connections:
      (1)   Notice of violation.  Whenever the city finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this part, the
administrator may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person.  The notice shall set forth a notification and compliance
period for the permittee to comply with the requirements of the notice, except
that when an imminent hazard exists the administrator may require that
corrective work begin immediately. The administrator may order an immediate
abatement action to abate the violation.  The notice shall further advise that
should the permittee fail to comply with the requirements of the notice by the
established deadline, the work necessary to achieve compliance may be done by
the city or by a designated contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged
to the permittee. Issuance of a notice to comply shall not be a prerequisite to
taking any other enforcement action.
      (2)   Fines.  The violation of any provisions of this section, upon
conviction, may be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or up to 30 days in
jail or both plus court costs as set by the city.  Each day or any portion of a
day during which any violation of this section shall continue shall constitute
a separate offense.
      (3)   Other actions.  Other actions may be taken by the city, including,
but not limited to, suspension of MS4 access, water supply severance,
injunctive relief, abatement, remediation, and restoration of lands.  The
permittee shall be responsible for the costs incurred by the city.  Failure to
pay will result in the city seeking recovery of costs and damages pursuant to
the conditions set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   Violations deemed a public nuisance.  Any violation of this chapter
may be deemed a public nuisance.  The administrator may authorize abatement
actions to protect public health, safety, and welfare.  Authorization of an
abatement action shall grant agents of the city or a designated contractor the
right to enter upon the subject property to perform the required abatement
work.  In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this part may be deemed a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated or restored at the violator’s
expense, and/or civil action to abate or otherwise compel the cessation of the
nuisance may be taken.
      (1)   Abatement, remediation and restoration:
         (a)   The city has the power to define and abate nuisances within its
corporate limits for the protection of the public health, protection of public
resources, and the public water supply inside or outside of its corporate
limits.  Public nuisances will be abated in accordance with the procedures
established in Title IX: General Regulations:
Chapter 93, Health and Sanitation Nuisances.
         (b)   In the event that the city conduct abatement, restoration,
remediation, or other ordered work, the city may file a notice of lien with the
County Clerk describing the property and stating that the city claims a lien on
the property for the abatement, restoration, or remediation costs and that the
costs are the personal obligation of the property owner.
         (c)   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the
requirements and within the time period set forth in the notice of violation,
then agents of the city or a designated contractor are authorized to enter upon
the subject property to perform the required abatement, restoration,
remediation, or other ordered work.
         (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in
possession of any premises to refuse to allow the authorized enforcement agency
or designated contractor to enter the premises for the purposes set forth
above.
         (e)   Demand for payment, liens, and certified statements of cost. 
After abatement, restoration, or remediation of a violation has occurred, the
administrator shall determine the actual cost of the abatement, restoration, or
remediation and any other expenses as may be necessary in connection therewith,
including, but not limited to, sampling and field testing costs, laboratory
costs, and the cost of the notice and mailing.  The city shall forward by mail
to the property owner a statement of the actual cost and demanding payment. If
the amount due is not paid within 30 days from the date of mailing of the
statement, the city shall forward a certified statement of the amount of cost
to the county treasurer of the county in which the property is located, and the
same shall be levied on the property and collected by the county treasurer and
shall continue until the cost shall be fully paid. Any person violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city by reason of the
violation. At any time prior to the collection as provided herein, the city may
pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest
thereon.
      (f)   Appeals.  The property owner and/or mortgage holder shall have a
right to appeal to the City Council from any order of abatement.  The appeal
shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within
ten days after the abatement order is rendered.
   (D)   Access to the MS4 may be suspended.
      (1)   The administrator may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
MS4 or waters of the state.  If the violator fails to comply with a suspension
order issued in an emergency, the administrator may take steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the state, or
to minimize danger to persons or property.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this chapter, without the prior approval of the
administrator.
   (F)   Restoration of lands.  Any violator may be required to restore land to
its undisturbed condition.  In the event that restoration is not undertaken
within a reasonable time after notice, the city may take necessary corrective
action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid.
   (G)   Injunctive relief.  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.  If a
person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the
city may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the
person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the
person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.  Furthermore, the
city can suspend licenses and permits when a violator has not corrected an
offense or has not paid a fine for an act that has resulted in an illicit
discharge.
   (H)   Major actions deemed criminal offenses.  The city may seek the
assistance of other agencies not limited to the Oklahoma Department of
Environmental Quality, the Environmental Protection Agency, or District
Attorney's Office whenever a complaint or finding related to a stormwater
incident could be considered an environmental criminal offense.
(Ord. 1865, passed 8-21-12)
CHAPTER 55:  EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
Section
   
55.01   Legislative findings
   
55.02   Monthly emergency service utility service charge
Cross-reference:
   Emergency Medical Services, see
Ch. 39
§ 55.01  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   The City Council of the City of Bethany, Oklahoma, makes the following
findings in consideration and adoption of this chapter:
   (A)   The City of Bethany is financially unable to provide ambulance and
emergency medical services for its citizens, and as a result of financial
shortfall has contracted with the Emergency Management Services Agency (EMSA)
to provide such services to the citizens of Bethany, Oklahoma.
   (B)   The contract for such services has a monetary cost to the City of
Bethany to make these services available to its citizens which meets the need
of prompt, efficient, and professional emergency medical treatment and
transport as required by Bethany citizens. The provision of such service is a
matter affecting the public health and safety of the citizens of the City of
Bethany, and is hereby declared to be a public utility subject to a recurring
availability use charge.
   (C)   A monthly public safety and health utility service charge should be
paid by each utility unit customer in the City of Bethany to defray the cost of
making this vital service available.
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-20-06)
§ 55.02  MONTHLY EMERGENCY SERVICE UTILITY SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   A monthly utility service charge of $1.50 per month for each utility
unit within the corporate limits of the City of Bethany, Oklahoma, is hereby
imposed, payable in advance, commencing on July 1, 2006. The amount of this fee
may be amended from time to time by resolution adopted by the City Council of
the City of Bethany.
   (B)   The monthly service charge for public safety utility service charge
shall be charged on the same classification as water and sewer services, i.e.,
multiple-dwelling units shall pay based upon the number of dwelling units
multiplied by the emergency service authority service fee, etc.
(Ord. 1766, passed 6-20-06)
TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   BICYCLES
      
74.   PEDESTRIANS
CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.001   Citation of code
   
70.002   Definitions
   
70.003   Traffic code controlling
   
70.004   Drivers of government vehicles; applicability
   
70.005   Authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.006   Pushcarts or animal-drawn vehicles
   
70.007   Jurisdiction on boundary lines, streets and roads
   
70.008   Increased fines under certain circumstances
Accidents
   
70.020   Duties imposed on drivers
   
70.021   Notification to police
   
70.022   Written accident reports; confidentiality
   
70.023   Accidents on private property
   
70.024   Proof of liability insurance coverage
Enforcement
   
70.035   Enforcement of traffic laws; establishment of Traffic-Control Division
   
70.036   Direction of traffic by hand or voice
   
70.037   Direction of traffic by unauthorized persons
   
70.038   Obedience to police and fire officials
   
70.039   Issuance of citation tags
   
70.040   Citation of moving vehicle
   
70.041   Eluding police officer prohibited
   
70.042   Citations at accidents
   
70.043   Arrest of non-residents
   
70.044   Bail upon deposit of license
   
70.045   Violating promise to appear
   
70.046   Citation of illegal parking violations
   
70.047   Failure to comply with traffic citations attached to parked vehicle
   
70.048   Official traffic-control devices; enforcement purposes
   
70.049   Disposition; records of citations, warrants and complaints
   
70.050   Illegal cancellation of traffic citations
Traffic-Control Devices; Authority
   
70.060   Traffic-control devices; uniform requirements
   
70.061   Traffic-control device locations
   
70.062   Specific traffic-control devices
   
70.063   Specific speed limits
   
70.064   Change of speed limits
   
70.065   Designation of restricted turns
   
70.066   Specific restricted turns
   
70.067   Traffic lane markings
   
70.068   Off-set street center lines
   
70.069   Change of street direction
   
70.070   One-way roadways
   
70.071   No passing zones
   
70.072   Meaning of traffic-control signal indicators
   
70.073   Flashing signals
   
70.074   Hazardous or congested places; restrictions
   
70.075   Schedule of through streets
   
70.076   Through streets; authority of Traffic Engineer to install stop signs
   
70.077   Intersections where stop required
   
70.078   Parking time limit signs required
   
70.079   Designation of curb loading zones and public carrier stops
   
70.080   Weight restrictions
   
70.081   Pedestrians; signal indicators; regulations
   
70.082   Crosswalk markings
   
70.083   Mid-block pedestrian crossings
   
70.084   Unauthorized traffic-control devices prohibited
   
70.085   Defacement of traffic-control devices
Equipment
   
70.095   Equipment of unsafe condition; inspection
   
70.096   License tag displayed
   
70.097   Head lamps and stop lights
   
70.098   Lights; regulations and restrictions
   
70.099   Red lens; head lamp
   
70.100   Mechanical signal devices permitted
   
70.101   Steering mechanism
   
70.102   Brakes
   
70.103   Tires
   
70.104   Windshield and windows
   
70.105   Certain window tints prohibited; definitions
   
70.106   Mirrors
   
70.107   Exhaust pipes
   
70.108   Horn or warning device
   
70.109   Bells and sirens
   
70.110   Trailer regulations
   
70.111   Required equipment for motorcycles and motor scooters
   
70.112   Headgear
   
70.113   Safety seat belt systems required
   
70.114   Child restraint systems required
Impoundment Procedures
   
70.125   Purpose and effect
   
70.126   Authority to impound vehicles
   
70.127   Derelict/disabled vehicles
   
70.128   Vehicles on bridges
   
70.129   Vehicles constituting traffic hazards
   
70.130   Illegal trespass
   
70.131   Vehicles parked in a prohibited zone
   
70.132   Vehicles blocking fire exits or hydrants
   
70.133   Vehicles parked in intersections
   
70.134   Stolen vehicles; recovery by police
   
70.135   Arrest and detention of driver
   
70.136   Place of impoundment
   
70.137   Impoundment
   
70.138   Seized and impounded vehicle storage
   
70.139   Duration; release; impound fee
   
70.140   Redemption of impounded vehicle
State Law Adopted by Reference
   
70.150   State motor vehicle code for misdemeanor violations
 
   
70.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.001  CITATION OF CODE.
   This title and all amendments hereto may be cited or referred to as the
“traffic code,” and may so appear upon all official documents, records or
instruments.
(Prior Code, § 16-101)
§ 70.002  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this traffic code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY.  Any narrow highway ordinarily located in the interior portion of
platted blocks and ordinarily used for service or delivery purposes at the rear
of stores, dwellings or buildings.
   AMBULANCE.  A motor vehicle constructed, reconstructed or arranged for the
purpose of transporting ill, sick or injured persons.
   BICYCLE. 
 
      (1) A BICYCLE is any device propelled solely by human power upon which
any person or persons may ride, having a seat or saddle for the use of each
rider, and:
         (a)   On a bicycle, two tandem wheels, either of which is 20 inches or
more in diameter;
         (b)   On a tricycle, three wheels in any configuration, of which at
least one is 20 inches or more in diameter; or
         (c)   On a quadcycle, four wheels in any configuration, of which at
least two are 20 inches or more in diameter.
The wheel diameter provisions of this definition shall not apply to recumbent
bicycles.
      (2)   An ELECTRIC-ASSISTED BICYCLE is any bicycle with:
         (a)   Two or three wheels;
         (b)   Fully operative pedals for human propulsion and equipped with an
electric motor:
            1.   With a power output not to exceed 1,000 watts;
            2.   Incapable of propelling the device at a speed of more than 20
miles per hour on level ground; and
            3.   Incapable of further increasing the speed of the device when
human power alone is used to propel the device at a speed of 20 miles per hour
or more.
An ELECTRIC-ASSISTED BICYCLE shall meet the requirements of the Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standards as set forth in federal regulations, and shall operate
in such a manner that the electric motor disengages or ceases to function when
the brakes are applied.
      (3)   A MOTORIZED BICYCLE is any bicycle having:
         (a)   Fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power;
         (b)   An automatic transmission; and
         (c)   A combustion engine with a piston or rotor displacement of 50
cubic centimeters or less,
regardless of the number of chambers in the engine, which is capable of
propelling the bicycle at a maximum design speed of not more than 30 miles per
hour on level ground.
      (4)   As used in this title, the term BICYCLE shall include tricycles,
quadcycles, or similar human- powered devices, electric-assisted bicycles, and
motorized bicycles, unless otherwise specifically indicated.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to, and including a highway if
there are  buildings within 600 feet of the highway in use for business or
industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks or office
buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
   CENTER LANE.
      (1)   Any clearly marked center lane.
      (2)   If the center lane is not marked and no cars are parked on the
roadway, then the center lane is equally distanced between the curbs or
traveled portion of the roadway.  In the event a vehicle or vehicles are parked
on one side of the roadway only, then the center lane is equally distanced from
the side of the parked vehicle or vehicles toward the street and curb on the
opposite roadway.  If vehicles be parked on each side of the roadway, then the
center lane is equally distanced from the edges of the parked vehicles.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.  Every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily
for the transportation of property.
   CROSSWALK.  The part of a roadway at an intersection, included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
street, measured from the curbs; or in the absence of curbs from the edges of
the traversable roadway.  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface.
   DOUBLE PARK.  Parking or stopping a vehicle on the roadway side of another
vehicle already parked adjacent to the edge or curbing of the roadway.
   DRIVER or OPERATOR.  A person who drives or is in actual physical control of
a vehicle.
   ELECTRIC-ASSISTED BICYCLE. See BICYCLE.
   EMERGENCY.  An unforeseeable occurrence of temporary duration causing or
resulting in abnormal increase in traffic volume, cessation or stoppage of
traffic movement or creation of conditions hazardous to normal traffic
movement, including fire, storm, accident, riot or spontaneous assembly of
large numbers of pedestrians in a manner as to impede the flow of traffic.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  Vehicles of the Fire and Police Departments and legally
authorized ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public
service corporations.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadway
of two streets, which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles,
or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets join at any
other angle, may come in conflict; or
      (2)   Where a street includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of the divided street by an intersecting street,
shall be regarded as a separate intersection.  In the event the intersecting
street also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of
two roadways of the streets shall be regarded as separate intersections.
   LANED ROADWAY.  A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY.  A highway, street or roadway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no
legal right of access, except at the points and in the manner as may be
determined by the  public authority having jurisdiction over the highway,
street or roadway.
   LIMIT LINES.  Boundaries of parking areas, loading zones and non-traffic
areas and lines indicating the proper place for stopping where stops are
required.
   LOADING ZONE.  A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or material.
   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE.  Any motor vehicle having:
      (1)   A power source that:
         (a)   If the power source is a combustion engine, has a piston or
rotor displacement of greater than 35 cubic centimeters but less than 150 cubic
centimeters regardless of the number of chambers in the power source;
         (b)   If the power source is electric, has a power output of greater
than 1,000 watts; and
      (2)   A seat or saddle for the use of each rider;
      (3)   Not more than three wheels in contact with the ground.
A MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE requires a driver’s license of proper class with
endorsement.
   MOTORCYCLE.  Any motor vehicle having:
      (1)   A seat or saddle for the use of each rider;
      (2)   Not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but
excluding a tractor; and
      (3)    A combustion engine with a piston or rotor displacement of greater
than 150 cubic centimeters.
   MOTORIZED BICYCLE.  See BICYCLE.
   MOTORIZED SCOOTER.  Any vehicle having:
      (1)   Not more than three wheels in contact with the ground;
      (2)   Handlebars and a foot support or seat for the use of the operator;
      (3)   A power source that is capable of propelling the vehicle at a
maximum design speed of not more than 25 miles per hour on level ground; and
         (a)   If the power source is a combustion engine, has a piston or
rotor displacement of 35 cubic centimeters or less regardless of the number of
chambers in the power source;
         (b)   If the power source is electric, has a power output of not more
than 1,000 watts.
For the purpose of this section, an electric personal assistive mobility
device, bicycle, electric-assisted bicycle, or motorized bicycle, as defined in
this section, shall not be considered a MOTORIZED SCOOTER.  A motorized scooter
shall not be required to be registered under the laws of this state.  The
operator of a motorized scooter shall not be required to possess a driver’s
license or to comply with the vehicle insurance or financial responsibility
laws of this state.
   OFFICIAL TIME.  Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean
Central Standard Time or Daylight Savings Time, as may be in current use in the
city.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE.  All signs, signals, markings and devices
not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of a public
body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or
guiding traffic.
   PARK or PARKING.  The standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers providing the loading and
unloading is in an authorized place.
   PEDESTRIAN.  Any person afoot.
   POLICE OFFICER.  Every officer of the Municipal Department, any officer
authorized to direct
or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violation of traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR ROADWAY.  A way or place in private ownership or leading to
property in private ownership and used for vehicular traffic by the owner and
those having express or implied permission from the owner.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under the
circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
   ROADWAY.  The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulders.  In the event a street includes
two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY, as used herein, shall refer to
any roadway, separately, but not to all roadways, collectively.
   SAFETY ZONE.  The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for
the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times, while set
apart as a safety zone.
   SCHOOL ZONE.  All streets or portions of streets immediately adjacent to a
school or school ground, where same is adjacent and for a distance of 300 feet
in each direction.
   SIDEWALK.  The portion of a street between the curblines or at lateral lines
of the roadway and adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians.
   STANDING.  Any stopping of a vehicle whether occupied or not.
   STOP or STOPPING. 
      (1)   When required, the complete cessation from movement.
      (2)   When not required, any stopping of a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a
police officer or traffic signal.
   STREET or HIGHWAY.  The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is opened to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
   THROUGH STREET or HIGHWAY.  A street, boulevard or highway or portion
thereof at the entrances to which:
      (1)   Vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required
by law to come to a full stop before entering or crossing; and
      (2)   Stop signs are erected, as provided in this title.
   TRAFFIC.  Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances, either singularly or together, while using any highway or street
for the purpose of travel.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE.  Any device legally authorized and used for the
purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
   TRAFFIC ENGINEER.  Appointed by the City Manager and will be responsible for
all traffic-control devices, signs, signals and markings.
   U-TURN.  A turn by which a vehicle reverses its course of travel on the same
street.
   VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is, or
may be, transported or drawn upon a highway or street, except devices moved by
human power, not used exclusively upon streets, rails or tracks.
(Prior Code, § 16-102) (Am. Ord. 1737, passed 12-7-04)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions; definitions for State Motor Vehicle Code, see 47 O.S. §§
1-101 to 1-186
§ 70.003  TRAFFIC CODE CONTROLLING.
   Except as specifically provided by law as set forth in this title, the
traffic code shall be controlling in the use of city streets, alleys,
thoroughfares, parks, parkways or any other public right-of-way or municipally-
owned land, by pedestrians and by vehicles of every kind whether self-propelled
or otherwise and whether moving or at rest.
(Prior Code, § 16-103)
§ 70.004  DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES; APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned
by or used in the service of the United States Government, this and any other
state or any county or city subdivision thereof.  No driver of any vehicle
shall violate any of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise
permitted by law.
(Prior Code, § 16-104) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Municipal drivers to obey state rules of the road, see 47 O.S. § 16-103
§ 70.005  AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section and other provisions
of this title, but subject to the conditions herein stated.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits up to ten mph so long as he or
she does not endanger life or property; and  (The ten mph limitation shall not
be applicable to Police and Fire Department vehicles.)
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement in specified
directions.
   (C)   The exemptions granted in this section to an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when the driver sounds an audible signal by bell,
siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and displays at least
one lighted lamp emitting a red light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle.  An
authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped
with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall the provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(Prior Code, § 16-105)
Statutory reference:
   Emergency vehicle driving rules, see 47 O.S. § 11-106
§ 70.006  PUSHCARTS OR ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   Every person operating any pushcart or riding any animal upon a roadway, and
every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to provisions
of this title applicable to the driving of any vehicle, except the provisions
of this title which, by their very nature, would have no application.
(Prior Code, § 16-106)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-104
§ 70.007  JURISDICTION ON BOUNDARY LINES, STREETS AND ROADS.
   The provisions of this title shall apply and be in full force and effect on
every road, street or highway that forms the boundary lines of the city.
(Prior Code, § 16-107)  (Ord. 1424, passed 7-5-88)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 16-109.1
§ 70.008  INCREASED FINES UNDER CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES.
   The conviction of any person of a violation of this title when the offense
occurred during a period when the driving privileges of the person were under
suspension, revocation, cancellation, denial, or disqualification, or the
person had not been granted driving privileges by Oklahoma or any other state,
shall result in the doubling of the appropriate fine and doubling of all court
costs and all fees collected by the Court on behalf of any other entity unless
waived by the Court.
(Ord. 1804, passed 6-3-08)
   ACCIDENTS
§ 70.020  DUTIES IMPOSED ON DRIVERS.
   (A)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately
stop the vehicle at the scene of the accident or as close thereto as possible
and forthwith return to and, in every event, shall remain and shall give his or
her correct name, address and registration number of the vehicle he or she is
driving.
      (2)   Upon request, and if available, he or she shall exhibit his or her
operator's or chauffeur's license to the driver or person attending any vehicle
collided with, and, if requested, shall render reasonable assistance to any
injured person.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is
unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and
notify the operator or owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or
shall leave, in a conspicuous place in the vehicle, a written notice giving the
name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the
striking and a statement of the circumstances.
   (C)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a street shall
stop and take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in
charge of the property of the fact and of his or her name and address and the
registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving.
      (2)   Upon request, and if available, he or she shall exhibit his or her
operator's or chauffeur's license.
   (D)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in any
injury to a pedestrian or person shall stop and give his or her correct name,
address and registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving.  Upon
request, and if available, he or she shall exhibit his or her operator's or
chauffeur's license to the pedestrian or person injured or to any witness or
police officer at the scene of the accident, and, if requested, shall render
reasonable assistance to any injured persons.
(Prior Code, § 16-1301)
Statutory reference:
   Duty to give information, see 47 O.S. § 10-104
§ 70.021  NOTIFICATION TO POLICE.
   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person or property damage to an apparent extent of $100 or more,
shall:
   (A)   Immediately give notice of the accident to the Police Department; and
   (B)   (1)   Within five days after the accident, forward a written report of
the accident to the Police Department or a copy of the report required by the
state.
      (2)   This report shall not be required if the accident is investigated
at the scene by a police officer while the driver is present.
(Prior Code, § 16-1302)
Statutory reference:
   Notice of accident to police department; written reports; accidents over
$300, see 47 O.S. §§ 10-107 and 10-108
§ 70.022  WRITTEN ACCIDENT REPORTS; CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)   All written accident reports made by drivers, owners or occupants of
vehicles involved in accidents shall be without prejudice to the individual so
reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the Police Department or
other governmental agencies having use of the records for accident prevention
purposes.
   (B)   The Police Department may disclose the identity of a person involved
in an accident when the identity is not otherwise known or when a person denies
his or her presence at the accident.
   (C)   No report shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal,
arising out of an accident, except that the Police Department shall furnish
upon demand of any person who has, or claims to have, made a report or upon
demand of any court, a certificate showing that the specified accident report
has or has not been made to the Police Department solely to prove a compliance
or a failure to comply with the requirements that a report be made to the
Department.
(Prior Code, § 16-1303)
Statutory reference:
   Public inspection of accident reports, see 47 O.S. § 10-115
§ 70.023  ACCIDENTS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   Police officers shall investigate accidents on private property where the
public is invited.
(Prior Code, § 16-1304)
§ 70.024  PROOF OF LIABILITY INSURANCE COVERAGE.
   (A)   Every owner of a motor vehicle registered in the state shall carry in
a vehicle, at all times, a current and valid owner's security verification
form, as defined in 47 O.S. § 7-601.1, listing the vehicle or a current and
valid equivalent form which has been issued by the Department of Public Safety,
which shall be produced by any driver thereof upon request for inspection by
any law enforcement officer, and in case of collision, the form shall be shown
upon request to any person affected by the collision.  (Prior Code, § 16-1305)
   (B)   Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in the state shall, while
operating or using the vehicle, carry either a current and valid operator's or
a current and valid owner's verification form, as defined in 47 O.S. § 7-601.1,
issued by an insurance carrier, providing the operator is not excluded from
coverage thereon, or an equivalent form issued by the Department of Public
Safety reflecting liability coverage.  (Prior Code, § 16-1306)
   (C)   The following shall not be required to carry an owner's or operator's
security verification form or an equivalent form issued by the Department of
Public Safety:
      (1)   Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government or
any agency or political subdivision thereof;
      (2)   Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of the business,
corporation or utility on the exterior, and which is in compliance with the
Compulsory Insurance Law according to the records of the Department of Public
Safety, which reflect a deposit, bond, self-insurance or fleet policy;
      (3)   Any vehicle authorized for operation under a permit number issued
by the Interstate Commerce Commission or State Corporation Commission;
      (4)   Any licensed taxicab; and
      (5)   Any vehicle owned by a licensed used motor vehicle dealer.
(Prior Code, § 16-1307)
   (D)   (1)   Any owner or operator who fails to produce for inspection a
valid and current security verification form or equivalent form which has been
issued by the Department of Public Safety upon request of any police officer,
or other authorized person, shall be guilty of an offense.
      (2)   Any person producing proof in Court that a current security
verification form or equivalent form, which has been issued by the Department
of Public Safety, reflecting liability coverage for the person was in force at
the time of the alleged offense, shall be entitled to dismissal of the charge
upon payment of court costs.
(Prior Code, § 16-1308)
   (E)   A police officer, to establish compliance with the Compulsory
Insurance Law during a traffic stop or accident investigation, shall access
information from the online verification system to verify the current validity
of the policy described on a security verification form produced by the
operator of each motor vehicle during the traffic stop or accident
investigation.  If compliance is not confirmed for the policy described on the
security verification form produced by the operator and a subsequent
investigation conducted by the officer verifies that the operator is not in
compliance or if no security verification form is produced, the officer shall
issue a citation to the operator for failure to comply with the Compulsory
Insurance Law.  Establishing compliance with the Compulsory Insurance Law
through the online verification system shall not be the primary cause for law
enforcement to stop a motor vehicle; and
   (F)   Any law enforcement officer who has been notified that the driving
privilege of a person has been suspended, upon observing the person or motor
vehicle anywhere upon a public street, highway, roadway, turnpike, or public
parking lot, may stop the person or motor vehicle, seize the driver license of
the person, seize the vehicle being operated by the person, and cause the
vehicle to be towed and stored as provided in §§
70.125 through
70.140 of this title, if the officer has probable cause to believe that the
vehicle is not insured as required by the Compulsory Insurance Law of this
state.
   (G)   An owner or operator who fails to comply with the Compulsory Insurance
Law, or who fails to produce for inspection a valid and current security
verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the Department of
Public Safety upon request of any peace officer, representative of the
Department of Public Safety, or other authorized person, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$250, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.  Upon issuing a citation under this section, the officer issuing
the citation may seize the vehicle being operated by the person and cause the
vehicle to be towed and stored as provided by 47 O.S. § 955, if the officer has
probable cause to believe that the vehicle is not insured as required by the
Compulsory Insurance Law of this state.  If the operator of the vehicle
produces what appears to be a valid security verification form and the officer
is unable to confirm compliance through the online verification system or
noncompliance by a subsequent investigation, the officer shall be prohibited
from seizing the vehicle and causing such vehicle to be towed and stored. 
Further, no vehicle shall be seized and towed under the provisions of this
division (G) if the vehicle is displaying a temporary license plate that has
not expired pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. §§ 1137.1 and 1137.3.
   (H)   An owner other than an owner of an antique or a classic automobile as
defined by the Oklahoma Tax Commission who files an affidavit that a vehicle
shall not be driven upon the public highways or public streets, pursuant to 47
O.S. § 7-607, who drives or permits the driving of the vehicle upon the public
highways or public streets, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500, or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (I)   A sentence imposed for any violation of the Compulsory Insurance Law
may be suspended or deferred in whole or in part by the court.
   (J)   Any person producing proof in court that a current security
verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the Department of
Public Safety reflecting liability coverage for the person was in force at the
time of the alleged offense shall be entitled to dismissal of the charge upon
payment of court costs; however, if proof of security verification is presented
to the court by the assigned court appearance date, the court shall access
information from the online verification system and, if compliance is
confirmed, the charge shall be dismissed without payment of court costs.
   (K)   Upon conviction, bond forfeiture, or deferral of sentence, the court
clerk shall forward an abstract to the Department of Public Safety within ten
days reflecting the action taken by the court.
(Ord. 1237, passed 5-17-83; Am. Ord. 1843, passed 11-3-10)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.035  ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC LAWS; ESTABLISHMENT OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL
DIVISION.
   It shall be the duty of the officers that are assigned by the Police
Department or any officers that are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce
all provisions of this title and all the state vehicle laws applicable to
street traffic in this city.  For purposes of effective administration and
enforcement, the Police Chief is authorized to establish, within the Police
Department, the Traffic-Control Division.
(Prior Code, § 16-301)
Statutory reference:
   Police officers' authority to regulate traffic, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
§ 70.036  DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY HAND OR VOICE.
   (A)   (1)   Officers of the Police Department or any officers designated by
the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand or
signal in conformance with traffic laws.
      (2)   In the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or
to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic,
as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
   (B)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic in the immediate vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 16-302)
§ 70.037  DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS.
   No unauthorized person shall direct or attempt to direct traffic, except in
case of emergency where no officer is present.
(Prior Code, § 16-303) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.038  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS.
   No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer or Fire Department official.
(Prior Code, § 16-304) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.039  ISSUANCE OF CITATION TAGS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to supply police
officers with citation tags in sets, each set consisting of an original and at
least three copies, for the purpose of giving notice to persons violating any
provisions of this title.
   (B)   Notice may be given by delivering the tags to the violator or by
affixing it to the vehicle involved in the violation.
   (C)   Each citation tag shall direct the violator to appear and to present
the tag at a designated place on or before a date and hour specified thereon.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge the power of a
police officer to arrest any violator and take him or her into custody.
(Prior Code, § 16-305)
§ 70.040  CITATION OF MOVING VEHICLE.
   (A)   A police officer who halts a vehicle in motion for a violation of this
title, other than for the purpose of giving the operator a warning or warning
notice, and does not arrest the operator, except when authorized or directed
under state law to immediately take a person before a magistrate for the
violation of any traffic laws, shall:
      (1)   Take the name, address and driver's license number of the operator,
the registered number of the motor vehicle involved and any other pertinent
information as may be necessary; and
      (2)   Issue to him or her, in writing, a traffic citation containing a
notice to answer to the charge against him or her in the Traffic Court at a
time at least five days after the alleged violation.
   (B)   The officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged
violator to answer as specified in the citation, shall release the person from
custody.
(Prior Code, § 16-306)
§ 70.041  ELUDING POLICE OFFICER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person operating a motor vehicle who has received a visual or
audible signal directing the operator to bring his or her vehicle to a stop
shall wilfully increase his or her speed or extinguish his or her lights, or in
any other manner attempt to or actually elude the police officer.
   (B)   A visual or audible signal for the purpose of this section shall be a
red light, siren or whistle in the case of a clearly marked designated police
car, police motorcycle or police bicycle driven by a police officer.
(Prior Code, § 16-307)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-99) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.042  CITATIONS AT ACCIDENTS.
   For any traffic violation, except a felony, a police officer at the scene of
a traffic accident may issue a written notice to appear, as provided in
§ 70.040, to any driver of a vehicle involved in the accident when, based upon
personal investigation, the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to
believe that the person has committed an offense under the provisions of this
title in connection with the accident.
(Prior Code, § 16-308)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of police officer; written citations, see 47 O.S. § 16-109.1
§ 70.043  ARREST OF NON-RESIDENTS.
   The State and Municipal Traffic Bail Bond Procedure Act, as set forth in 22
O.S. §§ 1115 through 1115.5 and 11 O.S. §§ 27-117 and 27-117.1, is hereby
adopted by reference and, where applicable, shall determine those persons
eligible for release from custody as provided in the Act.
(Prior Code, § 16-309)  (Ord. 1402, passed 7-7-87)
§ 70.044  BAIL UPON DEPOSIT OF LICENSE.
   (A)   For persons arrested for violation of municipal traffic regulations
who are ineligible for any reason for release under the provisions of the State
and Municipal Traffic Bail Bond Procedure Act the Judge of the Municipal Court
shall establish a bail bond schedule for traffic offenses, and the amount of
the bail shall not exceed the maximum fine provided for each offense.
   (B)   (1)   A person shall be entitled to be released from custody upon
posting the appropriate bail bond for each charge.
      (2)   The Judge of the Municipal Court is hereby authorized to formulate
rules for the receipt of bail and for release of persons arrested on personal
recognizance.
(Prior Code, § 16-310)  (Ord. 1402, passed 7-7-87)
§ 70.045  VIOLATING PROMISE TO APPEAR.
   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate his or her
written promise to appear, given to an officer upon the issuance of a traffic
citation regardless of the disposition of the charge for which citation was
originally issued.
(Prior Code, § 16-311) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Failure to obey notice to appear, see 47 O.S. § 16-112
§ 70.046  CITATION OF ILLEGAL PARKING VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or
stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this title, the
officer finding the vehicle shall take its registration number and any other
information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user.
      (2)   The officer shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a notice, in
writing, in a form provided by the city for the driver's answer to the charge
against him or her within five days and at the time and place specified in the
notice.
      (3)   The officer shall deliver copies of the notice to the Traffic
Division.
   (B)   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was,
at the time of the parking, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall
constitute a prima facie presumption that the registered owner was the person
who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during
which, the violation occurred.
(Prior Code, § 16-312)  (Ord. 1473A, passed 5-25-91)
§ 70.047  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH TRAFFIC CITATIONS ATTACHED TO PARKED VEHICLE.
   If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under the
traffic laws or regulations does not appear in response to a traffic citation
affixed to the motor vehicle within a period of five days, the Clerk of the
Municipal Court shall send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the
traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him or her of the violation and
warning him or her that in the event the letter is disregarded for a period of
five days, a warrant of arrest shall be issued. On any occasion where two or
more traffic citations have been affixed on the same motor vehicle and the
traffic citations have been disregarded, a warrant of arrest may be issued
without sending the letter provided in this section.
(Prior Code, § 16-313)
§ 70.048  OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES; ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES.
   (A)   No provision of this title for which official traffic-control devices
are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and
place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
   (B)   If a particular section does not state the official traffic-control
devices are required, the section shall be effective even though no devices are
erected or in place.
(Prior Code, § 16-314)
§ 70.049  DISPOSITION; RECORDS OF CITATIONS, WARRANTS AND COMPLAINTS.
   Every police officer, upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged violator
of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of the state or any traffic law of
the city, shall deposit the original and a duplicate copy of the citation with
his or her immediate superior officer, who shall cause the original to be
delivered to the Municipal Court.  Upon the filing of the original citation in
the Municipal Court, the citation may be disposed of only by trial in the Court
or by other official action by a Judge of the Court, including forfeiture of
bail or by payment of a fine to the Traffic Violations Bureau of the Court. 
The Chief of Police shall maintain a record of all warrants issued by the
Municipal Court, which are delivered to the Police Department for service and
of the final disposition of the warrants.  No member of the Police Department
or public employee shall dispose of, alter or deface a traffic citation, copy
thereof or record of the issuance or disposition of any traffic citation,
complaint or warrant, in a manner other than as required.
(Prior Code, § 16-315)
Statutory reference:
   Record of traffic convictions sent to state, see 47 O.S. §§ 6-204 and 6-206
§ 70.050  ILLEGAL CANCELLATION OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of
any traffic citation in any manner other than is provided by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-316) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES; AUTHORITY
§ 70.060  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES; UNIFORM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the
Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, hereinafter referred to as the
“manual,” and be approved by the Traffic Engineer.
   (B)   All signs, signals and devices required hereunder for a particular
purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and relative location
throughout the city.  All traffic-control devices erected and not inconsistent
with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-
control devices.
(Prior Code, § 16-201)
Statutory reference:
   Uniform sign manual, see 47 O.S. § 15-104
§ 70.061  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE LOCATIONS.
   Whenever the Traffic Engineer determines, based upon a traffic survey and
investigation, that traffic-control devices are necessary at a particular
intersection or location which meets standards provided in the manual, he or
she shall initiate necessary steps to obtain and install the same.
(Prior Code, § 16-202)
Statutory reference:
   Powers of local authorities to erect traffic-control devices, see 47 O.S. §§
15-102, 15-105 and 15-106
§ 70.062  SPECIFIC TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The Traffic Engineer shall prepare and maintain a schedule of each
intersection and location where a traffic-control device is installed and the
kind of device installed.  The schedule shall be designated as “Schedule XI: 
Traffic-Control Devices.”  The original of Schedule XI shall be kept on file in
the office of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 16-203)
§ 70.063  SPECIFIC SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   (1)   The Traffic Engineer shall prepare and maintain a schedule of
those streets or portions thereof upon which a specific speed limit has been
designated.
      (2)   The schedule shall reflect the speed limit so designated and the
exact locations upon which it is applicable.
   (B)   (1)   The schedule shall be designated as “Schedule XII:  Speed
Limits.”
      (2)   The original of Schedule XII shall be kept on file in the office of
the City Clerk as a public record.
(Prior Code, § 16-204)
Statutory reference:
   Local authorities; power to set speed limits, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-803 and 15-
102
§ 70.064  CHANGE OF SPEED LIMITS.
   When, as a result of a Traffic Engineering survey, the Traffic Engineer
determines that the movement of vehicular traffic upon the roadway,
intersection or location so surveyed could be controlled with greater safety to
life and property or with greater efficiency in the use of the roadway,
intersection or location, if the speed limit were increased or reduced, he or
she shall specify the speed limit in terms of miles per hour and it shall
become effective upon the placing of proper signs and markers giving notice
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 16-205)
§ 70.065  DESIGNATION OF RESTRICTED TURNS.
   (A)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those street
intersections at which drivers of vehicles:
      (1)   Shall not make right or left turns;
      (2)   May be permitted to make a U-turn on streets not equipped with
divider strips; and
      (3)   May be prohibited from making a U- turn at specific intersections
on streets having divider strips.
   (B)   The determinations of the Traffic Engineer shall specify each
intersection or location affected, the particular restriction or relaxation of
prohibitions applicable thereto and the hours of applicability.
   (C)   Each intersection or location regulated under this section shall be
plainly marked with signs indicating the regulations and the hours applicable,
if any.
(Prior Code, § 16-206)
Statutory reference:
   Power of local authorities to regulate or prohibit the turning of vehicles,
see 47 O.S. § 11-201
§ 70.066  SPECIFIC RESTRICTED TURNS.
   (A)   The Traffic Engineer shall prepare and maintain a schedule of those
locations where turns are restricted.  The schedule shall reflect the turn
location at which turning movements are restricted, the restrictions placed on
the turning movements and the times, if any, when the restrictions are
effective.
   (B)   The schedule shall be designated as “Schedule XIII.”  The original of
Schedule XIII shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk as a public record.
(Prior Code, § 16-207)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit turns, see 47 O.S. § 11-202
§ 70.067  TRAFFIC LANE MARKINGS.
   (A)   The Traffic Engineer may mark traffic lane lines on the roadway
surface and place marks, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections
indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning there.
   (B)   The Traffic Engineers's decision shall be based on his or her finding
that a paved roadway of sufficient width to allow two or more vehicles to pass
abreast requires, for the safety of traffic movement, regular traffic alignment
or guidelines to facilitate the positioning of moving vehicles in proper lanes
for passing, for turning or for stopping.
(Prior Code, § 16-208)
Statutory reference:
   Designation of traffic lanes, see 47 O.S. § 11-309
§ 70.068  OFF-SET STREET CENTER LINES.
   When the Traffic Engineer finds that the relation of traffic volume moving
in one direction over any street is greatly disproportionate to the volume of
traffic moving in the opposite direction on the same street, he or she is
authorized to align or realign the traffic lanes without regard to the center
of the street or roadway and designate the lanes to be used by traffic moving
in either direction, and install and maintain appropriate lines, signals,
barriers, markings or other devices to give notice.
(Prior Code, § 16-209)
§ 70.069  CHANGE OF STREET DIRECTION.
   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate
streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular
traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite
direction during another period of the day and shall place and maintain
appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof.
The Traffic Engineer may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used
by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of
the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 16-210)
§ 70.070  ONE-WAY ROADWAYS.
   The City Council may designate any road, street or highway or any separate
roadway under their jurisdiction for one-way traffic and shall cause
appropriate signs giving notice thereof, to be erected.
(Prior Code, § 16-211)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to designate one-way highways, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-308 and 15-102
§ 70.071  NO PASSING ZONES.
   The Traffic Engineer, within the limitations prescribed by this code, is
hereby authorized to determine those portions of any highway where overtaking
and passing would be especially hazardous, and may, by appropriate signs or
markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of the zones.
(Prior Code, § 16-212)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to set no-passing zones, see 47 O.S. § 11-307
§ 70.072  MEANING OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL INDICATORS.
   The display of signal lights, arrows and words shall be deemed to have the
following meanings and requires the appropriate response on the part of
vehicular traffic and pedestrians.
   (A)   Green alone or “Go.”
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited, may
proceed straight through or turn right or left unless an official sign at the
place prohibits the turn, but any vehicle and any pedestrian lawfully within
the intersection or adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal displays green
shall have the right-of-way over the vehicular traffic.
      (2)   Pedestrian traffic, facing a green signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk unless a “walk” signal
indicator is operating.
   (B)   Yellow or amber alone or “Caution.”
      (1)   The showing of the signal color following green shall constitute a
warning that the “red” or “stop” signal will be exhibited immediately
thereafter.
      (2)   Vehicles facing the signal shall stop before entering the near side
crosswalk or at the limit line, if it is marked, unless the vehicle is so near
the limit line when the “caution” signal first flashes that a stop cannot be
made in safety, in which event vehicles may proceed cautiously through the
intersection and clear the same before the “red” signal flashes.
   (C)   Red alone or “Stop.”
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk and shall remain standing until green or “go” is shown alone.  Except
where official signs are erected prohibiting the turns, vehicles in the right
traffic lane, after making a full stop as required, may enter the intersection
cautiously and make a right turn, but the vehicles shall yield right-of-way to
any pedestrians or other traffic proceeding on a green signal indication on the
cross street.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal shall not enter or cross the roadway
when the movement interferes with traffic proceeding on a green signal
indication on the cross street or when the movement cannot be made in safety. 
No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or
“go” is shown alone unless authorized to do so, by a pedestrian “walk” signal.
   (D)   Red with green arrow.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal when in the proper traffic lane
may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by
the arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.  If the
movement indicated by the green arrow is a left turn, the left turn shall be
made only on the red with green arrow signal.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the
green or “go” is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian “walk”
signal.
   (E)   Green arrows alone.  Whenever vehicular traffic movements are
controlled by green arrows alone and not displayed with any other signal
indication, vehicles facing the signals may make the movements indicated by the
green arrows and the movements shall be made only when the green arrows are
displayed.
(Prior Code, § 16-213)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-202
§ 70.073  FLASHING SIGNALS.
   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in traffic
signs or signals, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
   (A)   Flashing red.  When a red light is illuminated with rapid intermittent
flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk
at an intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules
applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing yellow.  When a yellow light is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersections
or pass the signal only with caution.
(Prior Code, § 16-214)
Statutory reference:
   Flashing signal rules, see 47 O.S. § 11-204
§ 70.074  HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES; RESTRICTIONS.
   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and regulate, by
proper signs, the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles when the stopping,
standing or parking would create an especially hazardous condition or would
cause unusual delay to traffic.
(Prior Code, § 16-215)
§ 70.075  SCHEDULE OF THROUGH STREETS.
   The Traffic Engineer shall prepare and maintain a schedule of those streets
or portions thereof designated as through streets.  The schedule shall be
designated as “Schedule I:  Through Streets.”  The original Schedule I shall be
kept in the office of the City Clerk as a public record.
(Prior Code, § 16-216)
Statutory reference:
   Powers to designate through streets, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
§ 70.076  THROUGH STREETS; AUTHORITY OF TRAFFIC ENGINEER TO INSTALL STOP SIGNS.
   (A)   The Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain a stop sign on every
street intersecting a through street or intersecting that portion thereof,
described and designated as such by ordinance unless traffic at the
intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals.
   (B)   At the intersection of two through streets or at the intersection of a
through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall
be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as may be determined by
the Traffic Engineer upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study.
(Prior Code, § 16-217)
Statutory reference:
   Power of local authorities to install stop and yield signs, see 47 O.S. §§
15-102 and 15-108
§ 70.077  INTERSECTIONS WHERE STOP REQUIRED.
   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections upon other than through streets where particular hazards exist
and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any
stop intersection.
(Prior Code, § 16-218)
§ 70.078  PARKING TIME LIMIT SIGNS REQUIRED.
   The Traffic Engineer shall erect appropriate signs giving notices of any
parking time limits.
(Prior Code, § 16-219)
§ 70.079  DESIGNATION OF CURB LOADING ZONES AND PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS.
   (A)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine the location of
passenger and commercial curb loading zones and shall place and maintain
appropriate signs indicating the zones and stating the hours during which the
provisions of this section are applicable.
   (B)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized and required to approve the
establishment of all loading zones for public carriers on the public streets in
the places and in a number as he or she shall determine to be of the greatest
benefit and convenience to the public and every loading zone shall be
designated by appropriate signs.
   (C)   No bus shall be operated within the city that makes more than one stop
in the city for the taking or discharging of passengers for hire, until the
route has been approved by the Traffic Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 16-220) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.080  WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   The Traffic Engineer shall prepare and maintain a schedule of those streets
or portions thereof upon which weight restrictions have been designated.  The
schedule shall reflect the gross weight above which is prohibited, the type
vehicles, if any, which are subject to the restrictions and any other weight
restrictions effective.
(Prior Code, § 16-221)
Statutory reference:
   Power to impose weight restrictions, see 47 O.S. § 14-113
§ 70.081  PEDESTRIANS; SIGNAL INDICATORS; REGULATIONS.
   Special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words “Walk,” “Wait” or
“Don't Walk” shall regulate pedestrian movement as follows:
   (A)   “Walk.”  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway
in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the
drivers of all vehicles.
   (B)   “Wait” or “Don't Walk.”  No pedestrian shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of the signal, but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his or her crossing on the “Walk” signal shall proceed to a sidewalk
or safety zone while the “Wait” signal is showing.
(Prior Code, § 16-222)
Statutory reference:
   Pedestrians control signals, see 47 O.S. § 11-203
§ 70.082  CROSSWALK MARKINGS.
   The Traffic Engineer may, at any time, install pedestrian crosswalks at any
street intersection.  The pedestrian crosswalks shall be plainly marked on the
surface of the roadway and protected by means of signs posted and maintained on
the roadway approaching the crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 16-223)
§ 70.083  MID-BLOCK PEDESTRIAN CROSSINGS.
   When the Traffic Engineer finds that pedestrian congestion required the
installation of a crosswalk at a location other than intersections, he or she
is authorized to install and maintain official traffic-control signals and
appropriate devices, markings or signs and crosswalk markings on the surface of
the roadway at the location.
(Prior Code, § 16-224)
§ 70.084  UNAUTHORIZED TRAFFIC- CONTROL DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway
any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal, which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control
device or any railroad sign or signal.
(Prior Code, § 16-225) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-206
§ 70.085  DEFACEMENT OF TRAFFIC- CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   No person shall alter, destroy, deface, molest, interfere, tamper,
injure, knock down, remove and have, in his or her possession, any traffic-
control device.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any of the following persons when
acting within the scope and duty of their employment:
      (1)   Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or
trustee or any governmental agency; or
      (2)   Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or
trustee of any contractor, public utility or railroad company.
(Prior Code, § 16-220)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-99)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-207
   EQUIPMENT
§ 70.095  EQUIPMENT OF UNSAFE CONDITION; INSPECTION.
   No person shall drive or cause to be moved on any highway any motor vehicle,
trailer, semi-trailer, pole trailer or any combination of vehicles unless the
equipment upon any and every vehicle is in good working order and adjustment,
as required in this chapter or in 47 O.S., and the vehicle is in safe
mechanical condition as not to endanger the driver, occupant or any person upon
the highway.
(Prior Code, § 16-1201)  (Ord. 1375, passed 5-6-86; Am. Ord. 1660, passed 10-2-
01) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Required equipment on vehicles, see 47 O.S. §§ 12-201 et seq.
   Vehicle inspections, see 47 O.S. §§ 13-102 and 13-103
§ 70.096  LICENSE TAG DISPLAYED.
   (A)   No person shall drive or cause to be moved onto any road, street or
highway of the city any motor vehicle or other vehicle required by state law to
display license plates unless the vehicle displays on the rear thereof the
current year's license plates as hereinafter required.
   (B)   (1)   Every motor vehicle is required to display on the rear thereof
the current year's license plates issued by the state, any other state in the
United States, United States Government or other officially recognized
sovereignty.
      (2)   The license plate shall be securely attached to the rear of the
vehicle, except truck-tractor plates which shall be attached to the front of
the vehicle.  The license plate, decal and all letters and numbers shall be
clearly visible at all times.
      (3)   The operation of the vehicle upon which the license plate is
covered, overlaid or otherwise screened with the material, whether the material
be clear, translucent, tinted or opaque, shall be an offense of this section.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to have attached to a vehicle a license plate or
a decal, which is not properly registered to the vehicle to which it is
attached when driven upon any road, street or highway of the city.
   (D)   All dealer and used dealer temporary license plates shall be displayed
in accordance with Oklahoma State Law Title 47, Chapter 74, Section 1137.1, and
Section 1137.3.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in violation of this
section.
(Prior Code, §16-1202)  (Ord. 1449, passed 9-5-89; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-
99; Am. Ord. 1797, passed 12-18-07) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Vehicle tags, see 47 O.S. §§ 1101 et seq.
§ 70.097  HEAD LAMPS AND STOP LIGHTS.
   (A)   All vehicles driven on any city street or highway, except motorcycles
and bicycles, shall be equipped with at least two head lamps with at least one
on each side of the front of the motor vehicle.  The head lamps shall emit a
light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet.
   (B)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer and any other
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be
equipped with at least two tail lamps mounted on the rear of the same level and
as widely spaced laterally as practicable which when lighted shall emit a red
light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. The vehicle
shall also be equipped with two red reflectors as part of the tail lamp.
   (C)   Every motor vehicle, except as exempted under 47 O.S., shall be
equipped with a white lamp which shall illuminate the rear tag display of the
vehicle so that it may be clearly read at a distance of 50 feet to the rear.
   (D)   Every motor vehicle, except a motorcycle or truck tractor, shall be
equipped with at least two stop lamps mounted on the rear of the vehicle having
attached thereto red reflectors which shall display a red or amber light
visible from a distance of not less than 100 feet to the rear in normal
sunlight, and which shall be actuated upon application of the service (foot)
brake.
   (E)   All aforementioned lights shall be kept burning during the period from
one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise when the vehicle is
in motion on city streets or highways, except for division (D) above, which
shall function properly at all times.
(Prior Code, § 16-1203)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-99) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. §§ 12-203 and 12-204
§ 70.098  LIGHTS; REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No vehicle equipped with glaring, blinding or dazzling lights
shall be operated or driven over any street or highway.  Any light which, when
thrown or reflected into the eyes of pedestrians or drivers, is of sufficient
intensity or degree as to hinder or impair the ordinary vision of the
pedestrian or driver shall be deemed glaring, blinding or dazzling.
      (2)   The use of any mechanical device, fixture, preparation or
composition in or about any flame, lamp, reflector or lens of the light, which
will in any manner whatever limit or diminish, except by diffusion of the
candle glow, ordinarily produced by the light is prohibited.
   (B)   Head lamps must have high and low beams. None of the high intensity
portion of the upper beam shall project above 42 inches above the level on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of 75 feet.  The lamps shall be directed
along the path in which the vehicle travels.
   (C)   Lens and reflectors must be clean, in good condition and the right
side up.
(Prior Code, § 16-1204) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.099  RED LENS; HEAD LAMP.
   (A)   Any lighted lamp or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than head lamps, spot lamps, auxiliary lamps, flashing turn signals, emergency
vehicle warning lamps, construction and maintenance vehicle warning lamps and
school bus warning lamps, which projects a beam of light of an intensity
greater than 300 candlepower shall be so directed that no part of the high
intensity portion of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on which the
vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment upon any
highway with any lamp or device thereon displaying a red light visible from
directly in front of the center thereof.  This section shall not apply to any
vehicle upon which a red light visible from the front is expressly authorized
or required by 47 O.S.
   (C)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited, except on an authorized
emergency vehicle, school bus or church bus, as defined in 47 O.S. § 11-705.1,
snow-removal equipment, wreckers and tow vehicles while at the scene of an
emergency, or any vehicle as a means of indicating a right or left turn, or the
presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching,
overtaking or passing.
      (2)   Flashing red or blue lights or a combination of flashing red and
blue lights may be used on vehicles or machinery owned or operated by any
agency of the state, county, or city when engaged in the performance of
emergency work or on the construction or maintenance of highways or bridges, or
on wreckers and tow vehicles at the scene of an emergency.
   (D)   Blue lights are prohibited, except as allowed in division (C) above.
(Prior Code, § 16-1205)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-99) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.100  MECHANICAL SIGNAL DEVICES PERMITTED.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped and, when required by state law,
shall be equipped with lamps showing to the front and rear for the purpose of
indicating an intention to turn either to the right or left.
   (B)   (1)   The lamps showing to the front shall be located on the same
level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable, and when in use shall
display a white or amber light, or any shade of color between white and amber,
visible from a distance of not less than 100 feet to the front in normal
sunlight; and the lamps showing to the rear shall be located at the same level
and as widely spaced laterally as practicable, and when in use shall display a
red or amber light, or any shade of color between red and amber, visible from a
distance of not less than 100 feet to the rear in normal sunlight.
      (2)   When actuated, the lamps shall indicate the intended direction of
turning by flashing the lights showing to the front and rear on the side toward
which the turn is made.
   (C)   The turn indicator signal device shall be, at all times, maintained in
good working order.
(Prior Code, § 16-1206)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-99)
Statutory reference:
   Signal lamps and devices, see 47 O.S. §§ 12-219 and 12-206
§ 70.101  STEERING MECHANISM.
   No motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be operated upon any street
or highway when the play in the steering wheel is in excess of three inches. 
The steering arms, tie rod, drag link or other mechanism by which the vehicle
is steered, and the associated parts of any vehicle shall be secure and free
from excessive play and/or wear.  The toe-in and toe-out front wheels on any
vehicle shall not vary more than ¼-inch from the factory specifications.  Rear
wheels of the vehicle shall be in good condition and in alignment so as not to
have more than ten-foot side slip per mile, and the center bolts shall be
secure in the rear springs.
(Prior Code, § 16-1207) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.102  BRAKES.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, operated upon any
highway or street shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control movement of
same to stop and to hold the vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels.  If these two separate means of applying brakes are connected
in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one part of the
operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at
least two wheels.
   (B)   On all motor vehicles, except those covered by division (E) below,
equipped with four-wheel brakes, the service brake shall be capable of stopping
the motor vehicle from a speed of 20 mph within a distance of 25 feet.
   (C)   All motor vehicles, except those covered by division (E) below,
equipped with only two-wheel brakes, shall have the service brakes so adjusted
as to stop the vehicle from a speed of 20 mph within a distance of 37.5 feet.
   (D)   (1)   Braking effort on front wheels shall not be less than two-thirds
of the braking effort on rear wheels, except in cases where factory
specifications call for a greater braking power ratio.
      (2)   In that event not more than 15% variation from factory
specifications will be permitted.  Braking effort on one front wheel or one
rear wheel shall not be less than four-fifths of the braking effort of the
opposite front wheel or rear wheel.
   (E)   Buses, trucks, truck-tractors and every combination of motor vehicle
shall be equipped with brakes upon one or more of the vehicles adequate to stop
and to hold the vehicles or combination of motor vehicles.  Every motor
vehicle, or combination of motor vehicles, according to its type, and exceeding
7,000 pounds gross weight, shall be capable of stopping within the following
distances at all times and under all conditions of loading:
      (1)   Where equipped with brakes on all wheels, the stopping distance
shall be 30 feet at a speed of 20 mph.
      (2)   Where not equipped with brakes on all wheels, the stopping distance
shall be 45 feet at a speed of 20 mph.  Total braking effort on front wheels
shall not be less than one-third of the total of the rear wheels.  Variations
from side to side shall be the same as provided in division (D) above.
   (F)   All tests, provided in this section, shall be applied on dry, hard,
smooth, level pavement, free from loose material.
   (G)   The pedal on all brakes shall have at least one-inch clearance from
the floor board of the vehicle upon the first application of the pedal.
(Prior Code, § 16-1208) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Brake requirements, see 47 O.S. §§ 12-301 to 12-315
§ 70.103  TIRES.
   (A)   No vehicle which is equipped with pneumatic tires shall be driven,
transported or hauled over any street or highway on the metal rim or wheel or
when the tire is flat or uninflated.
   (B)   No vehicle equipped with solid rubber tires shall be driven or
transported over any street or highway when the wearing or driving surface of
the tires is not full, smooth and round or when any part of the wearing surface
is broken out or removed.
(Prior Code, § 16-1209) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.104  WINDSHIELD AND WINDOWS.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, operated upon any street
or highway shall be equipped with a power-operated device in good working
condition for cleaning rain, snow or any other moisture from the windshield of
the vehicle.  The device shall be so constructed as to be controlled or
operated by the operator of the vehicle.
   (B)   Windshields and windows of vehicles shall be in good condition and
kept clean to a degree that the vision of the driver or occupants shall not be
hindered or impaired.
   (C)   No vehicle constructed or enclosed in a manner as to prevent the
driver from having a clear view of the highway ahead and approaches to the
side, shall be driven on a highway.
(Prior Code, § 16-1210)
Statutory reference:
   Windshield requirements, see 47 O.S. § 12-404
§ 70.105  CERTAIN WINDOW TINTS PROHIBITED; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      GLASS COATING MATERIAL or SUN- SCREENING DEVICES.  Materials, films,
applications or devices which are used in conjunction with approved vehicle
glazing materials for the purpose of reducing the effects of sun.
      LIGHT TRANSMISSION.  The percentage of total light which is allowed to
pass through a window.
      LUMINOUS REFLECTANCE.  The ration of the amount of total light, expressed
in percentages.
      WINDOW.  The windshield, side or rear glass of the motor vehicle,
including any glazing material, glass coating or sun-screening device.
   (B)   It is unlawful for a person to sell, install or to operate a motor
vehicle with any object or material placed, displayed, installed, affixed or
applied upon the windshield or side or rear windows, or with any object or
material so placed, displayed, installed, affixed or applied in or upon the
motor vehicle so as to obstruct or reduce a driver's clear view through the
windshield or side or rear windows, except as provided in this section.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to place, install, affix or apply any
transparent material upon the windshield or rear windows of any motor vehicle
if the material alters the color or reduced the light transmittance of the
windshield or side or rear windows, except as provided in this section.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Side or back windows that have a substance or material in
conjunction with glazing reflectance of, at most, 25%, pursuant to 47 O.S. §
12-422;
      (2)   Front side wing vents and windows that have a substance or material
not attached in conjunction with glazing material which is used by a vehicle
operator on a moving vehicle during daylight hours;
      (3)   Rearview mirrors;
      (4)   Adjustable, non-transparent sun visors which are mounted forward of
the side windows and are not attached to the glass;
      (5)   Signs, stickers or other materials which are displayed in a 49-
square inch area in the lower corner of the windshield nearest the driver;
      (6)   Direction, designation or termination signs on buses, if the signs
do not interfere with the driver's clear view of approaching traffic;
      (7)   Rear window wiper motors;
      (8)   Rear window defrosters or defoggers;
      (9)   Rear trunk lid handle or hinges;
      (10)   Side windows to the rear of the driver or back windows that have a
substance or material in conjunction with glazing material that has a light
transmission of at least 10% and a luminous reflectance of at most 25% on all
vehicles manufactured prior to 1996 year models, if the motor vehicle is
equipped with outside mirrors on both left- and right-hand sides of the vehicle
that are so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway through
each mirror for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of the motor
vehicle;
      (11)   Transparent material which is installed, affixed or applied to the
topmost portion of the windshield if:
         (a)   It does not extend downward beyond the AS-1 line or more than
five inches from the top of the windshield, whichever is closer to the top of
the windshield; and
         (b)   The material is not red or amber in color.
      (12)   All windows to the rear of the driver's seat in a vehicle licensed
as a bus, as defined by 47 O.S. § 1-105, or a taxicab, as defined by 47 O.S. §
1-174; and
      (13)   Vehicles not subject to registration in the state.
   (E)   This section shall not prohibit the use and placement of federal,
state or political subdivision certificates on any window, as are required by
applicable laws.
   (F)   (1)   Louvered materials, when installed as defined, shall not reduce
the area of the driver's visibility below 50% as measured on a horizontal
plane.
      (2)   When the materials are used in conjunction with rear window, the
measurement shall be based upon the driver's view from inside the driver's
review mirror.
   (G)   Any person may operate a vehicle or alter the color or reduce the
light transmitted through the side or rear windows of a vehicle in accordance
with an exemption issued by the Commissioner of the Department of Public
Safety.
(Prior Code, § 16-1210.1)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-99) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.106  MIRRORS.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle operated upon any street or highway shall be
equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the
highway to the rear of the vehicle.
   (B)   The mirror shall be kept clean at all times.
(Prior Code, § 16-1211) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Mirror requirements, see 47 O.S. § 12-403
§ 70.107  EXHAUST PIPES.
   (A)   No vehicle, other than an authorized emergency vehicle, shall be
driven over any street or highway with any attachment affixed in any manner to
the exhaust pipe of the vehicle that is or may be used as a signal, siren or
horn.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, including motor
scooters, motorcycles and trucks, over any street or highway with the exhaust
pipe open or leaking, or permit any exhaust from the engine to escape other
than through and from a muffler duly maintained on the motor vehicle.
      (2)   All mufflers shall be maintained on all motor vehicles in good
working order to prohibit unnecessary noise.
   (C)   No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle including
motor scooters, motorcycles and trucks, in a manner which will amplify or
increase the noise emitted louder than that emitted by the muffler originally
installed on the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16-1212) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Muffler requirements, see 47 O.S. § 12-402
§ 70.108  HORN OR WARNING DEVICE.
   Every motor vehicle operated upon any street or highway shall be provided
with a warning device which shall produce an abrupt sound sufficiently loud to
serve as an adequate warning of danger.
(Prior Code, § 16-1213) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 12-403
§ 70.109  BELLS AND SIRENS.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be equipped with any bell, except fire apparatus,
police cars and emergency cars.  No vehicle shall be equipped with any siren,
except fire apparatus, police cars or emergency vehicles.
   (B)   No vehicle belonging to the city shall be equipped with sirens, except
upon written order of the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 16-1214) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.110  TRAILER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Every trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer shall be equipped with a
coupling device which shall be so designed and constructed that the trailer,
semi-trailer or house trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it without shipping or swerving from side to side.
   (B)   (1)   Every trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer, except a semi-
trailer drawn by a truck tractor, shall be coupled with stay chains or cables
to the vehicle by which it is being drawn.
      (2)   The chains or cable shall be of sufficient size and strength to
prevent parting from the drawing vehicle should the regular coupling device
break or become otherwise disengaged.
(Prior Code, § 16-1215)
§ 70.111  REQUIRED EQUIPMENT FOR MOTORCYCLES AND MOTOR SCOOTERS.
   In addition to all other requirements, motorcycles and motor scooters shall
be equipped with the following:
   (A)   Two mirrors, containing a reflection surface of not less than three
inches in diameter, mounted one on each side of the vehicle and positioned so
as to enable the operator to view clearly the roadway for a distance of 200
feet to the rear of his or her vehicle;
   (B)   A windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness to protect the
operator from foreign objects;  (In lieu of the windshield, the operator shall
wear goggles or face shield of material and design to protect him or her from
foreign objects.)
   (C)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of the vehicle, to stop and
hold the vehicle, including two  separate means of applying the brakes;  (One
means
shall be effective to apply the brakes to the front wheel and one means shall
be effective to apply the brakes to the rear wheels.)
   (D)   A properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least 35
miles per hours;
   (E)   A fender over each wheel; and  (All fenders shall be of the type
provided by the manufacturer.)
   (F)   Head lamp and tail lamp as follows:
      (1)   At least one lighted head lamp capable of showing a white light
visible at least 300 feet in the direction in which the vehicle is proceeding,
and one tail lamp mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red
light plainly visible from at least 300 feet to the rear; and
      (2)   The lights shall be burning whenever the vehicle is in motion
during the period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before
sunrise and at any other time when due to insufficient light or unfavorable
atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the streets are not clearly
discernible at a distance of at least 500 feet ahead.
(Prior Code, § 16-1216)
§ 70.112  HEADGEAR.
   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall operate or ride upon any
motorcycle or motor scooter unless the person is equipped with and wearing on
the head a crash helmet of a type which complies with the standards established
by the State Department of Public Safety.
   (B)   All crash helmets shall consist of lining, padding and chin straps and
be of the type as not to distort the view of the driver.
   (C)   The Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety is hereby
authorized to approve or disapprove protective head gear and eye-protective
devices sold and required herein and to issue and enforce regulations
establishing standards and specifications for approved protective headgear and
eye-protective devices by name and type.  The Department may not recommend one
brand in preference to another if quality is identical.
(Prior Code, § 16-1217) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.113  SAFETY SEAT BELT SYSTEMS REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   Every operator and front seat passenger of a passenger car
operated in the city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety seat
belt system, required to be installed in the motor vehicle when manufactured
pursuant to 49 CFR 571.208.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         PASSENGER CAR.  “Vehicle,” as defined in 47 O.S. § 1102, except that
PASSENGER CAR shall not include trucks, truck-tractors, recreational vehicles,
motorcycles, motorized bicycles or vehicles used primarily for farm use and
licensed pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 1134.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to an operator or passenger of a
passenger car in which the operator or passenger possesses a written
verification from a physician licensed in this state that he is unable to wear
a safety seat belt system for medical reasons. The issuance of verification by
a physician, in good faith, shall not give rise to, nor shall the physician
thereby incur, any liability whatsoever in damages or otherwise, to any person
injured by reason of the failure to wear a safety seat belt system.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle who is
a route carrier of the U.S. Postal Service.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be used in any civil proceeding in the
state, and the use or non-use of a safety seat belt system shall not be
submitted into evidence in any civil suit in the state.
   (E)   Fine and court costs for violating the provisions of this section
shall not exceed $20.
(Prior Code, § 16-1218)  (Ord. 1416, passed 12-1-87; Am. Ord. 1510, passed 2-
15-94; Am. Ord. 1652, passed 5-1-01; Am. Ord. 1692, passed 1-7-03)   
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 70.114  CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEMS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every driver, when transporting a child under eight years of age in a
motor vehicle operated on the roadways, streets, or highways of this city,
shall provide for the protection of said child by properly using a child
passenger restraint system as follows:
      (1)   A child under four years of age shall be properly secured in a
child passenger restraint system. The child passenger restraint system shall be
rear-facing until the child reaches two years of age or until the child reaches
the weight or height limit of the rear-facing child passenger restraint system
as allowed by the manufacturer of the child passenger restraint system,
whichever occurs first; and
      (2)   A child at least four years of age but younger than eight years of
age, if not taller than four feet nine inches in height, shall be properly
secured in either a child passenger restraint system or child booster seat.
      (3)   For the purpose of this section and § 70.113, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT SYSTEM. An infant or child passenger
restraint system which meets the federal standards as set by 49 C.F.R., Section
571.213.
   (B)   If a child is eight years of age or is taller than four feet nine
inches in height, a seat belt properly secured to the vehicle shall be
sufficient to meet the requirements of this section.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other
motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to state
or federal laws;
      (2)   The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle;
      (3)   The driver of a vehicle in which all of the seat belts are in use;
      (4)   The transportation of children who for medical reasons are unable
to be placed in such devices, provided there is written documentation from a
physician of such medical reason; or
      (5)   The transportation of a child who weighs more than 40 pounds and
who is being transported in the back seat of a vehicle while wearing only a lap
safety belt when the back seat of the vehicle is not equipped with combination
lap and shoulder safety belts, or when the combination lap and shoulder safety
belts in the back seat are being used by other children who weigh more than 40
pounds. Provided, however, for purposes of this division, back seat shall
include all seats located behind the front seat of a vehicle operated by a
licensed child care facility or church. Provided further, there shall be a
rebuttable presumption that a child has met the weight requirements of this
division if at the request of any law enforcement officer, the licensed child
care facility or church provides the officer with a written statement verified
by the parent or legal guardian that the child weighs more than 40 pounds.
   (D)   (1)   A violation of the provisions of this section shall be
admissible as evidence in any civil action or proceeding for damages unless the
plaintiff in such action or proceeding is a child under 16 years of age.
      (2)   In any action brought by or on behalf of an infant for personal
injuries or wrongful death sustained in a motor vehicle collision, the failure
of any person to have the infant properly restrained in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall not be used in aggravation or mitigation of
damages.
   (E)   A person who is certified as a Child Passenger Safety Technician and
who in good faith provides inspection, adjustment, or educational services
regarding child passenger restraint systems shall not be liable for civil
damages resulting from any act or omission in providing such services, other
than acts or omissions constituting gross negligence or willful or wanton
misconduct.
   (F)   Any person convicted of violating subsection A of this section shall
be punished by a fine of $50 and shall pay all court costs thereof. Revenue
from such fine shall be apportioned to the Department of Public Safety
Restricted Revolving Fund and used by the Oklahoma Highway Safety Office to
promote the use of child passenger restraint systems as provided in §
70.113. This fine shall be suspended and the court costs limited to a maximum
of $15 in the case of the first offense upon proof of purchase or acquisition
by loan of a child passenger restraint system. Provided, the Department of
Public Safety shall not assess points to the driving record of any person
convicted of a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 16-1219)  (Ord. 1416, passed 12-1-87; Am. Ord. 1510, passed 2-
15-94; Am. Ord. 1681, passed 9-17-02; Am. Ord. 1725, passed 5-18-04; Am. Ord.
1904, passed 7-21-15)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1112
   IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES
§ 70.125  PURPOSE AND EFFECT.
   The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions of this
chapter shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the
public peace, safety and welfare, and the safeguarding of property, and shall
be used generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention
and abatement of public nuisance arising from traffic law violations,
protection of the public rights in the use of city streets and thoroughfares
from obstructions placed and left in derogation of those rights, and for
safeguarding and protecting stolen vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 16-401)
§ 70.126  AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.
   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized, within the limits
set forth in this chapter, to impound vehicles under the circumstances
hereinafter enumerated.  No impoundment shall be valid unless made under order
of an authorized police officer and in strict adherence with the procedures
required in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-402)
§ 70.127  DERELICT/DISABLED VEHICLES.
   A disabled vehicle or derelict vehicle, as defined herein, upon a street,
highway or public property may be impounded under the following circumstances:
   (A)   If left unattended and improperly parked on street or highway;
   (B)   If left unattended longer than 48 hours on any street, on the shoulder
of any street or highway, right-of-way or city-owned property; or
   (C)   If the person in charge of the vehicle is physically incapacitated to
the extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
(Prior Code, § 16-403)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-99; Am. Ord. 1660, passed 10-2-
01)
§ 70.128  VEHICLES ON BRIDGES.
   An unattended vehicle left upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway or within
the structure of a grade separation may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 16-404)
§ 70.129  VEHICLES CONSTITUTING TRAFFIC HAZARDS.
   A vehicle left unattended upon any street, alley or thoroughfare, and so
parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic, shall be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 16-405)
§ 70.130  ILLEGAL TRESPASS.
   (A)   An unattended vehicle found to be in violation hereof may be impounded
when the required complaint has been properly made and filed as provided in
this section.
   (B)   (1)   If a violation of the provisions hereof occurs, the owner or
legal occupant who complains shall sign a complaint against the person parking
the vehicle on the owner's or legal occupant's property, or if the identity of
the person parking the vehicle is unknown, then the complaint may be filed
against the registered owner of the vehicle.
      (2)   The complaint shall be verified and shall allege that the
complaining party is the owner or legal occupant of the property upon which the
vehicle is parked or standing.
   (C)   Upon filing of the complaint by the property owner or legal occupant,
and if there appears to be proper cause to believe the provisions hereof have
been violated, the Police Department shall cause the vehicle to be impounded
from the property and placed in storage.
(Prior Code, § 16-406)
§ 70.131  VEHICLES PARKED IN A PROHIBITED ZONE.
   Any unattended vehicle parked at the street curbing of any zone where
parking is prohibited and where official signs are in place giving notice
thereof in violation of the prohibition may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 16-407)
§ 70.132  VEHICLES BLOCKING FIRE EXITS OR HYDRANTS.
   Any vehicle illegally parked in a manner that it blocks a fire escape
ladder, device or exit or blocks ready access to a fire hydrant shall be
impounded.
(Prior Code, § 16-408)
§ 70.133  VEHICLES PARKED IN INTERSECTIONS.
   Any unattended vehicle illegally parked in any street intersection shall be
impounded.  A disabled vehicle in an intersection, with the person in charge of
the vehicle being present, shall be moved out of the intersection and to the
nearest available legal parking space at the street curbing.
(Prior Code, § 16-409)
§ 70.134  STOLEN VEHICLES; RECOVERY BY POLICE.
   (A)   Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by police and the registered
owner cannot be found within a reasonable time not exceeding one hour, or
cannot be determined from the registration or other identifying media in the
vehicle or from records or information available from reports of stolen cars,
the vehicle may be removed to the nearest authorized place of impoundment and
the registered owner of the vehicle shall be notified of the location of the
place of impoundment as soon as possible by the Police Department.
   (B)   If the registered owner is identified, located and notified of the
recovery of the stolen vehicle, the owner shall be given the right to make his
or her own arrangement for the removal of the vehicle within the period of one
hour from the time he or she is actually notified of its recovery, and if the
owner is unable or unwilling to effect the removal within the time specified,
the vehicle may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 16-410)
§ 70.135  ARREST AND DETENTION OF DRIVER.
   Whenever the driver or person in charge of any vehicle is placed under
arrest and taken into custody and detained by police under circumstances which
leaves or will leave a vehicle unattended on any street or highway, the vehicle
may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 16-411)
§ 70.136  PLACE OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   Every vehicle that is impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall
be removed to the nearest garage or place of safe keeping designated by the
City Council and to no other place.
(Prior Code, § 16-412)
§ 70.137  IMPOUNDMENT.
   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle
from any street, highway, private property or public property to a storage
facility as provided for in this code under the following circumstances:
   (A)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any public right-of-way and
is so parked as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of
traffic or parked where parking is prohibited;
   (B)   When a derelict vehicle has been parked upon public right-of-way,
easement or city owned property for a period of 48 hours;
   (C)   When a vehicle has been parked on private property without the consent
of the owner or occupant of the property in violation of §
70.130 of this code;
   (D)   When any vehicle is left abandoned upon public right-of-way in excess
of 48 hours from the date it was first reported or observed by officers;
   (E)   When officers recover a vehicle reported stolen and the owner cannot
be located, is unable or unwilling to effect the removal of the vehicle within
a reasonable amount of time not to exceed one hour, or the preservation and
collection of evidence requires removal;
   (F)   Where the vehicle has any evidentiary value, has directly or
indirectly been involved in the commission of a crime, has been used to
transport any person who has committed any offense involving the use of a
firearm, or was directly or indirectly associated with a drive-by shooting;
   (G)   When a police officer effects the arrest of the owner or operator of a
vehicle out of the vehicle;
   (H)   When the vehicle bears a license plate which has expired for a period
in excess of 90 days, bears a license plate which has been altered or tampered
with, or bears a temporary tag issued more than 30 days prior to the
impoundment, or bears no license plate which would be in conformance with the
Oklahoma Vehicle License Act (47 O.S. § 1101 et seq.); or
   (I)   The officer has probable cause that the person operating the vehicle
has not been granted driving privileges or that the driving privileges of the
person are currently suspended, revoked, canceled, denied, or disqualified; or
   (J)   The officer has probable cause that the vehicle is not insured as
required by the Compulsory Insurance Law of this state.
   (K)   Any police officer who has directed the impoundment of any vehicle, or
an authorized person in the employing agency of the officer, shall within 72
hours of the impoundment notify the Department of Public Safety of such
impoundment.  The notice of impoundment shall contain the name and address of
the owner, if known, the make, model, vehicle identification number,
registration number, date stored, place stored, and the estimated value of the
vehicle as determined by the officer.  This section shall not be construed to
create any civil liability upon the state, any agency of the state, or employee
thereof for failure to provide such notice to the owner or lienholder.
(Ord.1812, passed 12-2-08; Am. Ord. 1813, passed 1-6-09; Am. Ord. 1828, passed
8-4-09; Am. Ord. 1843, passed 11-2-10)
§ 70.138  SEIZED AND IMPOUNDED VEHICLE STORAGE.
   (A)   Vehicles seized or impounded by the city may, at the direction of the
Police Department, be transported to such place as the city may designate. 
   (B)   The owner of the vehicle shall be responsible to the city or the
city’s designee for the following costs prior to the city or the city’s
designee releasing the vehicle. (The City Manager, or his or her designee, may,
to meet the best ends of justice or expedite on-going investigations, release
the owner of part or all of the cost owed the city or the city’s designee.)
      (1)   The actual cost to have said vehicle transported to the place of
storage, including the actual towing expenses.
      (2)   A storage charge as allowed by law charged by the city’s designee. 
For purposes of this section, the day of receipt shall constitute the first day
and the day of release shall constitute the last day.
      (3)   All fees incurred by the city or the city’s designee, including
lien filing fees, to either return the vehicle to the owner or sell the vehicle
pursuant to statutory authority.  Prior to releasing the vehicle, the owner
shall obtain authorization to release from the Bethany Police Department, and
pay to the city’s designee, all costs listed above.  If the vehicle is
impounded pursuant to any lawful authority, then those provisions shall apply
in addition to the requirements of this section.  If the vehicle is impounded
pursuant to the provisions of §
70.137(F), (G), (H), (I) or (J), then the owner of the vehicle, or anyone
authorized by the owner of the vehicle, shall show proof of valid security
verification, valid operator’s license and valid vehicle tag registration,
before the Police Department will authorize release of the vehicle.  If the
owner fails to claim the vehicle within the time prescribed by law, then the
City Manager, or the city’s designee, is directed to institute proceedings to
have the vehicle sold under the applicable statutes of the State of Oklahoma.
(Ord. 1812, passed 12-2-08; Am. Ord. 1828, passed 8-4-09; Am. Ord. 1878, passed
12-17-13)
§ 70.139  DURATION; RELEASE; IMPOUND FEE.
   (A)   Any vehicle impounded under the authority granted herein shall be
stored and held safely until a written order for its release, signed by an
authorized officer of the city, has been issued.  For vehicles impounded under
the authority of §
70.137(F), (G), (H), (I), or (J), such order of release shall be conditioned
upon the payment of an impound fee in the amount of $100 by the person to whom
the release is issued.  This impound fee shall be independent of any fines,
costs or fees which may be assessed from citations issued to any person for
violation of traffic laws or other ordinance violations involving the impounded
vehicle and in addition to any fees owned to the towing service for the
impoundment and storage.  The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to adopt
rules and regulations consistent with this chapter to implement this section.
   (B)   There is hereby created within the police fund, a special account into
which all impound fees shall be deposited from which expenditures may be used
for enforcement of traffic safety and administration of this chapter.
(Ord. 1812, passed 12-2-08; Am. Ord. 1828, passed 8-4-09; Am. Ord. 1843, passed
11-2-10)
§ 70.140 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   Presentation of the order of release as provided in §
70.138 at the place of impoundment, together with payment or tender of payment
of all impoundment costs and accrued storage charges due, shall entitle the
person presenting such release to obtain possession of such vehicle.
(Ord. 1812, passed 12-2-08)
STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE
§ 70.150  STATE MOTOR VEHICLE CODE FOR MISDEMEANOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Title 47 O.S. (Oklahoma Motor Vehicle Code), as it may from time to
time be amended is adopted by reference and is made a part of the ordinances of
the city, as if fully set forth in this Code.  The provisions of the Oklahoma
Motor Vehicle Code shall take effect and be controlling with the city limits so
that a violation of the provisions of the Oklahoma Motor Vehicle Code will be a
violation of this code.  Nothing in this section shall grant to the city the
power or jurisdiction to prosecute offenses that a city is not authorized to
prosecute.  Copies of the Oklahoma Motor Vehicle Code are on file in the office
of the City Clerk.
   (B)   Any crimes specified in the Oklahoma Motor Vehicle Code as felonies
are specifically excluded from inclusion in this chapter.
   (C)   The penalty for a misdemeanor violation of the Oklahoma Motor Vehicle
Code as adopted by this chapter shall be the maximum penalty allowed by state
law or $750 and 60 days imprisonment whichever is lesser.
(Ord. 1832, passed 11-3-09)
§ 70.999  PENALTY.
   Except where a different punishment is prescribed, every person violating
any of the provisions of this traffic code shall be guilty of an offense and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined or punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 16-1701)
CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC RULES
Section
Right-of-Way
   
71.001   Approaching or entering an intersection
   
71.002   Turning left at an intersection
   
71.003   Approaching a “yield” sign
   
71.004   Entering a through highway
   
71.005   Entering a highway from a private road or driveway
   
71.006   Yield to pedestrians and stops
   
71.007   Entering traffic from parking
   
71.008   Operation upon approach of authorized emergency vehicles
   
71.009   Passengers on two- or three-wheeled vehicles; passing vehicles
   
71.010   Driver of a motor vehicle approaching a stationary emergency vehicle
Turning Movements
   
71.020   Turning markers or indicators
   
71.021   U-turns
   
71.022   Turns into or from alleys
   
71.023   Turning movements and signals
   
71.024   Position and method of turning
   
71.025   Giving turn signals
   
71.026   Giving hand and arm signals
General Operating Procedures
   
71.040   Possession of valid driver's license required
   
71.041   Operation of vehicle on invalid license
   
71.042   Permitting unauthorized person to drive
   
71.043   Renting to unlicensed operators
   
71.044   Operation in a careful and prudent manner
   
71.045   Attention to driving required
   
71.045.1   Electronic messaging while driving prohibited; exceptions.
   
71.046   Reckless driving
   
71.047   Obedience to official traffic-control devices
   
71.048   Exceptions to control devices
   
71.049   Transporting alcoholic beverages
   
71.050   Backing vehicle; limitations
   
71.051   Changing lanes
   
71.052   Controlled access highways; entering and leaving
   
71.053   Crossing fire hose
   
71.054   Driving on right side of roadway required
   
71.055   Driving on divided highways
   
71.056   Driving of vehicles on sidewalk prohibited; exception
   
71.057   Driving on right side of roadway; exceptions
   
71.058   One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands
   
71.059   Following too closely
   
71.060   Following fire apparatus prohibited
   
71.061   Processions
   
71.062   Funeral processions to be identified
   
71.063   Driving through funeral or other procession prohibited; exceptions
   
71.064   Shortcuts; private service drives
   
71.065   Limitation of use of motorcycles, bicycles and motor scooters
   
71.066   Special rules for motorized scooters, motor-driven cycles and bicycles
   
71.067   Minibikes prohibited
Passing Vehicles
   
71.080   Passing a vehicle on the left
   
71.081   Limitation on passing on the left; exception
   
71.082   Passing on the right; when permitted
   
71.083   Passing in school zones
   
71.084   Passing school bus
   
71.085   Passing church bus
   
71.086   School bus requirements; lights; signs; painting
   
71.087   No passing zones
Weight and Size Restrictions
   
71.100   Axle restrictions
   
71.101   Maximum height of vehicles
   
71.102   Permit for oversized vehicles
Traffic Hazards
   
71.115   Obstruction of streets and sidewalks
   
71.116   Derelict vehicles
   
71.117   Loads on vehicles
   
71.118   Littering
   
71.119   Removal of debris from streets
   
71.120   Protrusions; flag required
   
71.121   Passengers; obstructing driver's view
Speed Regulations
   
71.135   Reasonable and prudent speeds; existing conditions
   
71.136   Minimum requirements; exceptions
   
71.137   Speed limits generally; exception
   
71.138   Obedience to maximum and minimum speed limits
   
71.139   School zones and crossings
   
71.140   Speed contests
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 71.001  APPROACHING OR ENTERING AN INTERSECTION.
   (A)   When two vehicles enter or approach an uncontrolled intersection from
different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on
the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (B)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) above is modified at
through highways, as otherwise stated in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-601)
Statutory reference:
   Right-of-way at intersections, see 47 O.S. § 11-401
§ 71.002  TURNING LEFT AT AN INTERSECTION.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
   (B)   After so yielding and having given signal when and as required by this
code, the driver may make the left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles
approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-
of-way to the vehicle making the left turn.
(Prior Code, § 16-602)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-402
§ 71.003  APPROACHING A “YIELD” SIGN.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a “yield” sign shall slow to a
reasonable speed for existing conditions of traffic and visibility, yielding
the right-of-way to all vehicles on the intersecting street or highway which
have entered the intersection or which are so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (B)   The driver having so yielded may then proceed and drivers of all other
vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so
proceeding.  A driver who enters a yield intersection without stopping and has
or causes a collision with a pedestrian at a crosswalk or a vehicle in the
intersection shall prima facie be considered not to have yielded as required
herein.
      (1)   The provisions of this section shall not release the drivers of
other vehicles approaching the intersection at a distance as not to constitute
immediate hazard from the duty to drive with due care to avoid a collision.
      (2)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for
safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection before entering the intersection.
      (3)   If there is no crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line, or if there is not a stop line, then at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway.
(Prior Code, § 16-603)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-403
§ 71.004  ENTERING A THROUGH HIGHWAY.
   (A)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic-
control signal, every driver of a vehicle shall stop as required at the
entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through highway, or which
are approaching so closely on the through highway or which are approaching so
closely on the through highway as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (B)   (1)   If two or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning or caution
signs or signals at an intersection at the same time, the following rules shall
apply:
         (a)   If each vehicle is required to stop, the vehicle coming from the
right shall have the right-of-way;
         (b)   If each vehicle is required to slow, the vehicle coming from the
right shall have the right-of-way; or
         (c)   If each vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle coming
from the right shall have the right-of-way.
      (2)   In any event, a vehicle which has already entered the intersection
shall have the right-of-way over one which has not entered the intersection.
(Prior Code, § 16-604)
§ 71.005  ENTERING A HIGHWAY FROM A PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle about to enter, leave or cross a highway from or
onto a private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the highway.
(Prior Code, § 16-605)
Statutory reference:
   Rules on entering highway, see 47 O.S. § 11-404
§ 71.006  YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS AND STOPS.
   The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging
from an alley, driveway or building shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to
driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway
or driveway, shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary
to avoid collision and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 16-605)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-99)
§ 71.007  ENTERING TRAFFIC FROM PARKING.
   (A)   Any vehicle attempting to re-enter traffic while parked at the curb
shall yield the right-of-way to on-coming traffic in the street approaching
from the rear.
   (B)   The parked vehicle shall proceed into the traffic only after the
driver has given the appropriate signal which indicates his or her intention of
turning from the curb and into the line of traffic.
   (C)   The vehicle shall, in no event, enter the line of traffic until the
driver has ascertained that no hazard exists.
(Prior Code, § 16-606)
§ 71.008  OPERATION UPON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of
audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of 47 O.S. § 12-218 or of a
police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible or visual signal
only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall
immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the
right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection, and shall
stop and remain in the position until the authorized emergency vehicle has
passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
(Prior Code, § 16-607)  (Ord. 1529, passed 1-17-95; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-
99)
§ 71.009  PASSENGERS ON TWO- OR THREE- WHEELED VEHICLES; PASSING VEHICLES.
   (A)   No driver of a two- or three-wheeled motor vehicle or bicycle shall
carry any other person on, upon or within the vehicle on any street or highway
within the city unless the two- or three-wheeled motor vehicle with a wheel
diameter of 12 inches or greater or the bicycle shall have either a double
seating device with double foot rests or a side car attachment providing a
separate seat space within the side car attachment for each person riding
therein so that the person shall be seated entirely within the body of the side
car, then it shall be permissible for an operator who has attained the age of
16 or older to carry a passenger.
   (B)   No driver of a motorcycle, motor scooter or bicycle shall pass other
vehicles in between lanes of traffic traveling in the same direction,
authorized emergency vehicles excepted.
(Prior Code, § 16-613)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-99) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.010  DRIVER OF A MOTOR VEHICLE APPROACHING A STATIONARY EMERGENCY VEHICLE.
   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary authorized
emergency vehicle that is displaying a flashing combination red or blue light
or any combination of red or blue lights, shall:
   (A)   If traveling on a road, street, or highway that consists of two or
more lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of travel as that of the
driver, the driver shall proceed with due caution and shall, if possible and
with due regard to the road, weather, and traffic conditions, change lanes into
a lane that is not adjacent to the stationary authorized emergency vehicle; or
if the driver is not able to change lanes or if to do so would be unsafe, the
driver shall proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the motor vehicle
to a safe speed for the existing road, weather, and traffic conditions; and
   (B)   If traveling on a road, street, or highway other than as described in
division (A), the driver shall proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of
the motor vehicle to a safe speed for the existing road, weather, and traffic
conditions.
(Ord. 1802, passed 5-20-08)
   TURNING MOVEMENTS
§ 71.020  TURNING MARKERS OR INDICATORS.
   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an
intersection indicating
the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle
shall disobey the directions of the indications.
(Prior Code, § 16-701) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority to place markers or indicators, see 47 O.S. § 11-601
§ 71.021  U-TURNS.
   (A)   No person shall make a U-turn at the following locations:
      (1)   Any place other than an intersection;
      (2)   Intersections controlled by traffic- control devices unless the
turns are specifically authorized; or
      (3)   Any other location when the turns are specifically prohibited.
   (B)   No person shall make a U-turn, except in the following manner:
      (1)   By approaching the intersection as closely as practical to the
right curb or edge of the roadway, the driver giving and continuing to give a
signal for a left turn until the turn in completed, proceeding to make the turn
across the intersection;
      (2)   In one continuous movement without stopping or backing the vehicle;
      (3)   By yielding the right-of-way at all times to all vehicles until the
turn is completed; and
      (4)   Without constituting a hazard to or interfering with any other
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16-702)
§ 71.022  TURNS INTO OR FROM ALLEYS.
   (A)   No vehicles shall turn left when proceeding into or proceeding out of
an alley, except when necessary to enter a one-way street, and no vehicle shall
cross any street or highway when proceeding into or proceeding out of any
alley, except as provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   Left turns may be made when proceeding out of an alley if a traffic
survey conducted by the Traffic Engineer shows that the turn may be made with
safety and official signs are erected authorizing the turns.
   (C)   The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to bus
terminals used by licensed and authorized bus lines.
(Prior Code, § 16-703) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.023  TURNING MOVEMENTS AND SIGNALS.
   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection, a public or private
road or a driveway unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway,
as required in
§ 71.024, or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until the movement
can be made with reasonable safety.  No person shall so turn any vehicle
without giving an appropriate signal, as provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left, as required by law, shall
be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
vehicle before turning.
   (C)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in division
(B) above to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is
opportunity to give a signal.
   (D)   When any person is preparing for, attempting or executing a left turn,
as described in division (A) above, no other person operating another vehicle
immediately following the turning vehicle shall pass or attempt to pass the
turning vehicle to the left. (Prior Code, § 16-704)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-
99) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Rules for turning and signals, see 47 O.S. § 11-604
§ 71.024  POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows.
   (A)   Right turns.  Both the approach for a right turn and the execution of
a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or
edge of the roadway.
   (B)   Left turns from two-way into two-way street. The approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the street nearest the
center thereof and after entering the intersection to the right of the center
of the roadway being entered.
   (C)   Left turns, two-way and one-way streets.  The approach for a left turn
from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in the portion of the
right half of the street nearest to the center thereof and by passing to the
right of the center where it enters the intersection.  A left turn from a one-
way street into a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the
center of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection.
   (D)   Left turns where both roadways are one-way.  Both the approach for a
left turn and the execution of a left turn shall be made as close as
practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 16-705)
Statutory reference:
   Rules for position; method of turning, see 47 O.S. § 11-601
§ 71.025  GIVING TURN SIGNALS.
   Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by means
of hand or arm, or by a signal lamp or lamps, or mechanical device of a type
approved by the State Department of Public Safety, except as provided herein. 
When the body of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle projects 24 inches or
more to the left of the center of the steering wheel, or under any condition
where a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of
the vehicle, the vehicle shall be equipped with, and the required signal given
by, signal lamps or devices.
(Prior Code, § 16-706)
Statutory reference:
   Rules for turn signals, see 47 O.S. § 11-605
§ 71.026  GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   All signals, herein required, given by hand and arm shall be given from the
left side of the vehicle in the following manner and the signals shall indicate
as follows:
   (A)   Left turn:  hand and arm extended horizontally;
   (B)   Right turn:  hand and arm extended upward; and
   (C)   Stop or decrease speed:  hand and arm extended downward with palm to
the rear.
(Prior Code, § 16-707)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-606
   GENERAL OPERATING PROCEDURES
§ 71.040  POSSESSION OF VALID DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the highways without
having in his or her possession, at all times, when operating the motor
vehicle, an unrevoked or unsuspended operator's or chauffeur's license, as
required by the laws of the state, unless the person is specifically exempted
from the laws by the provisions thereof.  No person charged with violating this
section shall be convicted if he or she produces in Court an operator's or
chauffeur's license issued to him or her and valid at the time of his or her
arrest.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of
any restriction that may be imposed in a restricted license issued to him or
her with respect to the type of, or special mechanical control devices required
on a motor vehicle or any other restriction applicable as the state may
determine.
(Prior Code, § 16-801) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Drivers' licenses, see 47 O.S. §§ 6-101 to 6-117
§ 71.041  OPERATION OF VEHICLE ON INVALID LICENSE.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle when his or her privilege to do so
is canceled, suspended, revoked or denied.
(Prior Code, § 16-802) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 6-303
§ 71.042  PERMITTING UNAUTHORIZED PERSON TO DRIVE.
   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit any vehicle owned by him or
her or under his or her control to be driven upon any highway by any person who
is not authorized under the provisions of the laws of the state to operate the
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16-803) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 6-305
§ 71.043  RENTING TO UNLICENSED OPERATORS.
   No person shall rent or offer any self-propelled or motor-driven cycle to
any person who does not have in his or her possession a validly issued
operator's license or chauffeur's license or who is not authorized under the
provisions of the laws of the state to operate the vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 16-804) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.044  OPERATION IN A CAREFUL AND PRUDENT MANNER.
   Any person driving a vehicle on a public road or way shall drive the same in
a careful and prudent manner having due regard to the traffic, surface and
width of the public way and any other conditions then existing.
(Prior Code, § 16-805)
§ 71.045  ATTENTION TO DRIVING REQUIRED.
   The operator of a vehicle, while driving, shall devote his or her full time
and attention to the driving.
(Prior Code, § 16-806) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   State rules of road generally, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-101 et seq.
§ 71.045.1  ELECTRONIC MESSAGING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CELLULAR TELEPHONE.  An analog or digital wireless telephone
authorized by the Federal Communications Commission to operate in the frequency
bandwidth reserved for cellular telephones.
      (2)   COMPOSE, SEND, or READ.  With respect to a text message  means the
manual entry, sending, or retrieval of a text message to communicate with any
person or device.
      (3)   ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE.  An electronic device that permits
the user to manually transmit a communication of written text by means other
than through an oral transfer or wire communication. This term does not include
a device that is physically or electronically integrated into a motor vehicle
or a voice-operated global positioning or navigation system that is affixed to
a motor vehicle, or a hands-free device that allows the user to write, send, or
read a text message without the use of either hand except to activate,
deactivate, or initiate a feature or function.
      (4)   TEXT MESSAGE. Includes a text-based message, instant message,
electronic message, photo, video, or electronic mail.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any
street or highway within this city while using a hand-held electronic
communication device to manually compose, send, or read an electronic text
message while the motor vehicle is in motion.
   (C)   Any person who violates the provisions of division (B) of this section
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $100.
   (D)   The provisions of division (B) of this section shall not apply if the
person is using the cellular telephone or electronic communication device for
the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an
imminent emergency situation:
      (1)   An emergency response operator;
      (2)   A hospital, physician’s office, or health clinic;
      (3)   A provider of ambulance services;
      (4)   A provider of firefighting services; or
      (5)   A law enforcement agency.
(Ord. 1897, passed 5-19-15)
§ 71.046  RECKLESS DRIVING.
   No person shall drive any vehicle or animal in a manner which is calculated
to endanger the rights, lives or property of others or which is without due
caution or circumspection or which is at a careless, heedless or dangerous rate
of speed.
(Prior Code, § 16-807) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.047  OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instruction of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto, placed in accordance with the
provisions of this title unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police
officer, subject to the exemptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this title.
(Prior Code, § 16-808) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Drivers to obey traffic devices, see 47 O.S. § 11-201
§ 71.048  EXCEPTIONS TO CONTROL DEVICES.
   Notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicles or pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 16-809) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.049  TRANSPORTING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly transport in any vehicle upon a public
highway, street or alley any alcoholic beverage except in the original
container which shall not have been opened and the seal upon which shall not
have been broken and from which the original cap or cork shall not have been
removed, unless the opened container be in the rear trunk or rear compartment,
which shall include the spare tire compartment in a vehicle commonly known as a
station wagon and panel truck, or any outside compartment which is not
accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle while it is in
motion.
   (B)   Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500, or by imprisonment for
not more than 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE shall be defined as
alcohol, spirits, beer and wine, and also every liquid or solid, patented or
not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as
a beverage by human beings. Alcohol, spirits, beer, and wine shall have the
definitions as set forth in §
111.01 of the Bethany Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 1919, passed 9-20-16; Am. Ord. 1975, passed 8-20-2019) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provision, see 37 O.S. § 537
§ 71.050  BACKING VEHICLE; LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless the
movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with any
other traffic.
      (2)   No vehicle shall be backed into an intersection.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be backed upon any street or highway, except for the
purpose of entering or leaving a parked position and then only after the driver
of the vehicle has ascertained that the movement can be made without
endangering other traffic.
(Prior Code, § 16-812) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Rules on backing, see 47 O.S. § 11-1102
§ 71.051  CHANGING LANES.
   (A)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, in addition to all other rules consistent with this section,
a vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane
and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first ascertained
that the movement can be made with safety and given a signal, not less than the
last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle, of his or her intention to change lanes.
   (B)   Where streets or roadways do not have marked traffic lanes, vehicles
shall nevertheless keep in line or follow a straight course as nearly as
practical and shall not weave in and out or turn from side to side
unnecessarily.  Vehicles shall move to the right or left only as necessary in
slowing or stopping adjacent to the road, in passing slow moving vehicles, or
when making a proper approach for a turn, and this only after the driver has
first ascertained that the movement can be made safely and has signaled for a
change of course.
(Prior Code, § 16-813)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-99) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.052  CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAYS; ENTERING AND LEAVING.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access highway,
except at entrances and exits established by public authority.
(Prior Code, § 16-814) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Restricted access, see 47 O.S. § 11-312
§ 71.053  CROSSING FIRE HOSE.
   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department
used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department
official in command.
(Prior Code, § 16-815) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Crossing fire hose prohibited, see 47 O.S. § 11-1109
§ 71.054  DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY REQUIRED.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right.  Upon roadways having a width for not more than one line of
traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-
half the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(Prior Code, § 16-816)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-301
§ 71.055  DRIVING ON DIVIDED HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more roadways by
leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated
dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle
shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted
to use another roadway by official traffic-control devices or police officers.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any dividing space,
barrier or section, except through an opening in the physical barrier or
dividing section or space or at a crossover or intersection established by
public authority.
(Prior Code, § 16-817) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Rules for driving on divided highways, see 47 O.S. § 11-311
§ 71.056  DRIVING OF VEHICLES ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   No person shall drive any vehicle within or upon any sidewalk area, except
at a permanent or temporary driveway.
(Prior Code, § 16-818) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.057  DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven to
the right of the center of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing the movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; and
      (4)   Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic.
   (B)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed
of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall
be driven in the right-hand lane when available for traffic, or as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway and may be
temporarily driven upon the right-hand shoulder for the purpose of permitting
other vehicles to pass. This division shall not apply when overtaking and
passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for
a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway.
   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the
center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such
lanes or except as permitted under division (A)(2) of this section. However,
this division shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center
line in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.
(Prior Code, § 16-819)  (Am. Ord. 1894, passed 4-21-15)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-301
§ 71.058  ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   Upon a roadway designated and sign posted for one-way traffic, a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   (B)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of such island.
(Prior Code, § 16-827)
§ 71.059  FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
(Prior Code, § 16-828)
§ 71.060  FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall
not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than
600 feet, or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire
apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall
not follow any emergency vehicle or shall not purposely drive to any location
on a road, street, or highway where an emergency exists which would interfere
with the free movement of authorized emergency vehicles or any other traffic
using the road, street, or highway at that location.  For the purpose of this
section the definition of emergency shall include traffic accidents, airplane
accidents, disasters, explosions, civil disturbances, and (without limitation
by the foregoing) any other related circumstances which tend to cause traffic
congestion.
   (C)   The purpose of this section is to eliminate sightseers and other
persons who do not have official business at the scene of an emergency, and
whose presence would tend to cause traffic congestions.
(Prior Code, § 16-829)
§ 71.061  PROCESSIONS.
   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead
as close as is practical and safe.
(Prior Code, § 16-830)
Statutory reference:
   Local powers to regulate processions, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
§ 71.062  FUNERAL PROCESSIONS TO BE IDENTIFIED.
   A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such
by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of the identifying insignia as
may be determined and designated by the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 16-831)
§ 71.063  DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when the
vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter.
   (B)   This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is
controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers.
(Prior Code, § 16-832) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.064  SHORTCUTS; PRIVATE SERVICE DRIVES.
   No vehicle or animal shall be driven through any private service driveway or
private service area, except for the purpose of obtaining service or
merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 16-833) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.065  LIMITATION OF USE OF MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES AND MOTOR SCOOTERS.
   (A)   No driver of a two-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle or bicycle shall
carry any other person upon or within the vehicle on any street or highway,
except as provided in this section.
      (1)   If any two-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle with a wheel diameter
of 12 inches or greater or any bicycle shall have either a double seating
device with double foot rests or a side car attachment providing a separate
seat space within the side car attachment for each person riding therein so
that the person shall be seated entirely within the body of the side car, then
it shall be permissible for an operator who has attained the age of 16 or older
to carry a passenger.
      (2)   A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his or her employee is
permissible.
   (B)   No motorcycle, bicycle or motor scooter shall be ridden upon any city
sidewalk.
   (C)   Handlebars on bicycles, motorcycles and motor scooters shall not
exceed 12 inches in height, measured from the crown or point of attachment.
   (D)   No rider of a motorcycle or motor scooter shall hold on to any moving
vehicle for the purpose of being propelled.
(Prior Code, § 16-834) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.066  SPECIAL RULES FOR MOTORIZED SCOOTERS, MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLES AND
BICYCLES.
   (A)   Motorized scooters and motor-driven cycles.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor- driven cycle at a speed greater
than the legally posted speed limit; provided, in no event nor at any time
shall any operator drive a motor-driven cycle at a speed greater than 35 miles
per hour.
      (2)   No person shall operate a motorized scooter at a speed greater than
the legally posted speed limit; provided, in no event nor at any time shall any
operator drive a motorized scooter at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour,
or on any roadway with a posted speed limit of greater than 25 miles per hour.
      (3)   Operators of motorized scooters and motor-driven cycles shall wear
goggles or a face shield, and all operators under the age of 18 years shall
wear protective headgear meeting the standards established by the State of
Oklahoma.
      (4)   Motor-driven cycles operated on city streets shall be equipped with
all lights and equipment required for motorcycles by state law.
      (5)   No motor-driven cycle or motorized scooter shall be driven on any
public street between sunset and sunrise.
   (B)   Motorized scooters and bicycles.
      (1)   Every person operating a bicycle or motorized scooter upon a
roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and
under the conditions then existing shall ride as near as practicable to the
right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except under any of the following
situations:
         (a)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         (b)   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a
private road or driveway;
         (c)   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions and while
exercising due care, including but not limited to:
            1.   Fixed or moving objects;
            2.   Parked or moving vehicle;
            3.   Pedestrians or animals;
            4.   Surface hazards; or
            5.   Any time it is unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or
edge of the roadway; and
         (d)   When riding in the right-turn-only lane.
      (2)   Any person riding a bicycle or motorized scooter upon a one-way
street or highway with two or more marked lanes of travel may ride as near as
practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the street or highway.
      (3)   No person operating a bicycle or motorized scooter shall pass other
vehicles between lanes of traffic traveling the same direction.
      (4)   Persons riding bicycles or motorized scooters upon a roadway shall
not ride more than two abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside
for the exclusive use of bicycles or motorized scooters.  Persons riding two
abreast shall not impede the normal and reasonable flow of traffic and, on a
laned roadway, shall ride within a single lane.
      (5)   Wherever a usable path for bicycles or motorized scooters has been
provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle or motorized scooter riders shall use
the path and shall not use the roadway.
      (6)   A Class A, B, C, or D license, but no motorcycle endorsement, is
required to operate an electric-assisted bicycle.
      (7)   No person operating a bicycle or motorized scooter shall carry any
package, bundle, or
article which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand on the handle
bars.
   (C)   All motor vehicles shall comply with all rules of the road in
operation of a vehicle on the public streets.
(Prior Code, §16-835)  (Am. Ord. 1737, passed 12-7-04) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Speed limits; motor-driven cycles, see 47 O.S. §11-805
§ 71.067  MINIBIKES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall drive or operate any motor-driven vehicle known as
minibikes, trail bikes, golf carts, all terrain vehicles, other similar trade
names or other motor vehicles which are manufactured principally for use off
the streets and highways, upon, over or across any city street, alley, park,
parkway or any other public right-of-way or municipally-owned land, except
where permitted by signs posted by the appropriate authority.  The motor-driven
vehicles used by regularly organized units of any shrine, temple or any other
similar organization shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while
being used in any authorized parade.
(Prior Code, § 16-836)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-99) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
   PASSING VEHICLES
§ 71.080  PASSING A VEHICLE ON THE LEFT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the street or roadway until safely clear of
the overtaken vehicle.
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his or
her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16-820) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-303
§ 71.081  LIMITATION ON PASSING ON THE LEFT; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
street or roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction unless the left side is clearly visible and is free of on-coming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit the completion of the
overtaking and passing without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken.
   (B)   No vehicle at any time shall be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the street
or highway where the driver's view along the street or highway is obstructed;
or
      (2)   When approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel
or when approaching within 50 feet of or traversing any intersection or
railroad grade crossing.
(Prior Code, § 16-821) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-305
§ 71.082  PASSING ON THE RIGHT; WHEN PERMITTED.
   (A)   Passing on the right is permitted under the following conditions:
      (1)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn.
      (2)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle
either upon the left or upon the right of a street or roadway with unobstructed
pavement of sufficient width of four or more lanes of moving traffic when the
movement can be made safely.
   (B)   No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the
street or roadway in overtaking or passing on the right, except in the event of
an emergency.
(Prior Code, § 16-822) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-304
§ 71.083  PASSING IN SCHOOL ZONES.
   (A)   No driver of a vehicle shall pass any other vehicle which is in motion
and being driven in the same direction in any school zone between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on all days when schools are in session.
   (B)   Whenever a school zone is located on a multiple lane street which is
divided into three or more clearly marked lanes for traffic or where the right-
half of the roadway has been divided into two or more lanes or on one-way
streets, vehicles shall be allowed to pass slower moving vehicles being driven
in the same direction where passing does not involve a change of lane movement.
(Prior Code, § 16-823) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.084  PASSING SCHOOL BUS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle upon any street, roadway or highway upon
meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on
or adjacent to the street, roadway or highway for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school children and other occupants, and on which the red
loading signals are in operation, shall stop the vehicle before it reaches the
school bus and not proceed until the loading signals are deactivated.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle when proceeding past the school bus shall do
so at a speed which is reasonable and use due caution for the safety of school
children and other occupants of the school bus.
   (C)   Occupants of the school bus shall have the right-of-way when crossing
the roadway immediately upon leaving the school bus.
(Prior Code, § 16-824) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-705
§ 71.085  PASSING CHURCH BUS.
   (A)   A church bus is a vehicle operated by a nonprofit religious
organization which transports persons including school age children to and from
religious services.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a church that is stopped
to take on or discharge passengers, and on which the red loading signals are in
operation, is to stop his or her vehicle before it reaches the church bus and
not proceed until the loading signals are deactivated and then proceed past the
bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due caution for safety of the
occupants.
   (C)   (1)   Every church bus for transportation of persons to and from
religious services or other church activities shall bear upon the front and
rear thereof plainly visible signs containing the words “CHURCH BUS” in letters
not less than eight inches in height.
      (2)   In addition, the bus may be equipped with visual signals meeting
the requirements of 47 O.S. § 12-218, which shall be actuated by the driver of
the church bus whenever but only whenever the vehicle is stopped on the highway
for the purpose of receiving and discharging passengers.
   (D)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not
stop upon meeting or passing a church bus which is on a different roadway or
when upon a controlled-access highway and the church bus is stopped in a
loading zone which is part of or adjacent to the highway and where pedestrians
are not permitted to cross the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 16-824.1)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-99) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.086  SCHOOL BUS REQUIREMENTS; LIGHTS; SIGNS; PAINTING.
   The provisions of § 71.084 shall be applicable only if the school bus is
painted yellow and bears upon the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign
containing the words “SCHOOL BUS” in letters not less than eight inches in
height which can be removed or covered when the vehicle is not in use as a
school bus.
   (B)   The school bus shall be equipped with four red alternately flashing
warning signal lights, two of which shall be located high on the front and two
high on the rear of the vehicle.  The lights shall be a minimum of four inches
in diameter and shall be widely separated.
(Prior Code, § 16-825)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-99)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1108
§ 71.087  NO PASSING ZONES.
   (A)   When signs or markings designating certain sections of a roadway as a
no passing zone are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant
person, every driver shall obey the directions thereof.
   (B)   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no passing zone as
set forth in division (A), no driver shall at any time drive to the left side
of the roadway within such no passing zone or on the left side of any pavement
striping designed to mark such no passing zone throughout its length.
(Prior Code, § 16-826)  (Am. Ord. 1895, passed 4-21-15)
   WEIGHT AND SIZE RESTRICTIONS
§ 71.100  AXLE RESTRICTIONS.
   When designated by the Traffic Engineer and when signs are erected giving
notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle which has more than two
axles upon any street so designated.  Vehicles with more than two axles may be
operated on streets where they are prohibited only for the purpose of
delivering or picking up materials or merchandise on that street and then only
by entering the street at the intersection nearest the destination of the
vehicle and proceeding no further than the nearest intersection thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 16-1101) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.101  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF VEHICLES.
   Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no person shall drive or move
or cause or permit to be driven or moved upon any street whether paved or
otherwise, any vehicle, unladed or with load, which exceeds a height of 13½
feet.
(Prior Code, § 16-1102)
§ 71.102  PERMIT FOR OVERSIZE VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   The Traffic Engineer shall have authority to issue, withhold or
revoke, permits for temporary or emergency operation of vehicles or
combinations of vehicles in excess of 13½ feet in height.
      (2)   Special permits shall prescribe the hours of the day when valid,
the streets to be used and the route to be taken, and any other conditions that
the Traffic Engineer may consider proper under the circumstances.
   (B)   (1)   Application for permits provided in this section shall be made
to the Traffic Engineer a reasonable time in advance of the expected time of
movement of the vehicles.
      (2)   In emergencies affecting the safety of persons or property,
however, permits may be issued for immediate movement.
(Prior Code, § 16-1103)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. §§ 14-101 to 14-117
   TRAFFIC HAZARDS
§ 71.115  OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct a street or sidewalk of the city
by intentionally or in a criminally negligent manner placing anything, or
performing any act, on any sidewalk, road, street or public way which will
render movement thereon more difficult or which will interfere with the free
and uninterrupted use of the street or sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 16-1401) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.116  DERELICT VEHICLES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DERELICT VEHICLE.
         (a)   A vehicle which is in a state of dilapidation, dismantled,
wrecked, junked or is non-operative;
         (b)   A vehicle upon which a current license plate is not displayed;
         (c)   A vehicle from which tires or wheels have been removed or
deflated; and
         (d)   A vehicle which has obviously been abandoned and left on any
street.
   (B)   No person shall park, or cause to be parked, any derelict vehicle upon
any street or municipally-owned property.
   (C)   Nothing herein contained shall forbid the temporary leaving of a
wrecked vehicle on public streets of the city while the Police Department is
investigating the accident and until the same can be removed therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 16-1402)  (Am. Ord. 1660, passed 10-2-01) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.117  LOADS ON VEHICLES.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle
is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping,
shifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand
may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other
substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the
roadway.
   (B)   No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load
unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent
the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to
other users of the highway. Any vehicle loaded with sand, cinders or other
loose material susceptible to blowing or escaping by reason of wind shall have
the load covered or dampened so as to prevent the blowing or escaping of the
load from the vehicle.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to trucks loaded with livestock, poultry
or agricultural products only, except baled agricultural products, provided
that any the truck shall be so constructed or loaded as to prevent the
livestock or poultry from escaping therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 16-1403) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Vehicle load limits, see 47 O.S. §§ 14-105 to 14-107
§ 71.118  LITTERING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to place, leave or
throw on or across any streets or sidewalks any rocks, sand, gravel, cement,
bottles, boxes, lumber, nails, wire, wood, limbs, leaves, trash or debris by
any other description, nor to leave, nor permit them to be left on any street,
sidewalk or city-owned property.
   (B)   The operator of a vehicle unless any other person in the vehicle
admits to or is identified as having committed the act, shall be liable for any
action of throwing, dropping, depositing or otherwise placing any item from
division (A) above from his or her vehicle upon, or within 100 yards of any
public highway, road, street or alley.
(Prior Code, § 16-1404)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-99) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.119  REMOVAL OF DEBRIS FROM STREETS.
   (A)   Any person that causes or permits any material of any kind to be
placed upon any of the city streets or sidewalks, except as provided by law,
shall forthwith immediately remove same from the street or sidewalk, or shall
pay the expense of causing same to be removed. 
   (B)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a city street,
road or highway shall, at the time of removing the vehicle, also remove any
glass, debris or other injurious substance left upon the highway from the
wrecked or damaged vehicle. 
   (C)   Failure to comply with this section shall constitute an offense. 
(Prior Code, § 16-1405)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-99; Am. Ord. 1703, passed 9-2-
03) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Deposit of debris prohibited; removal required, see 47 O.S. § 11-1110
§ 71.120  PROTRUSIONS; FLAG REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate, upon any street or highway, any vehicle which is
loaded with material extending more than two feet in any direction from the
body of the vehicle unless there is attached to the material a red flag by day
and a red or ruby light by night at the extreme end of the extended material.
(Prior Code, § 16-1406) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.121  PASSENGERS; OBSTRUCTING DRIVER'S VIEW.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle upon any street or highway when:
      (1)   The vehicle has more than three people in the front seat; or
      (2)   The vehicle is so loaded with passengers either seated or standing
in a manner or position so as to constitute a traffic hazard by obstructing the
view of the driver or by interfering with the driver's control over the
vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger shall ride or stand in a vehicle while the vehicle is
being driven upon any street or highway in a position or manner so as to
constitute a traffic hazard by obstructing the driver's view or by interfering
with the driver's control over the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16-1407) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1104
   SPEED REGULATIONS
§ 71.135  REASONABLE AND PRUDENT SPEEDS; EXISTING CONDITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater or less than is
reasonable or prudent under the conditions then existing, taking into
consideration among other things, the conditions of the vehicle, roadway, the
amount of light or darkness, the amount of traffic, presence of pedestrians in
or near the roadways and the obstruction of view.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle upon a highway at a speed greater
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
(Prior Code, § 16-501) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Basic speed rules, see 47 O.S. § 11-801
§ 71.136  MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTIONS.
   No vehicle shall be driven at an unreasonably slow speed in relation to the
effective maximum speed allowed as to constitute a hazard or to interfere with
the normal movement of other traffic, except when the slow speed is
unavoidable.
(Prior Code, § 16-502) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Minimum speed rules, see 47 O.S. § 11-804
§ 71.137  SPEED LIMITS GENERALLY; EXCEPTION.
   No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than 25 mph upon any street or
highway within the city except:
   (A)   Emergency vehicles being lawfully driven as provided in this traffic
code;
   (B)   When a different speed limit is otherwise designated and posted; and
   (C)   When there exists an established speed limit on a street which is
incorporated into the city street system as a result of annexation and has not
been changed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-503) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority to set speed limits, see 47 O.S. §§ 15-102 and 11-803
§ 71.138  OBEDIENCE TO MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM SPEED LIMITS.
   Where official signs and markings give notice of both maximum and minimum
speed limits in effect on any street, no vehicle shall be driven at rates in
excess of the maximum nor slower than the minimum, except as required by an
authorized officer or in obedience to posted official signs.
(Prior Code, § 16-504) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.139  SCHOOL ZONES AND CROSSINGS.
   No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than 20 mph between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. in any designated school zone on those days in which
school is in session unless a different speed limit or time is otherwise
designated and posted.
(Prior Code, § 16-505) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 71.140  SPEED CONTESTS.
   (A)   No person shall engage in, aid or abet any motor vehicle speed contest
or exhibition of speed on any street or highway.
   (B)   No person shall for the purpose of facilitating or aiding or as an
incident to any motor vehicle speed contest upon any street or highway, in any
manner obstruct or place any barricade or obstruction upon any street or
highway.
   (C)   When three or more persons assemble to witness or participate in an
unlawful speed contest the assembly is unlawful assembly and any person who
participates in the unlawful assembly is guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 16-506) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
General Parking Provisions
   
72.01   Hazardous or congested places
   
72.02   Vehicle entering stop intersection
   
72.03   Parking for certain purposes prohibited
   
72.04   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places
   
72.05   Double parking
   
72.06   Parking time limit signs required
   
72.07   Night parking in business district; exception
   
72.08   Truck parking prohibited
   
72.09   Parking time limits not exclusive
   
72.10   Obedience to angle parking signs or markings
   
72.11   Angle parking of commercial vehicles
   
72.12   Negligent parking
   
72.13   Parking not to obstruct traffic
   
72.14   Standing or parking close to curb
   
72.15   Right-of-way to parallel parking space
   
72.16   Opening and closing vehicle doors
   
72.17   Lights on parked vehicles; requirements
   
72.18   Application of standing or parking regulations
   
72.19   Illegal parking declared public nuisance
Loading Provisions
   
72.30   Definitions
   
72.31   Designated uses
   
72.32   Passenger curb loading zones; parking prohibited
   
72.33   Commercial curb loading zones; parking prohibited
   
72.34   Use of bus and taxicab stands
   
72.35   Buses and taxicabs
   
72.36   Permit required
Off-Street Parking on City Right-of-Way
   
72.50   Unlawful parking
   
72.51   Permit required; application
   
72.52   Method and design of construction
   
72.53   Inspections
   
72.54   Conditions of permit
   
72.55   Maintenance and repair
GENERAL PARKING PROVISIONS
§ 72.01  HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES.
   When official signs are erected in places where stopping, standing or
parking would create hazardous conditions or cause unusual delay to traffic, no
person shall violate the signs.
(Prior Code, § 16-901) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Local powers to regulate parking, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
§ 72.02  VEHICLE ENTERING STOP INTERSECTION.
   (A)   Except when directed by a police officer or traffic-control signal,
every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection, indicated by a stop
sign, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection.
   (B)   In the event there is no crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line before entering the intersection.  If there is no marked stop
line, then the driver shall stop at the point nearest the intersecting road
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on an intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection.  A driver after having stopped shall yield
the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another
highway or road, or which is approaching so close as to constitute immediate
hazard; but the driver having so yielded may then proceed and the driver of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the
vehicle so proceeding.
(Prior Code, § 16-902) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Local power to require stop at intersections, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
§ 72.03  PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway or upon any public property,
including public streets, easements, or rights-of-way, for the purpose of:

   (A)   Displaying a vehicle for sale; or

   (B)   Washing, cleaning or repairing the vehicle, except for repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
(Prior Code, § 16-903) (Am. Ord. 1718, passed 12-16-03) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.04  STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following
places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, sidewalk area or between the sidewalk and the
street;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic-control located at the side of a roadway;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone unless the
Traffic Engineer has indicated a different length by signs or markings;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
of the entrance, when properly signposted;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or construction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
      (13)   At any place where official signs give notice that stopping,
standing or parking is prohibited, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Locations for the use of public employees for parking government
vehicles engaged in official business, as designated by the Traffic Engineer;
         (b)   The left-hand side of any one-way street, as designated by the
Traffic Engineer;
         (c)   Either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school
property, as designated by the Traffic Engineer, where the parking would
interfere  with traffic or create a hazardous situation;
         (d)   Any narrow street, as designated by the Traffic Engineer when
the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet;
         (e)   The side of any street, as designated by the Traffic Engineer
when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet; or
         (f)   City-owned property or city-owned parking areas during the times
or under the conditions as designated by the Traffic Engineer.
      (14)   On any street parking-planting strip or center median;
      (15)   Upon the left-hand side of a one-way roadway which is part of a
highway composed of two or more separate roadways, each with one-way traffic,
unless the Traffic Engineer determines that stopping, standing or parking may
be permitted and erects signs giving notice thereof;
      (16)   Within any alley, except for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading and unloading merchandise;
      (17)   Within a fire lane, as approved by the Fire Chief and Chief of
Police, pursuant hereto; or
      (18)   Within any parking space that is designated and posted as a
reserved area for parking of motor vehicles of a physically disabled person
unless the vehicle is eligible for a detachable insignia or reflective insignia
of a physically disabled person, and the insignia is displayed, as provided in
accordance with state law or regulations adopted pursuant thereto. The
provisions of this section shall apply to any designated and posted reserved
area on public property or private property accessible to the public and where
the public is invited.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any prohibited area or an unlawful distance away from the curb.
(Prior Code, § 16-904) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1003
§ 72.05  DOUBLE PARKING.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be permitted to double park or double stop under the
conditions hereinafter set out:
      (1)   Within 50 feet of an intersection, except alley intersections or
within ten feet of an alley intersection;
      (2)   Opposite a double parked or double stopped vehicle across the
street;
      (3)   When the double parking or double stopping could or does block or
interfere materially with the normal movement of traffic;
      (4)   When parking space adjacent to the curb is available; and
      (5)   When directed by a police officer to move on.
   (B)   Vehicles not used ordinarily for the transportation of merchandise may
double stop for the purpose of, but only while actually engaged in, the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, subject, however, to all the
general conditions hereinabove set out.
   (C)   Vehicles used ordinarily for the transportation of merchandise may
double park for the purpose of, but only while actually engaged in, the
expeditious loading or unloading of merchandise, subject, however, to all the
general conditions hereinabove set out.  No vehicle shall be double parked
longer than ten minutes.
(Prior Code, § 16-905) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.06  PARKING TIME LIMIT SIGNS REQUIRED.
   No parking time limits shall be effective unless the signs are erected and
in place at the time of the alleged offense.
(Prior Code, § 16-906)
§ 72.07  NIGHT PARKING IN BUSINESS DISTRICT; EXCEPTION.
   No person shall park a vehicle on any street in any business district for a
period of time longer than 30 minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00
a.m. of any day, except physicians on emergency calls.
(Prior Code, § 16-907) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.08  TRUCK PARKING PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to park
any truck, bus, tractor, trailer or other commercial vehicle, with the
exception of private passenger cars on the streets of the city for a period in
excess of two hours.
(Prior Code, § 16-908) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.09  PARKING TIME LIMITS NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
(Prior Code, § 16-909)
§ 72.10  OBEDIENCE TO ANGLE PARKING SIGNS OR MARKINGS.
   On those streets which have been assigned or marked for angle parkings, no
person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or
edge of the roadway indicated by the signs or markings.
(Prior Code, § 16-910) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.11  ANGLE PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   Commercial vehicles shall be permitted to park on any street or highway at
an angle with the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise only
when the angle parking does not interfere with the normal flow of vehicular
traffic on the street or highway.
(Prior Code, § 16-911)
Statutory reference:
   Power to prohibit angle parking; exceptions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1004
§ 72.12  NEGLIGENT PARKING.
   No person shall park, cause to be parked, stop or leave unattended any
vehicle as follows:
   (A)   In a careless or negligent manner;
   (B)   In a manner as to endanger life, limb, person or property; or
   (C)   In a manner as to endanger or interfere with the lawful traffic or use
of the streets.
(Prior Code, § 16-912) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.13  PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.
   No person shall park any vehicle upon any street or alley in a manner or
under the conditions as to leave available less than ten feet in width of the
street or alley for free movement of vehicular traffic.
(Prior Code, § 16-913) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.14  STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs, shall be so stopped or
parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within 18
inches of the right-hand curb.
(Prior Code, § 16-914) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Parking rules, see 47 O.S. § 11-1004
§ 72.15  RIGHT-OF-WAY TO PARALLEL PARKING SPACE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle intending to occupy a parallel parking space
where a backing movement is necessary and which is being vacated by another
vehicle shall stop his or her vehicle to the rear of the parking space until
the vacating vehicle has cleared and entered normal traffic.  He or she then
shall be deemed to have the right-of-way to the parking space over any other
vehicle attempting to park therein.
   (B)   The first of two or more vehicles to reach the rear boundary of an
unoccupied parallel parking space, where a backing movement is necessary to
occupy, shall be deemed to have the right-of-way to the parking space.
(Prior Code, § 16-915)
§ 72.16  OPENING AND CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS.
   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic, unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so.  No person
shall leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving
traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.
(Prior Code, § 16-916) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1105
§ 72.17  LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A vehicle parked upon a street or highway outside of a business or
residential district during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and
one-half hour before sunrise shall be equipped with one or more lamps which
shall exhibit a white light on the roadway side visible from a distance of 500
feet to the front of the vehicle and a red light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the rear.
   (B)   Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed.
(Prior Code, § 16-917) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.18  APPLICATION OF STANDING OR PARKING REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable when it is necessary
for a vehicle to stop to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control
device.
(Prior Code, § 16-918)
Statutory reference:
   Exceptions to parking regulations, see 47 O.S. § 11-1003
§ 72.19  ILLEGAL PARKING DECLARED PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Any vehicle in violation of any regulation contained in this chapter
governing, limiting or prohibiting the parking or standing of a vehicle on any
street or public thoroughfare is hereby declared to constitute a public
nuisance, and each separate traffic citation issued as authorized herein for
the violation shall constitute a separate notice thereof to the owner or
operator of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16-919)
   LOADING PROVISIONS
§ 72.30  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL LOADING ZONES.  All curb loading zones authorized and regularly
used exclusively for the loading of merchandise for storage, trade, shipment or
re-sale.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.
      (1)   A truck designated for delivery purposes with the name of the owner
or his or her business painted on both sides of the vehicle, regularly used
during normal business hours for the delivery and handling of merchandise or
freight and which bears a regular state commercial license tag; and
      (2)   A passenger vehicle used regularly and actually engaged during
normal business hours in the delivery and handling of merchandise or freight,
and which bears a special numbered license plate issued by the city at the rear
of the vehicle attached to the state license plate together with an identically
numbered decal, issued by the city and displayed on the windshield of the
passenger vehicle.
   PASSENGER LOADING ZONES.  All loading zones authorized and used regularly
and exclusively for the loading and unloading of passengers except bus stops,
taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 16-1001)
§ 72.31  DESIGNATED USES.
   No curb loading zone authorized and established as a passenger loading zone
shall be used as a commercial loading zone and no commercial loading zone shall
be used as a passenger loading zone, except as may be specifically provided by
law.
(Prior Code, § 16-1002) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.32  PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONES; PARKING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a passenger curb loading
zone for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading
or unloading of passengers, during the hours when the regulations applicable to
the curb loading zones are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed
three minutes.
(Prior Code, § 16-1003) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.33  COMMERCIAL CURB LOADING ZONES; PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a commercial curb
loading zone for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious
unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials during hours when the
provisions applicable to the zones are in effect.  In no case shall the stop
for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.  Vehicles using any
commercial loading zone shall be subject to the licensing requirements and
regulations provided by this chapter.
   (B)   No passenger vehicle, as defined herein, shall be parked in locations
designated as commercial loading zones unless the owner of the vehicle has met
the requirements for a commercial vehicle license and has obtained the license,
license plate and decal.
(Prior Code, § 16-1004) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.34  USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop
or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when the stop or stand has been
officially designated and the appropriate signs are in place.  The driver of a
passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when the stopping does not
interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone.
(Prior Code, § 16-1005) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.35  BUSES AND TAXICABS.
   (A)   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park the vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated.
   (B)   The operator of a bus shall not stop the vehicle upon any street at
any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage
other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone, except in case
of an emergency.
   (C)   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in a manner that the bus, when stopped to load
or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front
wheel of the vehicle not farther than 18 inches from the curb and the bus
approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of
other vehicular traffic.
   (D)   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle upon any
street at any place other than in a taxicab stand.  This provision shall not
prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with
other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
(Prior Code, § 16-1006) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.36  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to issue special permits to permit
the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of the permit. 
Permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the
owner of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16-1007)
OFF-STREET PARKING ON CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 72.50  UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm, or corporation to park
or cause to be parked, or to permit to be parked, any automobile or other
vehicle wholly or partially upon any right-of-way of any road, street or alley
in the city except in compliance with this chapter, or except for parking on
streets as permitted herein.
(Prior Code, § 15-301)  (Am. Ord. 1317, passed 1-8-85) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.51  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to establish parking upon
right-of-way in the city shall, before any grading, drainage or work of any
kind is done thereon and before any vehicles are so parked, obtain a permit
therefor from the City Engineer.
   (B)   The application shall be submitted to the City Engineer in writing. 
It shall contain plans and profiles for the work contemplated in sufficient
detail for the City Engineer to assess whether the work will comply with the
requirements of the chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-302)  (Am. Ord. 1317, passed 1-8-85) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.52  METHOD AND DESIGN OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, plans for parking on right-of-way
shall establish islands between the parking curb and the street curb as
follows:
      (1)   Not less than ten feet on 39th Expressway between Rockwell Avenue
and the west city limits; and
      (2)   Not less than five feet on all other streets within the city.
   (B)   Parking on right-of-way shall be designed so that vehicles exiting the
premises are not required to back into the traveled portion of a street, except
where permitted herein.
   (C)   The manner of construction and materials shall meet the general
specifications of the city for parking areas.
   (D)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, parking on right-of-
way shall not be permitted if it will interfere with the traveling public,
pedestrians or the city's use of right-of-way.  Nor shall parking be
established at or near an intersection or so close thereto as to obstruct the
view of the traveling public at the intersection.
(Prior Code, § 15-303)  (Am. Ord. 1317, passed 1-8-85) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.53  INSPECTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the City Engineer or his or her inspectors to
inspect, check, test or measure any and all work during the construction of the
parking areas, and if he or she shall discover that the same are not in
compliance with approved plans, then the Engineer shall order the work
discontinued until full compliance with the plans is made.
(Prior Code, § 15-304)  (Am. Ord. 1317, passed 1-8-85) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.54  CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Every person, firm or corporation performing the construction work
shall give warning thereof to the traveling public.  Where the same is in an
unsafe condition for travel, the warning shall disclose the condition.  Lighted
barricades shall be placed about the construction area.
   (B)   Issuance of the permit shall not allow or authorize the following
acts, and it shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or
corporation to do any of the same:
      (1)   To commence or carry on any work after the same has been ordered
stopped by the City Engineer;
      (2)   To commence or carry on any work in an authorized manner; or
      (3)   To fail or neglect to give warnings or place barricades as
required.
(Prior Code, § 15-305)  (Am. Ord. 1317, passed 1-8-85) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 72.55  MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.
   (A)   The owner of the premises making application for the parking on right-
of-way and all successors in ownership thereof shall be fully responsible for
the completion, maintenance or repair of the parking area.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation making application for a permit to
establish parking on the right-of-way shall submit, with the application, an
agreement and covenant running with the land on which the parking is located,
which shall require the owner of the property to maintain the parking area on
public right-of-way according to the regulations of the city for as long as the
area is maintained for vehicle parking, and which shall provide that, upon
failure to maintain the parking area on public right-of-way, the city shall
have the right upon notice and hearing to the current owner of the subject
property to repair the parking area adjacent to public rights-of-way as
abatement of public nuisances.
   (C)   If the property owner shall fail to properly maintain or repair the
parking areas on right-of-way to an extent which threatens or causes surface or
subsurface damage to an adjoining street or alley under the care of the city,
then the city may repair the areas and recover all costs incurred in making the
repair, in accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   At least ten days' notice shall be given to the owner of the
subject property by certified mail with return receipt requested at the address
shown by the current year's tax rolls in the County Treasurer's office before
the City Council holds a hearing or takes action.  However, if the property
owner cannot be located as shown by the return receipt, notice may be given by
publication one time not less than ten days prior to any hearing or action by
the City Council.
      (2)   The owner of the property may give his or her written consent to
the city authorizing the repair of the parking area on public right-of-way.  By
giving the written consent the owner waives his or her right to a hearing by
the City Council.
      (3)   A hearing may be held by the City Council to determine whether the
parking area on public right-of-way has become a public nuisance by reason of
deterioration or damage which threatens to cause or causes surface or
subsurface damage to the adjoining street, alley or public way, or which
constitutes a nuisance or a hazard to traffic or pedestrians.
      (4)   Upon a finding that the condition of the property constitutes a
nuisance or hazard to traffic or pedestrians or threatens to cause surface or
subsurface damage to adjoining public streets, the agents of the city are
granted the right of entry on the property for the repair of the parking area
on public right-of-way and performance of the necessary duties as a
governmental function of the city.
      (5)   The City Council shall determine the actual cost of the repair and
any other expenses as may be necessary in connection therewith, including the
cost of notice and mailing.  The City Clerk shall forward, by certified mail
with return receipt requested, to the property owner, at the address specified
herein, a statement of the actual cost and demanding payment.  If the repairs
are done by the city, the cost to the property owner for the repairs shall not
exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance and equipment required, plus
costs of mailing and publication.  If the repairs are done on a private
contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder.
      (6)   If payment is not made within 30 days from the date of the mailing
of the statement, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of the
amount of the cost to the County Treasurer and the same shall be levied on the
property and collected by the County Treasurer as other taxes authorized by
law.  The cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property
from the date the cost is certified to the County Treasurer, coequal with the
lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and prior
and superior to all other titles and liens against the property, and the lien
shall continue until the cost shall be fully paid.  At any time prior to the
collection, as provided herein, the city may pursue any civil remedy for
collection of the amount owing and interest thereon.  Upon receiving payment,
if any, the City Clerk shall forward to the County Treasurer a notice of the
payment and directing discharge of the lien.
(Prior Code, § 15-306)  (Am. Ord. 1317, passed 1-8-85) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
CHAPTER 73:  BICYCLES
Section
   
73.01   Applicability; regulations and traffic law
   
73.02   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
73.03   Speed regulations
   
73.04   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
   
73.05   Riding on sidewalks
   
73.06   Emerging from alley or driveway
   
73.07   Parking
   
73.08   Manner of riding
   
73.09   Clinging to vehicles
   
73.10   Carrying articles
   
73.11   Lamps and equipment on bicycles
   
73.12   Rental agencies
§ 73.01  APPLICABILITY; REGULATIONS AND TRAFFIC LAW.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply whenever a bicycle is
operated upon any street or upon any public way, subject to those exceptions
stated in this chapter.  (Prior Code, § 16-1501)
   (B)   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the
rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of the state and the traffic provisions of this code
applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this
chapter and except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances, which by
their nature, are inapplicable to the persons.  (Prior Code, § 16-1502)
Statutory reference:
   Bicycle rules generally, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-1201 to 11-1207
   Local powers to regulate, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
§ 73.02  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles
unless otherwise directed by other police officers.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating no right or left or
U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the directions
of the sign, except where the person dismounts from the bicycle to make any
turn, in which event, the person shall then obey the regulations applicable to
the pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 16-1503) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 73.03  SPEED REGULATIONS.
   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Prior Code, § 16-1504)
§ 73.04  RIDING ON-ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or a vehicle proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use.
   (C)   If usable paths for bicycles are provided adjacent to a roadway,
bicycle riders shall use the paths and shall not use the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 16-1505) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 73.05  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
   (B)   The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs and, when the signs
are in place, no person shall disobey them.
   (C)    Persons riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way
to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and
passing any pedestrian.
(Prior Code, § 16-1506)  Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 73.06  EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
   (A)   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley or driveway shall,
upon approaching a sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the alley or
driveway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk
or sidewalk area.
   (B)   Upon entering the roadway, the bicycle operator shall yield the right-
of-way to all vehicles approaching on all side roadways.
(Prior Code, § 16-1507) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 73.07  PARKING.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against the building or at the curb in a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 16-1508) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 73.08  MANNER OF RIDING.
   (A)   No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Prior Code, § 16-1509) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 73.09  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
(Prior Code, § 16-1510) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 73.10  CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand on the handle bars.
(Prior Code, § 16-1511) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 73.11  LAMPS AND EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   Bicycles in use at night-time shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be
visible from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear.  A lamp emitting a red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the
red reflector.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet.
   (C)   A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use, any
siren or whistle.
   (D)   Bicycles shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator
to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Prior Code, § 16-1512) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 73.12  RENTAL AGENCIES.
   A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the
bicycle is equipped with all the equipment required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-1513) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
CHAPTER 74:  PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
74.01   Pedestrians subject to traffic-control signals
   
74.02   Coasters, roller skates, wheelchairs and the like
   
74.03   Drivers to exercise due care
   
74.04   Crossing limited
   
74.05   Right-of-way at crosswalks
   
74.06   Walking on right side of crosswalks
   
74.07   Crossing outside crosswalks
   
74.08   Yielding
   
74.09   Walking along roadways
   
74.10   Soliciting rides and the like
   
74.11   Clinging to vehicles
   
74.12   Riding outside passenger compartment; exceptions
Statutory reference:
   Pedestrians rights and duties, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-501 to 11-507
§ 74.01  PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as provided for in
this code, but, at all other places, pedestrians shall be granted those rights
and be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-1601)
§ 74.02  COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, WHEELCHAIRS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster,
scooter, toy wagon, wheelchair or similar device shall go upon any roadway,
except while crossing a street at a crosswalk and, when so crossing, the person
shall be granted all rights and shall be subject to all duties applicable to
pedestrians.
   (B)   This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play
street, when authorized by law.
(Prior Code, § 16-1602)
§ 74.03  DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, every driver shall exercise
due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give
warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper
precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person on
the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 16-1603)
§ 74.04  CROSSING LIMITED.
   (A)   Between adjacent intersections, at which traffic-control signals are
in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place, except in a crosswalk.
   (B)   Pedestrians shall not cross any divided highway having a median in the
center thereof, except in a crosswalk.
   (C)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any
business district.
(Prior Code, § 16-1604)
§ 74.05  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   When traffic-control signs are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way slowing down or stopping, if
need be, to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when:
      (1)   The pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the
vehicle is traveling; or
      (2)   The pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite edge of
the roadway as to be in danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety or
walk or run into the path of the vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a
marked crosswalk, or any unmarked crosswalk, at an intersection to permit a
pedestrian to cross a roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
the rear shall not overtake to pass the stopped vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16-1605) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 74.06  WALKING ON RIGHT SIDE OF CROSSWALKS.
   Pedestrians, when crossing the street at a crosswalk, shall move, whenever
practicable, upon the right half of the crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 16-1606)
§ 74.07  CROSSING OUTSIDE CROSSWALKS.
   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except
in a crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 16-1607) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 74.08  YIELDING.
   Every pedestrian upon a roadway at any point other than within a marked or
unmarked crosswalk at any intersection, shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles upon the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 16-1608)
§ 74.09  WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practical, walk only on the left side of the
roadway, or its shoulder, facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction.
(Prior Code, § 16-1609) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 74.10  SOLICITING RIDES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for purpose of soliciting a ride,
donations, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall:
      (1)   Stand in any street, roadway or park and stop or attempt to stop
and engage any person in any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting
contributions;
      (2)   Sell or attempt to sell anything to any person in any vehicle;
      (3)   Hand or attempt to hand to any person in any vehicle any circular,
advertisement, handbill or any political campaign literature or any sample,
souvenir or gift; or
      (4)   In any other manner, while standing in the street or roadway,
attempt to interfere with the normal flow of traffic for any other similar
purpose.
(Prior Code, § 16-1610) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 74.11  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall
attach the same or himself or herself to any moving vehicle upon a roadway.
(Prior Code, § 16-1611) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
§ 74.12  RIDING OUTSIDE PASSENGER COMPARTMENT; EXCEPTIONS.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall allow a passenger to ride outside the
passenger compartment of the vehicle on the streets, roads or highways of the
city.  This section shall not apply to persons so riding on private property,
or for parades or special events, nor shall the section apply to passengers
riding on the bed of a pickup truck.
(Prior Code, § 16-1612)  (Ord. 1618, passed 8-17-99) 
Penalty, see § 70.999
TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
91.   ALARM SYSTEMS
      
92.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
94.   CITY CEMETERY
      
95.   ANIMALS
      
96.   ABANDONED, JUNKED AND DISCARDED VEHICLES
      
97.   AIR QUALITY CONTROL
         
APPENDIX A:   ALLOWABLE RATE OF PARTICLE MATTER OF EMISSION
         
APPENDIX B:   HOT MIX ASPHALT PLANTS
      
98.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
      
99.   IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
CHAPTER 90:  FIRE PREVENTION
Section
   
90.01   Investigation of fire origins
   
90.02   Inspection of premises
   
90.03   Right to enter
   
90.04   Combustible and explosive material
   
90.05   Examination of plats and plans for water extensions
   
90.06   Fire hydrants; new construction
   
90.07   Fire lanes devoted to public use
   
90.08   Fire protection outside city limits
   
90.09   Unlawful burning prohibited
§ 90.01  INVESTIGATION OF FIRE ORIGINS.
   The Fire Chief shall cause to be investigated the cause, origin and
circumstances of every suspicious fire occurring in the city, and shall
especially make investigation as to whether the fire was the result of
carelessness or design.  The investigation is to begin within the time provided
by law.  The Chief shall communicate and report to the State Fire Marshal, on
forms to be furnished by him or her, the cause of the fire and all facts
relating to the cause and origin of the fire, as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 14-131)
Statutory reference:
   Reports to State Fire Marshal, see 74 O.S. § 314
§ 90.02  INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   The Fire Chief shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, as often as may be
necessary, but not less frequently than the Manager may prescribe, the
buildings, premises and public thoroughfares in the city for the purpose of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any condition liable to cause fire, or
any violation of the provisions of any ordinances of the city affecting the
fire hazard.
(Prior Code, § 14-132)
§ 90.03  RIGHT TO ENTER.
   The Fire Chief or his or her designee is hereby authorized to enter any
premises or building within the city at any reasonable hour to examine and
determine the condition of any building which, for want of proper repair, or by
reason of age and dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable
to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property,
or so occupied that a fire would endanger persons or other property therein. 
The Chief or his or her designee shall order any building or premises to be
repaired, torn down, demolished, materials removed and all dangerous conditions
removed.
(Prior Code, § 14-133)
§ 90.04  COMBUSTIBLE AND EXPLOSIVE MATERIAL.
   (A)   (1)   If the Chief finds, in a building or upon any premises, any
combustible or explosive material, rubbish, rags, waste, oils, gasoline or
inflammable conditions of any kind, dangerous to the safety of buildings or
property, he or she shall order the materials removed or condition remedied. 
The order shall be made against the owner, lessee, agent or occupant of the
building or premises, and thereupon, the order shall be complied with in the
time fixed in the order.
      (2)   If the owner, lessee, agent or occupant deems himself or herself
aggrieved by the order and desires a hearing, he or she may complain or appeal
to the State Fire Marshal within three days from the service of the order, and
thereafter all proceedings shall be as provided by state law.
   (B)   It is unlawful and an offense for any owner, lessee, agent or occupant
to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the order unless the complaint is
made or appeal taken, as above provided.
(Prior Code, § 14-134) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.05  EXAMINATION OF PLATS AND PLANS FOR WATER EXTENSIONS.
   The Fire Chief shall inspect all plans and specifications for extension to
the water system in the city and shall make recommendations as to the location,
size and type of fire hydrants.
(Prior Code, § 14-135)
§ 90.06  FIRE HYDRANTS; NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   (1)   Fire hydrants of a type and manufacture approved by the City
Superintendent of Water shall be available to serve the building site of all
commercial, industrial, mercantile, educational, institutional, assembly,
hotel, motel, multi-family dwelling or mobile home park occupancies prior to
start of construction of combustible materials.  Where water mains are not
accessible, an adequate plan for fire protection shall be submitted to and
approved by the Fire Chief of the city prior to start of construction.
      (2)   Building plans for all new construction involving the occupancies,
listed in division (A)(1) above, shall show the location of fire hydrants on
both public and private property as approved by the Fire Chief and the City
Engineer before any actual construction is undertaken.
      (3)   Hydrant location and standards are as follows:
         (a)   All hydrants are to be installed according to city standards.
         (b)   No portion of a building of any occupancy listed in division (A)
(1) above shall be located more than 300 feet from a hydrant.
         (c)   Fire hydrants shall be located apart from buildings and fully
accessible from paved driveways and fire lanes.
      (4)   Access to fire hydrants required by division (A)(1) above shall not
be required for sites whose structures total less than 2,000 square feet unless
constituting or declared a high hazard occupancy by the Fire Chief of the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-136)
   (B)   (1)   The proper size for water mains located on public or private
property which supply fire hydrants for occupancies listed in division (A)(1)
above shall be approved by the city.
      (2)    The City Engineer shall approve no water main supplying fire
hydrants for occupancies listed in division (A)(1) above which is less than six
inches in diameter.
(Prior Code, § 14-137)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.07  FIRE LANES DEVOTED TO PUBLIC USE.
   (A)   The marking of fire lanes on private property, devoted to public use,
shall be approved by the Fire Chief and the Chief of Police of the city.
   (B)   Fire lanes and driveways shall be located so that all buildings served
by them are accessible to fire equipment.
   (C)   (1)   The contractor or person in charge of any construction site for
commercial, industrial, mercantile, educational, institutional, assembly,
hotel, motel, multi-family dwelling or mobile home park occupancies shall
provide and maintain an approved hard surfaced, all-weather access fire lane,
not less than 20 feet in width, as shown on approved site plans.
      (2)   The access lane shall be complete at the time that construction has
progressed to completion of the first foundation.
   (D)   Fire lanes required by division (A) above shall not be required for
sites whose structures total less than 2,000 square feet unless constituting or
declared a high hazard occupancy by the Fire Chief of the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-138)
§ 90.08  FIRE PROTECTION OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   The City Council, pursuant to law, may enter into contracts with any
political subdivision, or any person or organization, to provide fire
protection to the subdivisions, persons or organizations, under the terms or
conditions as may be agreed to between the parties.  A copy of the contract
shall be furnished to the parties.
(Prior Code, § 14-139)
Statutory reference:
   Fire protection contracts, see 11 O.S. §§ 29-103 and 29-106
§ 90.09  UNLAWFUL BURNING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to set fire to any forest, grass, woods,
wild lands, or marshes, or to build a campfire or bonfire, or to burn trash or
other material that may cause a forest, grass, structure, or woods fire in the
city, when there is a proclamation issued by the state governor or county
commissioner resolution determining extraordinary danger from fire in Oklahoma
County, unless the setting of any backfire is necessary to afford protection
from the fire, or to save life or property.
   (B)   The burden of proving need for setting fires is on the person claiming
same as a defense.
   (C)   The definitions contained in 2 O.S. § 16-26 shall apply in
interpreting this section.
(Ord. 1759, passed 1-17-06; Am. Ord. 1850, passed 4-19-11)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 91:  ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
91.01   Purpose and scope
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Permits required; fee assessment
   
91.04   Businesses; registration required
   
91.05   Certain interconnections prohibited
   
91.06   False alarms; charges; permit revocation
   
91.07   Violation; appropriate legal action
§ 91.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to enhance and protect the emergency services
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-220)
§ 91.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM ADMINISTRATOR.  The department head, or his or her designee, of the
department designated by the City Manager to perform the administrative
functions of this chapter.
   ALARM BUSINESS.  The business by any individual, partnership, corporation or
other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering,
replacing, moving, installing or monitoring any alarm system or causing to be
sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, installed or
monitored any alarm system in or on any  building, structure or facility, but
excluding any person who installs his or her own alarm on his or her own
property to protect his or her own personal property.
   ALARM SYSTEM.
      (1)   One or more devices designed to detect and signal unauthorized
intrusion, entry, robbery, fire or other emergency condition, which signals are
responded to by public law enforcement officers, Fire Department personnel,
private security guards or security officers and includes:
         (a)   Interconnecting systems which are connected, either directly or
through a mechanical device, to a telephone for the purpose of using the
telephone line to transmit a message upon activation of the alarm system;
         (b)   Automatic dialing devices; and
         (c)   Audible systems not interconnected to telephone lines which when
activated sound a bell, siren or other device that make an audible or visual
signal at the location protected by the alarm system.
      (2)   ALARM SYSTEMS installed within vehicles shall be excluded.
   ALARM USER.  Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization in control of any building, structure or facility
located within the city, wherein an alarm system is maintained, and included
users outside the city for the purposes of false alarm charges in
§ 91.06(A).
   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE.  A device which is interconnected to a telephone
line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit
by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for
police, fire or medical response.
   FALSE ALARM.
      (1)   The activation of a burglary, robbery, fire or other alarm for the
purpose of summoning emergency assistance or which causes the Police or Fire
Department to be summoned, at a time when no emergency exists and includes
those caused by:
         (a)   Error, mistake or any action by any person, firm, corporation or
other entity or agent thereof, owning or operating any dwelling, building or
place which results in the activation of any alarm system when no emergency
exists;
         (b)   Malfunction or any activation of any alarm system caused by a
flaw in the normal operation, design, installation, maintenance of the system,
faulty equipment, change in environment, atmospheric conditions or premises
upon or within which the alarm system is operating; and
         (c)   Intentional misuse or any intentional activation of an alarm
system when no  burglary, robbery, vandalism, fire or other emergency is in
progress, but excluding testing during installation and regular maintenance
when the alarm user notifies the police service in advance and receives
permission for the test.
      (2)   An alarm will not be considered a FALSE ALARM if it is determined
by the police service that the alarm was the result of vandalism, attempted
entry or severe weather, which causes visible, physical or other evidence of
damage to the premises.
   IN-STATION ALARMS.  An alarm system which is connected to the police station
communications area or the Fire Department by telephone or other means which
summons emergency assistance.
(Prior Code, § 14-221)
§ 91.03  PERMITS REQUIRED; FEE ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   No alarm system shall be installed, maintained or operated until the
alarm user shall have first obtained a permit from the alarm administrator for
each alarm system on the premises.  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain
or operate an alarm system without obtaining a permit.
   (B)   The application for permit shall include information as to the number
of and type of alarms installed, alarm business providing the service,
monitoring agent and numbers to be called in the event an emergency should
occur.  An approved application and permit shall bear the signature of the
alarm administrator.  The administrator shall assess an initial and annual
permit fee in an amount to be established by resolution of the City Council of
the City of Bethany.
   (C)   An annual permit fee is hereby levied on each alarm system within the
city.  The fee shall be paid by the alarm user and shall be due on July 1 of
each year and shall expire on the following June 30.  No free permits shall be
granted, nor rebates allowed for any cause, nor any sum accepted less than the
amount specified herein.  Nor shall a permit be issued for a shorter period
than required in this section.  No fee shall be levied on governmental agencies
maintaining an alarm, provided that this shall not exempt the agencies from the
requirement to obtain a permit. The amount of such fee shall be established by
resolution of the City Council of the City of Bethany.
   (D)   Alarm users shall display all current permit stickers on the front
entrance of their residence or business so that it will be available for
inspection any time, night or day.
(Prior Code, § 14-222) (Am. Ord. 1768, passed 6-20-06; Am. Ord. 1770, passed 8-
15-06) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.04  BUSINESSES; REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the alarm industry
business, as defined in 59 O.S. §§ 1800.1 et seq., unless licensed pursuant to
the State Alarm Industry Act.
   (B)   Every alarm business selling, leasing or furnishing any alarm system
within the city shall furnish the alarm user with instructions that provide
adequate information to enable the alarm user to operate the alarm system
properly and to obtain service for the alarm system.
   (C)   Every alarm business doing business with alarm users shall be required
to register with the alarm administrator each calendar year.  Registration
shall include copies of the state license of the company or individual
providing services to the alarm user and other information as the alarm
administrator deems appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 14-223)
§ 91.05  CERTAIN INTERCONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to any
telephone line which, when activated, dials the digits 9-1-1.  It is unlawful
for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an automatic dialing
device which is programmed to dial the digits 9-1-1.
(Prior Code, § 14-224) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.06  FALSE ALARMS; CHARGES; PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   An excessive number of false alarms shall be deemed to be more than
three false alarms within any three-month period.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, tenant, corporation,
partnership, trust, joint venture or any other entity and their respective
agents who have a right to exert control and/or any other legal entity or
person who has a record interest and/or control over property protected by an
alarm system who allows, continues or causes excessive false alarms, as defined
in § 91.02, to be made or continued.
(Prior Code, § 14-225)  (Am. Ord. 1649, passed 1-16-01) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.07  VIOLATION; APPROPRIATE LEGAL ACTION.
   In addition to the penalties, the alarm administrator is hereby authorized
to take appropriate legal action to require the disconnection of any alarm
system operated in violation of this chapter, including, but not limited to
disconnection of the alarm system through injunctive relief in the District
Court.
(Prior Code, § 14-226)  (Ord. 1443, passed 4-18-89)
CHAPTER 92:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Street Names and Numbers
   
92.01   Street designation
   
92.02   East and west streets
   
92.03   North and south streets
   
92.04   Future streets
   
92.05   Duty to post street markers
   
92.06   House numbers; duty to post
Obstructions
   
92.20   Projections over sidewalks
   
92.21   View obstructions prohibited
   
92.22   Tree limbs to be trimmed; failure
   
92.23   Removal of traffic hazards
   
92.24   Complaint, notice and hearing
   
92.25   Hearing and order to remove traffic hazard
   
92.26   Failure to remove
Street Lights
   
92.40   Provision of street lights
   
92.41   Contract for electric current
   
92.42   Action upon special orders
STREETS NAMES AND NUMBERS
§ 92.01  STREET DESIGNATION.
   All streets running east and west in the city shall be designated by
numbers.  All streets running north and south in the city shall be designated
by name. (Prior Code, § 15-401)
§ 92.02  EAST AND WEST STREETS.
   (A)   The east and west streets in the city shall have the following
designations:  the first street on the south edge of the city, shall be known
as N.W. 16th Street and the streets shall be numbered consecutively, except as
indicated herein, to the north edge of the city, which shall be known as N.W.
63rd Street.
   (B)   The exceptions shall be as follows:  the first street north of N.W.
25th Street, between Glade and Council, shall be N.W. 25th Street Terrace; the
first street north of N.W. 28th Street, between Glade and Thompkins, shall be
N.W. 28th Street Terrace; the first street north of N.W. 29th Street, between
Peniel and Mueller, shall be N.W. 29th Street Terrace; the first street north
of N.W. 30th, between Peniel and Mueller, shall be N.W. 30th Street Terrace;
the first street north of N.W. 31st Street between Peniel and Mueller, shall be
N.W. 31st Street Terrace; the first street north of N.W. 34th Street, between
Shannon Drive and Eagle Lane, shall be N.W. 34th Street Terrace; the first
street north of N.W. 38th Street, between Beaver and Rockwell Avenue, shall be
N.W. 38th Street Terrace; the first street north of 38th Street, on the ease
edge of the city and continuing through the limits of the city, shall be N.W.
39th Street Expressway; the first street north of N.W. 39th Street, between
Rockwell Avenue and Divis, shall be N.W. 39th Street Terrace; the first street
north of N.W. 59th Street, between Rockwell Avenue and the east edge of the
limits of the city, shall be N.W. 59th Street Terrace; the street between N.W.
59th Street Terrace and N.W. 60th Street, beginning and ending on N.W. 60th
Street, shall be N.W. 60th Street Drive;
the first street north of N.W. 61st Street shall be N.W. 61st Street Terrace.
(Prior Code, § 15-402)
§ 92.03  NORTH AND SOUTH STREETS.
   (A)   The streets running north and south shall be designated by name.
   (B)   The first street on the east limits of the city shall be MacArthur
Boulevard, with the exception hereinafter noted.  The north and south streets
in order from east to west shall be named as follows: MacArthur Boulevard,
North Hammond Avenue, North Wheeler Avenue, North Redmond Avenue, North Donald
Avenue, North Peniel Avenue, North College Avenue, North Central Road, North
Asbury Avenue, North Mueller Avenue, North Willow Avenue, North Holloway, North
Beaver Avenue, North Rockwell Avenue, North Donna Avenue, North Divis Avenue,
North Alexander Lane, North Glade Avenue, North Thompkins Road, North Tropicana
Avenue, Council Road, North Markwell Avenue, North Shannon Avenue, Eagle Lane,
with the exceptions as follows:  the first street west of Peniel between N.W.
19th Street and N.W. 22nd Street shall be Keeton Drive; the first street west
of College between N.W. 19th Street and N.W. 23rd Street shall be Gleason
Avenue; the first street west of Mueller between N.W. 25th Street and N.W. 30th
Street shall be Oakridge; the first street west of Beaver between N.W. 50th
Street and N.W. 53rd Street shall be Dawson Avenue; the first street west of
Divis between N.W. 17th Street and N.W. 20th Street shall be Timber Avenue; the
first street west of Divis Avenue between N.W. 39th Street Expressway and N.W.
45th Street shall be Martin Avenue; the first street west of Glade Avenue
between N.W. 28th Terrace and N.W. 30th Street and between N.W. 30th Terrace
and N.W. 31st Street shall be Flamingo; the first street west of Rockwell
Avenue between N.W. 43rd Street and N.W. 44th Street shall be Rea Avenue.
(Prior Code, § 15-403)
§ 92.04  FUTURE STREETS.
   (A)   All street and avenues laid out in the city shall conform as near as
practical to the named or numbered streets or avenues as set forth herein.
   (B)   No new designation shall be given to any streets and avenues unless
they do not conform in location or direction to the named avenues or numbered
streets as set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-404)
§ 92.05  DUTY TO POST STREET MARKERS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of each developer to place street markers at each
intersection in the section being developed.  The markers shall conform in
style and quality with the standard street markers adopted by the city.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the city to maintain the markers after the
installation by developers and acceptance of development from the developer.
(Prior Code, § 15-405)
§ 92.06  HOUSE NUMBERS; DUTY TO POST.
   (A)   All house numbers on north and south streets shall be numbered
consecutively commencing with the first block north of 15th Street, to be known
as the North 1700 Block, to the block immediately south of N.W. 63rd Street,
which shall be known as the North 6300 Block.  All houses on the west side of
the street shall bear an odd number and on the east side of the street shall
bear an even number.  (Prior Code, § 15-406)
   (B)   (1)   All house numbers on the east and west streets shall be numbered
consecutively, commencing with the first block west of North MacArthur shall be
the 5900 Block West, and the first block east of Eagle Lane shall be the West
8300 Block.
      (2)   In numbering blocks and houses, the following base points are
hereby established:  the first block west of North Hammond shall be the West
6200 Block; the first block west of North Peniel shall be the West 6600 Block;
the first block west of North College shall be the West 6700 Block; the first
block west of North Mueller shall be the West 6800 Block; the first block west
of North West Avenue shall be the West 7100 Block; the first block west of
North Glade Avenue shall be the West 7500 Block; the first block west of North
Council shall be the West 8000 Block. All houses on the south shall bear even
numbers, and all houses on the north shall bear odd numbers.
(Prior Code, § 15-407)
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the owners or occupant of each house or
business building to place in a conspicuous place the proper house or building
number as assigned by the City Engineer.  (Prior Code, § 15-408)
   OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 92.20  PROJECTIONS OVER SIDEWALKS.
   No projection over any sidewalk within the city shall be maintained at a
height of less than eight feet above the level of the sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 15-501) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.21  VIEW OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be the duty of all property owners or occupants of premises not to
erect, place or permit to be erected or placed any structure or object on their
premises so as to obstruct vision at any street intersection in the city and to
keep all hedges, shrubbery, natural growth, trees and limbs trimmed in a way
that they will not interfere with the cross visibility at intersecting streets.
(Prior Code, § 15-502)
§ 92.22  TREE LIMBS TO BE TRIMMED; FAILURE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of all property owners or occupants of
premises within the city to keep the limbs of trees hanging or projecting over
streets and sidewalks, trimmed to a height that they will not interfere with
vehicles, pedestrians or other use of the streets or sidewalks.
      (2)   In any event, no tree limbs hanging or projecting over a sidewalk
shall be less than 8 feet, and over a street no less than 12 feet.
(Prior Code, § 15-503)
   (B)   If any owner or occupant of the premises in the city fails to keep
shrubs, hedges, natural growth or trees trimmed, as required in § 92.21 and
division (A) above, the Street Superintendent may cause the hedges, shrubbery,
natural growth and trees to be so trimmed to conform to the requirements of the
chapter and to assess the cost thereof against the owner or occupant of the
premises.  (Prior Code, § 15-504)
Statutory reference:
   Obstructions, encroachments in streets, see  11 O.S. §§ 36-107 and 36-108
§ 92.23  REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC HAZARDS.
   The owner or owners of every lot or parcel of land upon which any tree or
trees or shrubs or plants are growing or upon which any obstruction has been
placed, shall remove the same if the tree or trees, shrubs or plants or any
other obstruction or any parts thereof are so situated so as to constitute a
traffic hazard by obstructing the view of any driver of any vehicle on the
streets to the extent that the driver is unable to observe the approach of
other vehicles on any street, highway or at intersections.
(Prior Code, § 15-505)
§ 92.24  COMPLAINT, NOTICE AND HEARING.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Engineer to file a complaint
with the City Council when he or she believes a traffic hazard does exist.
      (2)   The complaint shall:
         (a)   Specify that it is the belief of the Traffic Engineer that the
traffic hazard exists;
         (b)   Contain a complete description of the alleged traffic hazard;
and
         (c)   State what trees, shrubs or other obstruction in the judgment of
the Traffic Engineer should be removed by the property owner involved.
   (B)   (1)   The City Council shall set a date and give notice in writing of
the hearing to the property owner involved.
      (2)   The notice shall specify in what manner a traffic hazard has been
alleged to exist and shall be given at least ten days' notice prior to the
hearing.
(Prior Code, § 15-506)
§ 92.25  HEARING AND ORDER TO REMOVE TRAFFIC HAZARD.
   (A)   (1)   The City Manager shall hear, in summary manner, all matters
incident to the complaint from all interested parties.
      (2)   At the conclusion of the hearing, he or she will make the order as
may be just and proper in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   If it is the judgment of the City Manager that a traffic hazard does
in fact exist, then the City Council shall make an order directing the removal
by the property owner of the trees, shrubs or other obstructions which
constitute the traffic hazard.
(Prior Code, § 15-507)
§ 92.26  FAILURE TO REMOVE.
   (A)   If, within ten days after a final order has been entered by the City
Council, any owner of any lot or parcel of land has failed, refused or
neglected to remove any tree or trees, shrubs or parts thereof, which have been
adjudged to constitute a traffic hazard, then the person shall be guilty of an
offense.
   (B)   Each and every day that the owner fails, refuses and neglects to
remove any tree or trees, shrubs or plants or any other obstructions or parts
thereof, shall be a separate and distinct offense.
(Prior Code, § 15-508)
   STREET LIGHTS
§ 92.40  PROVISION OF STREET LIGHTS.
   The City Manager shall provide for and designate the places for street
lights within the city from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 15-601)
§ 92.41  CONTRACT FOR ELECTRIC CURRENT.
   The City Manager may, from time to time, enter into contracts, not exceeding
one year, with electric companies for the furnishing of electric power and
current for the use of the city for power and lights.
(Prior Code, § 15-602)
§ 92.42  ACTION UPON SPECIAL ORDERS.
   The City Council shall direct the City Manager, from time to time, on any
changes on white-way street lighting or changes in general design or major
change of street lighting in the city.
(Prior Code, § 15-603)
CHAPTER 93:  HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   Health hazards
   
93.03   Weeds
   
93.04   Rubbish
   
93.05   Dilapidated buildings
   
93.06   Other nuisances defined
   
93.07   Commercial vehicles in residential areas
Noise
   
93.20   Unreasonable and disturbing noise prohibited
   
93.21   Loud sound amplification system prohibited
   
93.22   Disturbing and unnecessary noises enumerated and defined
Graffiti
   
93.23   Definitions
   
93.24   Purpose and intent
   
93.25   Declaration of public nuisance
   
93.26   Application prohibited
   
93.27   Removal from private property
   
93.28   Sale of spray paint to minors
   
93.29   Prohibitions on spray paint containers and broad-tipped indelible
markers
   
93.30   Abatement of graffiti
Abatement Enforcement; Inspection
   
93.35   Authority to inspect
   
93.36   Abatement of nuisances
   
93.37   Order to remove health hazard
   
93.38   Weeds and trash; abatement
   
93.39   Dilapidated buildings; removal
   
93.40   Abatement by suit
   
93.41   Nuisances prohibited
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned, Junked and Discarded Vehicles, see
Ch. 96
   Animal nuisances, see
§ 95.039
   Barking dogs and howling cats, see
§ 95.038
   Tree limbs to be trimmed; failure, see
§ 92.22
   GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLEANING.  The removal of trash from property.
   OWNER.  The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the
County Treasurer.
   PERSON.  Any person, firm or corporation which owns, occupies, has control
of, is in charge of or rents or leases any real property, including any lot or
parcel of land in the city.
   TRASH.  Any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible
materials, rubbish, offal, waste or mater of any kind or form which is uncared
for, discarded or abandoned.
   WEED.  Poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac and all vegetation at any
state of maturity which:
      (1)   Exceeds 12 inches in height, except healthy trees, shrubs or
produce for human consumption grown in a tended and cultivated garden;
      (2)   Regardless of height, harbors, conceals
or invites deposits or accumulation of refuse or trash;
      (3)   Harbors rodents or vermin;
      (4)   Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
      (5)   Constitutes a fire or traffic hazards;
      (6)   Is dead or diseased; or
      (7)   Excluding tended crops on land zoned for agricultural use which are
planted more than 150 feet from a parcel zoned for other than agricultural use.
(Prior Code, § 9-301)  (Am. Ord. 1243, passed 7-19-83)
§ 93.02  HEALTH HAZARDS.
   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person to:
   (A)   Suffer or permit on premises within the city any source of filth,
cause of sickness, conducive to breeding of insects or rodents that might
contribute to the transmission of disease or any other condition adversely
affecting the public health;
   (B)   Suffer or permit on premises within the city any water, animal or
vegetable refuse matter, chemical or any putrid or unwholesome substance to
accumulate thereon so as to emit an offensive odor to become injurious or
dangerous to the health of the neighborhood;
   (C)   Suffer or permit on premises within the city any cellar, stable, barn,
hen house, dog kennel or any place where an animal or animals are kept or any
water closet or privy, septic tank or cesspool thereon, to become in a
condition as to emit offensive odors or to be injurious or dangerous to the
health on the neighborhood;
   (D)   Pile on premises within the city any manure or refuse, or on the
premises of another or on any public property or in any street, alley or
highway in the city;
   (E)   Construct, use or maintain on premises within the city any outside
toilet, privy or privy vaults;
   (F)   Construct, use or maintain on premises within the city any septic tank
or cesspool if the property is located within a sewer district or within a
reasonably accessible distance from any sewer main or lateral.
      (1)   Any premises within 300 feet of a sewer main or lateral shall prima
facie be considered to be reasonably accessible.
      (2)   Exceptions shall be made to the requirements hereof only when
property is situated too low to tie into the sewer and a necessary lift station
has not or cannot reasonably be established;
   (G)   Leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to
children any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or other
container of any kind which has an air-tight door or lock which may not be
released from the inside of the ice box, refrigerator or container or which has
a snap lock or other device for automatically fastening the door in a closed
position, without first removing the fastener, lock, snap lock or doors of the
container.
(Prior Code, § 9-302)  (Am. Ord. 1243, passed 7-19-83) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.03  WEEDS.
   (A)   No person in the city shall permit any lot, yard, parkway or sidewalk
or the space abutting thereon, to the center of the street or to the center of
any alley, to become covered or overgrown with weeds or other noxious or
injurious growth or accumulations.  Any lot, yard, sidewalk, parkway or space
abutting thereon, which shall become covered or overgrown with the weeds or
other accumulation so as to become noxious, detrimental to the general health
or offensive or likely to cause or spread disease, is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance.  Each person shall cut down and remove, or cause to be cut
down and removed, from any lot or tract of land, in the city, to the center of
the street or alley, all offensive, unwholesome and noxious weeds, vines and
grass.
   (B)   Any person refusing or neglecting to cut down and remove the
offensive, unwholesome and noxious weeds, vines, grass or other accumulation,
with or without notice, shall be guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 9-303)  (Am. Ord. 1243, passed 7-19-83) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.04  RUBBISH.
   No person having in his or her possession, supervision or control any
premises situated in the city shall allow or permit any premises to have
thereon any empty boxes, barrels, rubbish, trash, waste paper, excelsior, tin
cans, weeds, grass, junk, oil, auto parts, ice box, refrigerator, refuse or
trash of any description, not properly cared for.  No person shall place or
dump any of the items mentioned in this section in any public street,
thoroughfare, avenue or alley or upon any vacant lot or premises.
(Prior Code, § 9-304)  (Am. Ord. 1243, passed 7-19-83) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.05  DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person to suffer
or permit on premises within the city any dilapidated building.
   (B)   For the purpose of this Title 9, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DILAPIDATED BUILDING.
         (a)   A structure which through neglect or injury lacks necessary
repairs or otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such an extent
that the structure is a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the general
public;
         (b)   A structure which is unfit for human occupancy due to the lack
of necessary repairs and is considered uninhabitable or is a hazard to the
health, safety, and welfare of the general public;
         (c)   A structure which is determined by the City Council or City
Manager to be an unsecured building, as defined by 11 O.S. § 22-112.1, more
than three times within any 12-month period;
         (d)   A structure which has been boarded and secured, as defined by 11
O.S. § 22-112.1, for more than 18 consecutive months; or
         (e)   A structure declared by the City Council to constitute a public
nuisance.
      OWNER.  The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the
County Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 9-305)  (Am. Ord. 1243, passed 7-19-83; Am. Ord. 1577, passed
10-21-97; Am. Ord. 1858, passed 12-20-11) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.06  OTHER NUISANCES DEFINED.
   In addition to those specific acts and things designated to be a nuisance in
§§ 93.02 through
93.05, a nuisance shall include the unlawful doing an act or omitting to
perform a duty which act or omission either:
   (A)   Hurts, annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or
safety of others;
   (B)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstruct or tends to obstruct or renders
dangerous for use or passage, and public park, square, street, alley or
highway;
   (C)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of
property; or
   (D)   Endangers public water supply or the public sewerage disposal system.
(Prior Code, § 9-306)  (Am. Ord. 1243, passed 7-19-83)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.07  COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and an offense to park or store on a lot in a
residential district or occupied by a dwelling any of the following:
      (1)   Commercial trailers or equipment of all types or sizes; or
      (2)   Road licensed commercial motor vehicles exceeding a one-ton rated
capacity.
   (B)   Road licensed commercial motor vehicles, not prohibited by division
(A) above, shall nevertheless:
      (1)   Be limited to one per family living on the premises; and
      (2)   Not be used for hauling explosives, gasoline or liquified petroleum
products.
(Prior Code, § 9-307)  (Am. Ord. 1243, passed 7-19-83; Am. Ord. 1339, passed 8-
20-85; Am. Ord. 1376, passed 5-20-86) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
   NOISE
§ 93.20  UNREASONABLE AND DISTURBING NOISE PROHIBITED.
   The creating of any unreasonable, loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise
within the limits of the city is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 9-701) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.21  LOUD SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway,
alley, parking lot or driveway shall operate or permit the operation of any
sound amplification system from within the vehicle so that the sound is plainly
audible at a distance of 50 or more feet from the vehicle.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PLAINLY AUDIBLE.  Any sound produced by a sound amplification system from
within the vehicle which clearly can be heard at a distance of 50 feet or
more.  Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based upon direct
line of sight.  Words or phrases need not be discernible and base
reverberations are included.  The motor vehicle may be stopped, standing,
parked or moving on a street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway.
      SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM.  Any radio, tape player, compact disc player,
loud speaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of the human
voice, music or other sounds.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the sound
amplification system and that any of the following apply:
      (1)   The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular
assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition;
      (2)   The vehicle was an emergency or public safety vehicle;
      (3)   The vehicle was owned and operated by the city or public or private
utility company; or
      (4)   The vehicle was used in authorized public activities, such as
parades, fireworks, sports events or other activities which have been approved
by the City Council or City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 9-702)  (Ord. 1482, passed 11-19-91) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.22  DISTURBING AND UNNECESSARY NOISES ENUMERATED AND DEFINED.
   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises and in violation of this subchapter, but this enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive as follows:
   (A)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, street car or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a
danger signal if another vehicle is apparently approaching out of control, or
if in motion only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and
deceleration of the vehicle is intended;  (The creation by means of any signal
device of any unreasonable loud or harsh noise, the sounding of the device for
an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.)
   (B)   Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public street;
   (C)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicles so out of
repair, so loaded or in a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grinding,
grating, rattling or other noises;
   (D)   The operation of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle without a
properly adjusted working muffler;
   (E)   The creation of a loud and excessive noise on any street adjacent to
any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in
session or adjacent to any hospital which reasonably interferes with the
workings or sessions thereof;
   (F)   The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the
loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales,
boxes, crates and containers;
   (G)   The use of any drum, loud speaker or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention by creating of noise or other performance
or show for sale or display of merchandise;
   (H)   The operation of a loud speaker situated on the outside of buildings
or in unclosed places within the city; or
   (I)   The use of mechanical loud speakers or amplifiers on trucks or other
moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes, without a permit
of the Police Chief.
(Prior Code, § 9-703) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
GRAFFITI
§ 93.23  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLIES GRAFFITI, APPLY GRAFFITI or APPLYING GRAFFITI.  The act of drawing,
painting, chiseling, scratching, or etching graffiti on public or private
property within the city.
   DIRECTOR.  The director of the public works department or designee.
   GRAFFITI.  Without limitation, any letter, word, name, number, symbol,
slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of any kind visible
to the public that is drawn, painted, chiseled, scratched, or etched on a rock,
tree, wall, bridge, fence, gate, building, or other structure.  However, this
definition does not include advertising or any other letter, word, name,
number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of
any kind lawfully placed on property by an owner of the property or by an
authorized agent for such owner or occupant.
   OCCUPANT.  Any person shown by the records of the county clerk's office as a
tenant of property or any person in actual physical possession of property.
   OWNER.  Any person shown by the records of the county clerk's office as the
owner of a property.
   REMOVAL, REMOVE, or REMOVED.  When used in relation to the eradication of
graffiti, the act of taking graffiti off or masking the presence of graffiti on
a rock, tree, wall, bridge, fence, gate, building, or other structure.
(Ord. 1845, passed 2-15-11)
§ 93.24  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the prevention and removal
of graffiti within the city. The intent of the City Council is to prevent and
remove a public nuisance that is a growing blight on and a substantial
detriment to the health, safety, and general welfare of the community and its
inhabitants.
(Ord. 1845, passed 2-15-11)
§ 93.25  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   The City Council declares that graffiti on public or private property within
the city constitutes a public nuisance to the detriment of the city and its
inhabitants and visitors.  The provisions for prevention and removal of such
public nuisance are set forth in the following sections.
(Ord. 1845, passed 2-15-11)
§ 93.26  APPLICATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall apply graffiti to public or private property within
the city.
   (B)   Any person who applies graffiti to public or private property within
the city shall be deemed guilty of an offense.  Each act of applying graffiti
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person convicted of the offense of applying graffiti to public or
private property within the city shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$500, plus costs, or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
   (D)   This section shall be enforced by the city police department.
(Ord. 1845, passed 2-15-11)
§ 93.27  REMOVAL FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   For the purpose of the city eradicating graffiti, the nuisance abatement
procedures set forth in § 93.30 will apply.
(Ord. 1845, passed 2-15-11)
§ 93.28  SALE OF SPRAY PAINT TO MINORS.
   (A)   Definitions.    For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MINOR.  Any individual under the age of 18 years of age.
      PERSON.  Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
selling or offering for sale any item prohibited by this section.
   (B)   Prohibited conduct.  The following conduct shall be prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall sell to any minor any aerosol container of paint
(spray paint) capable of defacing property, unless such minor is accompanied by
a parent or a guardian.
      (2)   Any person selling or offering for sale any aerosol container of
paint shall require bona fide evidence of majority and identity.  Bona fide
evidence of majority and identity shall be established only by a document
issued by a federal, state, county, or municipal government, including but not
limited to a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate
issued under the federal selective service act, or an identification card
issued to a member of the armed forces.
      (3)   Proof that the defendant or his or her employee or agent demanded
was shown and acted in reliance upon such bona fide evidence in any sale
transaction forbidden by this section shall be a defense to any criminal
prosecution therefor.
   (C)   Posting of sign.  Any person who owns, manages, or operates a place of
business wherein aerosol containers of paint capable of defacing property are
sold shall conspicuously post, at the place of display of such containers for
sale and at the place of sale (cash register), a sign in letters at least one-
half inch in height stating: “Spray paint shall not be sold to minors.”
   (D)   Consequences of providing paint used for graffiti.  Any person who has
reached the age of majority who shall give, trade, or otherwise provide to any
minor any aerosol container of paint used in the actual application of graffiti
or defacement of property shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon
conviction, be punished as prescribed.
   (E)   Penalty.  The penalty for violation of this section shall be 60 days
in jail and/or a fine of up to $500 for each individual violation.
(Ord. 1845, passed 2-15-11)
§ 93.29  PROHIBITIONS ON SPRAY PAINT CONTAINERS AND BROAD-TIPPED INDELIBLE
MARKERS.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years may possess an aerosol spray-paint
container or broad- tipped indelible marker on any public property unless
accompanied by a parent, guardian, employer, teacher, or other adult in any
similar relationship and such possession is for a lawful purpose.
   (B)   No person may possess an aerosol spray paint container or broad-tipped
indelible marker on any private property unless the owner, agent, manager, or
other person having control of the property consented to the presence of the
aerosol spray paint container or broad-tipped indelible marker.
   (C)   The penalty for violation of this section shall be 60 days in jail
and/or a fine of up to $500 for each individual violation.
(Ord. 1845, passed 2-15-11)
§ 93.30  ABATEMENT OF GRAFFITI.
   (A)   The city code enforcement officer shall have the authority to order
the owner or occupant of any private premises to abate or remove from such
premises, at the owner's or occupant's own expense, any graffiti as described
in this chapter within ten days or within such other time as might be
reasonable, and a failure to do so shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (B)   At least ten days' notice shall be given to the owner of the property
by certified mail at the address shown by the current year’s tax rolls in the
county treasurer's office, or any other source deemed by the city to be more
accurate than said tax rolls before the City Manager holds a hearing or takes
action.  At the time of mailing the notice to any property owner the
municipality shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which
receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the
addressee. The notice shall order the property owner to abate the nuisance
graffiti, as appropriate, and said notice shall further state that unless such
work is performed within ten days of the date of the notice, the work shall be
done by the city and a notice of lien shall be filed with the county clerk
against the property for the cost due and owing to the city.  The notice shall
further state that the property owner may request a hearing within ten days
after the date of the notice to determine whether the graffiti constitutes a
nuisance as defined in this subchapter.  If the certified mail to the property
owner is refused, service of the notice shall be deemed valid and complete. 
However, if the property owner cannot be located as shown by the certified mail
being returned as unclaimed, notice shall be given by posting a copy of the
notice on the property for ten days and by publication, by publishing in a
legal newspaper published in the city, and which is of general circulation
within the city, one time not less than ten days prior to any hearing or action
by the city.
   (C)   The owner of the property may give his or her written consent to the
city authorizing the removal or the abatement of public nuisances.  By giving
written consent, the owner waives his right to a hearing by the city.
   (D)   A hearing may be held by the city manager or his or her designee, the
administrative officer, to determine whether the graffiti that is a public
nuisance has caused the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit,
and welfare of the city.
   (E)   Upon finding that the condition of the property constitutes a
detriment or hazard and that the property would be benefited by the removal of
such conditions, the city agents are granted the right of entry on the property
for the removal or abatement of the conditions and performance of the necessary
duties as a governmental function of the city.
   (F)   The City Manager or his or her designee as the administrative officer
shall determine the actual cost of abatement and any other expenses as may be
necessary in connection therewith, including the cost of notice and mailing. 
The City Clerk shall forward by certified mail, with return receipt requested,
to the property owner at the address specified in division (B) of this section
a statement of such actual costs and demanding payment.  If the abatement is
done by the city, the cost to the property owner for the abatement shall not
exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance, and equipment and
administrative expenses required.  If the abatement of public nuisances is done
on a private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and
best bidder.
   (G)   If payment is not made within 30 days from the date of the mailing of
the statement, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount
of the costs to the County Treasurer, and the costs shall be levied on the
property and collected by the County Treasurer as other taxes authorized by
law.  The cost and interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from
the date the cost is certified to the County Treasurer, coequal with the lien
of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and prior and
superior to all other titles and liens against the property, and the lien shall
continue until the cost shall be fully paid.  At any time prior to the
collection as provided in this division, the city may pursue any civil remedy
for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon.  Upon receiving
payment, if any, the City Clerk shall forward to the County Treasurer a notice
of such payment and directing discharge of the lien.
   (H)   The property owner shall have the right of appeal to the City Council
from any order of the City Manager or his or her designee, the administrative
officer.  Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal with
the City Clerk within ten days after the administrative order is rendered.
(Ord. 1845, passed 2-15-11)
ABATEMENT ENFORCEMENT; INSPECTION
§ 93.35  AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   The City Inspector shall have the authority to inspect and examine or cause
to be inspected or examined by his or her duly authorized representative all
premises on which nuisances or unhealthful conditions are believed to exist and
any premises in violation of the terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-310)
§ 93.36  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   (A)   (1)   The City Council shall have the right and power to determine
what is a nuisance and to abate all nuisances within the limits of the city.
      (2)   For the protection of the public health, the public parks, the
public water supply and the public sewerage disposal system the Council shall
have the power outside the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 9-311)
   (B)   The abatement of a nuisance shall consist of remedying or removing the
thing causing the nuisance.  (Prior Code, § 9-312)
Statutory reference:
   Power to define and abate nuisances, see 60 O.S. §§ 1 et seq.and 11 O.S. §
22-121
§ 93.37  ORDER TO REMOVE HEALTH HAZARD.
   (A)   The City Inspector shall have the authority to order the owner or
occupant of any private premises of the city to remove from the premises, at
his or her own expense, any of the nuisances defined in
§ 93.02, within 24 hours, or within such other time as might be reasonable. 
Failure to comply with the order shall constitute an offense.
   (B)   The order shall be in writing.  It may be served in one of the
following manners:
      (1)   Personally, on the owner or occupant of
the premises or authorized agent thereof, by the City Inspector or a police
officer;
      (2)   By certified mail to the last known address of the owner or his or
her authorized agent;
      (3)   If the address of the owner or agent is unknown and the premises
are unoccupied then:
         (a)   By posting a copy of the order on the premises; and
         (b)   By publication of the order in at least one issue of a newspaper
having general circulation in the city.
   (C)   (1)   If the order is not complied with, the City Inspector may cause
the order to be executed and complied with, and the cost thereof shall be
certified to the City Clerk.  If the owner or occupant is a user of any of the
services of the city, the cost of removing or abating the nuisance shall be
added to the water bill, sewer bill, sanitation bill or other city utility
bill.
      (2)   The cost shall be treated as a part of a utility bill to which it
is added, and it shall become due and payable and be subject to the same
regulations relating to delinquency in payment as the utility bill itself.  If
the owner or occupant is not a user of any city utility service, the cost after
certification to the City Clerk, shall be certified to the County Treasurer for
collection, as other special taxes are collected.
      (3)   The cost may also be collected in any other manner as any other
debt due the city may be collected.
   (D)   The procedure for abating a health nuisance described herein is
cumulative and in addition to any other procedure authorized by law for
abatement.
(Prior Code, § 9-313)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 63 O.S. §§ 1-1011 to 1-1012
§ 93.38  WEEDS AND TRASH; ABATEMENT.
   The City Manager is hereby authorized to cause any of the nuisances defined
herein to be abated in accordance with the following procedures:
   (A)   The City Manager or his or her designee may determine whether the
accumulation of trash, growth of weeds or grass or other nuisances has caused
the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the
public and the community or a hazard to traffic, or creates a fire hazard to
the danger of the property in accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   At least ten days prior to hearing on determination of the
nuisance; and (Notice of the intended abatement and hearing before the City
Manager, or his or her designee, shall be given to the owner of the property by
certified mail with return receipt requested at the address shown by the
current year's tax rolls in the County Treasurer's office.)
      (2)   A copy of the notice of the hearing on determination of the
nuisance shall be posted in prominent view on the property at least ten days
prior to the hearing.
   (B)   The owner of the property may give his or her written consent to the
city authorizing the removal of the trash, the mowing of weeds or grass or
other nuisances.  By giving the written consent the owner waives his or her
right to a hearing by the city.
   (C)   If the City Manager, or his or her designee, finds the condition of
the property constitutes a detriment or hazard and that the property would be
benefitted by the removal of the conditions, the City Manager shall direct the
clearing or cleaning be done:
      (1)   By the city, provided the actual cost of the labor, maintenance and
equipment required does not exceed $2,500; or
      (2)   On a private contract basis, in which case it shall be awarded to
the lowest and best bidder.
   (D)   After the property has been cleaned, the City Manager, or his or her
designee, shall determine the actual cost of the cleaning and any other
expenses as may be necessary in connection therewith, including the cost of
notice and mailing.  The City Clerk shall forward, by certified mail with
return receipt, requested to the property owner, at the address specified in
division (A) above, a statement of the actual costs and demanding payment.
   (E)   If payment is not made within 30 days from the date of the mailing of
the statement, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount
of the
cost to the County Treasurer.  The city shall have a lien on the property for
the costs together with the interest thereon.
   (F)   The property owner shall have a right of appeal to the City Council
from any order of the City Manager, or his or her designee, issued pursuant to
this section by filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten
days after the administrative order is rendered.
   (G)   At any time prior to the collection, as provided herein, the city may
pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest
thereon.  Upon receiving payment, if any, the City Clerk shall forward to the
County Treasurer as notice of the payment and directing discharge of the lien.
(Prior Code, § 9-314)  (Ord. 1243, passed 7-19-83; Am. Ord. 1388, passed 1-21-
86; Am. Ord. 1437, passed 2-7-89; Am. Ord. 1541, passed 9-19-95) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 11 O.S. § 22-111
§ 93.39  DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS; REMOVAL.
   The City Manager is hereby authorized to cause the nuisance, defined in
§93.05, to be abated in accordance with the following procedures:
   (A)   The City Manager shall conduct a hearing to determine whether the
property is dilapidated and has thereby become detrimental to the health,
benefit and welfare of the public and the community or creates a fire hazard to
the danger of property.
   (B)   (1)   At least ten days prior to the hearing, notice shall be given to
the owner and mortgage holders of the property.  Notice shall be given by
posting on the property, and by notice mailed by certified mail with return
receipt requested to the property owner at the address shown by the current
year’s tax rolls in the County Treasurer’s office, and by written notice mailed
to any mortgage holder as shown by the records in the office of the County
Clerk to the last known address of the mortgagee.
      (2)   If neither the property owner nor mortgage holder can be located,
notice may be given by posting the notice on the property or by publication at
least ten days prior to the hearing.
   (C)   (1)   If the City Manager finds that the condition of the property
constitutes a detriment or a hazard and that the property would be benefitted
by the removal of the condition, the City Manager shall fix reasonable dates
for commencement and completion of the work.
      (2)   The City Clerk shall immediately file notice of lien with the
County Clerk describing the property, the findings of the City Manager at the
hearing, and stating that the city claims a lien on the property for the
boarding, securing, destruction and removal costs.
   (D)   After the building is declared dilapidated, provided notice that the
city proposes to board and secure that building is given, as provided in
division (B) above, the City Manager may direct that the building be boarded
and secured:
      (1)   By the city, provided the actual cost of the labor, maintenance and
equipment does not exceed $500; or
      (2)   On a private contract basis, in which case it shall be awarded to
the lowest and best bidder.
   (E)   If the work other than boarding and securing is not performed by the
property owner within the dates fixed by the City Manager, he or she shall
direct the tearing down and removal be done, subject to prior approval of City
Council:
      (1)   By the city, provided the actual cost of the labor, maintenance and
equipment does not exceed $5,000; or
      (2)   On a private contract basis, in which case it shall be awarded to
the lowest and best bidder.
   (F)   After the building has been removed, the City Manager shall determine
the actual cost of the dismantling and removal of dilapidated buildings and any
other expenses as may be necessary in conjunction therewith, including the cost
of notice and mailing.
   (G)   If payment is not made within six months from the date of the mailing
of the statement, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of the
amount of the cost to the County Treasurer.
   (H)   The property owner or mortgagee shall have a right of appeal to the
City Council from any order of the City Manager, issued pursuant to this
section by filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten days
after the administrative order is rendered.  Any action to challenge the order
of the City Council shall be filed within 30 business days from the date of the
order.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from otherwise abating
a dilapidated building as a nuisance or otherwise exercising its police power
to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(Prior Code, §9-315)  (Ord. 1305, passed 10-16-84; Am. Ord. 1437, passed 2-7-
89; Am. Ord. 1740A, passed 11-16-04) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provision, see 11 O.S. § 22-112
§ 93.40  ABATEMENT BY SUIT.
   In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance, the
city may bring suit in the District Court of the county.  Before suit is
brought, the City Council shall first adopt a resolution directing the bringing
of the suit for the purpose of abating nuisance.  All costs of bringing the
suit and the cost of abating a nuisance shall be assessed against the property
as by law provided.
(Prior Code, § 9-316)
§ 93.41  NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to maintain, permit or
create a public nuisance on any private or public property within the city.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PUBLIC NUISANCE.  Any of those acts, conditions, circumstances or
inactions set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 9-317)  (Ord. 1494, passed 10-20-92) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 94:  CITY CEMETERY
Section
   
94.01   Cemetery Board created
   
94.02   Conveyance of lots; authority
   
94.03   Cemetery Manager; duties
   
94.04   Records
   
94.05   Purchase of burial sites; rates and conditions
   
94.06   Cemetery Care Fund
   
94.07   Donations, deposits or bequests
§ 94.01  CEMETERY BOARD CREATED.
   The Mayor of the city shall serve as Chairperson of the City Cemetery
Board.  Members of the City Council shall serve as members of the Cemetery
Board of Trustees and the City Manager shall serve as Cemetery Manager.
(Prior Code, § 12-301)
Statutory reference:
   Establishment of municipal cemeteries, see 11 O.S. §§ 26-101 et seq.
§ 94.02  CONVEYANCE OF LOTS; AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Lots in the cemetery shall be conveyed by certificate signed by the
Mayor and Chairperson of the Cemetery Board and countersigned by the Clerk
under the seal of the city, showing the price for which the lots were sold, and
specifying that the person to whom it is issued is the owner of the lot or lots
described therein by number, as laid down on the plat, for the purpose of
interment.  The conveyance certificate shall vest in the purchaser and his or
her heirs, legatees, and devisees a right to the lot or lots, for the sole
purpose of interment, under the regulations of the Council of the city as
Cemetery Trustees.
   (B)   The Council, as the Cemetery Board, may limit the number of lots which
may be owned by one person at the same time, may prescribe rules for enclosing,
adorning and erecting monuments and tombstones on cemetery lots and shall
prohibit any division of the use of lots and any improper adornment thereof. 
Lots sold may not be sold to a corporation, association or similar entity.
(Prior Code, § 12-302)  (Ord. 1612, passed 5-4-99; Am. Ord. 1778, passed 12-19-
06)
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance of cemetery lots, see 11 O.S. § 26-103
§ 94.03  CEMETERY MANAGER; DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Manager is authorized and directed to manage and operate the
cemetery, and to negotiate and sell burial lots as the need arises.
(Prior Code, § 12-303)
   (B)   (1)   The Cemetery Manager shall have charge of and control of the
cemetery and shall be authorized to enforce rules and regulations governing the
management, improvement and establishment of the cemetery and shall be
authorized to negotiate for the sale of lots which shall be sold or for which
an interment shall be made.  The Manager shall have authority to delegate to
any city employee or person other than a city employee, as deemed necessary and
advisable, responsibility for the maintenance and control of the cemetery.
      (2)   It shall be his or her duty and under his or her control to
determine the duties as deemed necessary and advisable for the care and
protection of the grounds and their appurtenances are carried out and to
enforce the rules and regulations as are made from time to time by the Cemetery
Trustees, to superintend repairs and construction or improvements and
maintenance of all permanent improvements and embellishments of any kind which
tend to beautify the cemetery or preserve it permanently as a place of burial
for the human dead.
      (3)   It shall further be his or her duty to see that all money is
receipted from the sale of the lots or from interments or any other source, and
to see that the funds are deposited by the City Treasurer as provided otherwise
in this chapter.  The Treasurer shall, on the order of the Manager, draw the
funds in payment for repairs, materials and services in the management, care
and preservation of cemetery property.  The Board of Trustees, by resolution
from time to time, shall set the rules and regulations and prices for cemetery
lots as they deem proper and for the best interest of the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 12-304)
   (C)   The City Manager is authorized to repurchase unused burial sites at a
price not to exceed $350, when, in the opinion of the City Manager, the
repurchase is advantageous and the money is available.  (Prior Code, § 12-305)
   (D)   The resale or transfer of cemetery lots by any party other than the
City of Bethany is prohibited, except transfers by operation of law, including
inheritance, and transfers among persons related by blood or marriage are
permitted under rules and regulations adopted by the City Council from time to
time.
(Am. Ord. 1778, passed 12-19-06)
§ 94.04  RECORDS.
   The City Manager, as manager of the cemetery, shall cause to be kept
complete and accurate records of all transactions of the cemetery and receipts
for all moneys received.  He or she shall cause a complete report of the
records of the cemetery to be furnished to the Trustees in the month of January
and July of each year.  In each report, he or she shall apportion the net
proceeds received from the sum total and make proper credit to each of the
separate funds assigned in trust.
(Prior Code, § 12-306)
§ 94.05  PURCHASE OF BURIAL SITES; RATES AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   A bona fide resident of the city is a person, who at the time of
death, or at the time of purchase of the lot, shall be physically residing
within the boundaries of the city or shall have maintained for more than one
year next preceding the date of purchase a permanent residence available for
use if he or she is temporarily away due to employment, military service or
illness.
   (B)   All of the unsold lots in the cemetery shall be valued and sold from
time to time at the following rates:
      (1)   For each burial site sold to a bona fide resident of the city: 
$350.
      (2)   For each burial site sold to a non- resident of the city:  $2,250.
   (C)   No person shall be buried in any lot in the cemetery until burial site
is fully paid for.
(Prior Code, § 12-307)  (Ord. 1514, passed 5-7-94; Am. Ord. 1612, passed 5-4-
99; Am. Ord. 1778, passed 12-19-06)
§ 94.06  CEMETERY CARE FUND.
   There shall be established the Cemetery Care Fund into which not less than
25% of all money received from the sale of lots and interment shall be
segregated and set aside as a permanent fund to be known as “The Cemetery Care
Fund.”  The fund shall be expended in purchasing of land for cemeteries, and
for making capital improvements, as defined in 11 O.S. § 17-110, if necessary. 
The Cemetery Care Fund to be invested as provided by applicable state law and
city ordinance and resolution.  The earnings from the investment shall be used
for the same purposes as the principal or in improving, caring for and
embellishing the walks, lots, drives, parks and other necessary improvements.
(Prior Code, § 12-308)  (Ord. 1604, passed 1-19-99)
Statutory reference:
   Perpetual care fund, see 11 O.S. §§ 26-201 to 26-209
§ 94.07  DONATIONS, DEPOSITS OR BEQUESTS.
   Donations, deposits or bequests may be made in trust for the care of the
cemetery, and the funds shall be invested in like manner as the Cemetery Care
Fund.  A separate account shall be kept of each amount so deposited, donated
and bequeathed and only the interest derived from the funds shall be used in
the care, maintenance and repair of the cemetery unless otherwise specified by
the donor.
(Prior Code, § 12-309)  (Ord. 1612, passed 5-4-99)
CHAPTER 95:  ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
95.001   Keeping animals; required area
   
95.002   Animals at-large
   
95.003   Sanitation; enclosures
   
95.004   Keeping rabbits and chickens
   
95.005   Keeping swine, goats and the like
   
95.006   Keeping dangerous, vicious or diseased animals
   
95.007   Beekeeping prohibited
   
95.008   Hunting
   
95.009   Cruelty prohibited
   
95.010   Abandonment of animals
   
95.011   Cleaning up after animals
   
95.012   Failure to provide humane care and treatment prohibited
   
95.013   Standards of humane care and treatment
   
95.014   Animal Welfare Officer may impound animal and/or provide terms and
conditions for care
Vicious and Dangerous Animals
   
95.020   Definitions
   
95.021   Vicious, dangerous and diseased animals
   
95.022   Summons and complaint
   
95.023   Impoundment
   
95.024   Hearing
   
95.025   Determination
Dogs and Cats
   
95.035   Vaccination requirements
   
95.036   Confinement on premises
   
95.037   Dogs at-large prohibited
   
95.038   Barking dogs and howling cats
   
95.039   Nuisances
   
95.040   Biting incidents
   
95.041   Impoundment
   
95.042   Maximum number of dogs and cats
City Pound
   
95.060   Establishment
   
95.061   Redemption of animals; pick-up charge and expenses
   
95.062   Transfer of proceeds
   
95.063   Sale of impounded animals
   
95.064   Disposition of impounded animals; reclaiming or adopting
   
95.065   Animals exposed to rabies; confinement
   
95.066   Breaking in the pound; obstruction
   
95.067   Fees and charges pertaining to animals; establishment by City Council
resolution
Administration and Enforcement
   
95.080   Animal control officers
   
95.081   Issuance of citation
   
95.082   Failure to appear
   
95.083   Payment of fines; appearance before magistrate
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.001  KEEPING ANIMALS; REQUIRED AREA.
   All animals commonly referred to as “domesticated farm animals,” including
horses, cow, mules, asses and other similar animals shall not be kept and
maintained on any parcel of land of less than one acre.  The tract where the
animals are kept shall be fenced so as to prevent damage by the animals to
personal property on adjacent tracts of land.  No more than two domesticated
farm animals shall be kept per acre of land, except that on any tract of land
zoned A-1, agricultural-use district, a maximum of five domesticated farm
animals may be kept per acre of land, provided, the premises are maintained in
strict compliance with § 95.003 and provided the fence enclosing the tract is
capable of preventing the escape of the animals and is maintained at all times.
(Prior Code, § 4-101)  (Ord. 1279, passed 2-21-84; Am. Ord. 1297, passed 8-7-
84; Am. Ord. 1415, passed 11-18-87) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate animals, see  11 O.S. § 22-115
§ 95.002  ANIMALS AT-LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person to allow any animals,
fowl or reptiles picketed, staked, herded or driven upon any of the streets,
alleys or public grounds within the city.  All stock must be led by halter,
leash or rope while being taken to and from pasture.  It shall be unlawful to
allow or permit any animal, fowl or reptile to run at large or trespass on the
property of another within the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-102)  (Am. Ord. 1415, passed 11-18-87) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.003  SANITATION; ENCLOSURES.
   All pens or enclosures where animals, fowl or reptile are kept and
maintained shall be kept free of filth at all times.  All manure shall be
cleaned regularly from pens and kept in a manure pile that shall be removed at
least twice a week.  Each pen or enclosure shall be sprayed with a suitable
residual spray as often as is necessary to control flies, insects, rodents and
noxious odors.
(Prior Code, § 4-103)  (Am. Ord. 1415, passed 11-18-87) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.004  KEEPING RABBITS AND CHICKENS.
   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to
keep, maintain, harbor or feed rabbits, chickens or other fowls in a way that
they may become an annoyance or nuisance to others and all hutches, pens or
shelters and premises must be maintained and kept clean.
(Prior Code, § 4-104)  (Am. Ord. 1415, passed 11-18-87) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.005  KEEPING SWINE, GOATS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep,
maintain or feed swine, goats, emu or ostrich within the city.
   (B)   The keeping of potbellied pigs within the city is specifically
prohibited, except as follows:
      (1)   Only those potbellied pigs, as hereinafter defined, which are
located within the city on the effective date of this chapter may continue to
be located in the city under the following conditions for their lifetime.  For
purposes of this chapter, only those potbellied pigs which are registered
through a bona fide registry firm may be licensed within the city.  To qualify
to be kept under this exception the potbellied pig must have been located in
the city on the effective date of this chapter, and must be licensed with the
city no later than 30 days from the effective date of this chapter.
      (2)   The keeping of not more than two licensed potbellied pigs or
similar small swine per lot or premises under this exception shall be subject
to the following conditions:
         (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
            POTBELLIED PIGS.  Asian potbellied pigs, Shar-pei pigs, Vietnamese,
Chinese or Asian pigs or other similar swine meeting the provisions of this
section.
         (b)   Each potbellied pig shall be a pet that is to be kept for
personal enjoyment and not kept or raised for human consumption.
         (c)   Each potbellied pig shall be licensed with the city under
conditions as the animal control division deems appropriate, including, but not
limited to rabies vaccination, if available, and registered through a bona fide
registry firm.  The license shall be renewed annually at the same time, at the
same cost, and under the same conditions as dog licenses hereunder.
         (d)   A potbellied pig shall not exceed 75 pounds in weight and 21
inches in height.
         (e)   There shall not be more than two potbellied pigs more than three
months of age per lot or residence.
         (f)   The keeping of potbellied pigs for commercial breeding purposes
is prohibited in the city.
         (g)   The premises where potbellied pigs are kept shall be maintained
so that noxious odors are controlled.
            1.   Any person who keeps, maintains or harbors a potbellied pig
shall keep it confined on the premises.
            2.   The confinement shall be accomplished by the following means:
               a.   A fence or similar enclosure to prevent escape;
               b.   Keeping inside a house or other building; and
               c.   Keeping on a leash to prevent escape.
(Prior Code, § 4-105)    (Am. Ord. 1415, passed 11-18-87; Am. Ord. 1487, passed
3-3-92; Am. Ord. 1535, passed 5-16-95) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.006  KEEPING DANGEROUS, VICIOUS OR DISEASED ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or harbor any
dangerous, vicious or diseased animal.
   (B)   A diseased animal is an animal known or believed to be infected with a
dangerous or communicable disease.
(Prior Code, § 4-106)  (Am. Ord. 1415, passed 11-18-87) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.007  BEEKEEPING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The City Council of Bethany, Oklahoma finds that the keeping of bees
within the urban environment of the City of Bethany creates an unreasonably
high risk of harm to its citizens due to the proximity of dwellings located on
smaller lots and the high density of Bethany’s residential environs. The risk
of bee stings and associated injury to the citizens of Bethany constitute a
public nuisance.
   (B)   The keeping, harboring, and maintaining of bees in hives within the
City of Bethany is hereby prohibited.
(Ord. 1788, passed 7-17-07)
§ 95.008  HUNTING.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to trap, hunt, shoot, molest or attempt
to trap, hunt, shoot, molest in any manner, any bird or wild fowl, or to rob
bird nests or wild fowl nests within the city.
   (B)   However, if any of the birds or wild fowl become a public nuisance or
a menace to health or property, then in that event, the birds or wild fowl may
be destroyed under the control and supervision of the animal control officer or
City Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 4-107)  (Am. Ord. 1415, passed 11-18-87)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.009  CRUELTY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Wilfully or maliciously torture, cruelly beat, injure, maim, mutilate
or unjustly destroy or kill any animal, fowl or reptile whether belonging to
himself or another;
   (B)   Deprive an animal, fowl, reptile in subjugation or captivity of food,
drink or shelter;
   (C)   Unjustly administer any poison or noxious drug or substance to any
animal, fowl or reptile.
   (D)   Unjustly expose any drug or substance with the intent that the same
shall be taken by any animal, fowl, reptile, whether same be the property of
himself, herself or another; or
   (E)   Cause any person to do any of the acts enumerated in this section.
(Prior Code, § 4-108)  (Am. Ord. 1415, passed 11-18-87)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.010 ABANDONMENT OF ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any animal on any private or
public property in the city, including but not limited to the city's animal
control shelter when no employees are present to accept the animal.
(Ord. 1672, passed 5-21-02)
§ 95.011  CLEANING UP AFTER ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any person owning, keeping, possessing, or harboring any animal shall
promptly remove and dispose of all feces left by the animal on any public
property or on any private property not owned by such person or lawfully
occupied by such person.
   (B)   A first violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $25 and any subsequent violation shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $100.
(Ord. 1790, passed 8-21-07)
§ 95.012  FAILURE TO PROVIDE HUMANE CARE AND TREATMENT PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning an animal to fail to provide the
animal with humane care and treatment in accordance with the standards set
forth herein.
(Ord. 1871, passed 2-19-13; Am. Ord. 1883, passed 8-19-14)
§ 95.013  STANDARDS OF HUMANE CARE AND TREATMENT.
   The following standards of humane care and treatment are established for all
animals within the city:
   (A)   Food requirements.  Food shall be free from contamination and of
sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain an animal in good health. 
An animal shall be fed at least once a day except as dictated by hibernation,
veterinary treatment, normal fasts or other professionally accepted practices. 
All food receptacles shall be kept clean and sanitary.
   (B)   Water requirements.  Safe, clean water shall be provided as often as
necessary for the health and comfort of each animal.  Frequency of watering
shall consider age, species, condition, size and type of animal.  Animals shall
be watered as required by applicable state and federal laws.  All water shall
be provided in sturdy, stable receptacles of adequate size for the animal and
shall be kept clean and sanitary.
   (C)   Space requirements.  Enclosures or shelters for animals shall be
constructed and maintained to provide sufficient space for each animal to make
normal postural and social adjustments and to provide each animal with adequate
freedom of movement to maintain good physical condition.
   (D)   Indoor shelter requirements.  Facilities shall be sufficiently heated,
cooled and ventilated as to protect the animal from extremes of temperature and
to provide for its health and prevent injury or disease. Sufficient light shall
be provided, but lighting of primary enclosures shall be designed to protect
the animal from physical harm.  Lighting shall be uniformly distributed and of
sufficient intensity to permit routine inspection and cleaning.
   (E)   Outdoor shelter requirements.  Natural or artificial shelters
appropriate to the local climatic conditions for the particular species of
animal shall be provided for all animals kept outdoors or for animals left out
of doors during inclement weather.  A suitable method of drainage shall be
provided to rapidly eliminate excess water.
      (1)   A shelter for a dog or cat shall consist of a moistureproof and
windproof structure of suitable size to accommodate the animal and to allow
retention of body heat.  It shall be made of durable material, and shall be
provided with a sufficient quantity of suitable bedding material to provide
insulation and protection against cold and dampness and to promote retention of
body heat.
      (2)   A shelter for livestock or domesticated fowl shall be at least a
three-sided, roofed structure made of durable material.
      (3)   A shelter for any other animals shall be appropriate to the size
and needs of the animal.
   (F)   Sanitation requirements.  All shelters, enclosures, cages and litter
boxes shall receive necessary cleaning to remove excreta, waste materials, dirt
and trash to minimize disease hazards and to reduce odors.  Litter in litter
boxes and shaving or other materials used in cages or enclosures shall be
changed as frequently as necessary to minimize disease hazards and to reduce
odors.
   (G)   Veterinary and other care requirements.  All animals shall have the
veterinary and other care necessary to prevent suffering.
   (H)   Animals in vehicles.  No animal shall be left or confined in any
unattended vehicle under any conditions that endanger the health or well-being
of the animal due to heat cold, lack of adequate ventilation, or lack of food
or water, or under other circumstances that could reasonably be expected to
cause injury, suffering, disability or death to the animal.
(Ord. 1871, passed 2-19-13; Am. Ord. 1883, passed 8-19-14)
§ 95.014  ANIMAL WELFARE OFFICER MAY IMPOUND ANIMAL AND/OR PROVIDE TERMS AND
CONDITIONS FOR CARE.
   (A)   Whenever the Animal Control Officer, or his or her designee, finds any
animal is without humane care or treatment, he or she may, at the owner’s
expense, impound the animal for protective care.  In the event of sickness or
injury of the animal and upon the advice of a licensed veterinarian, the Animal
Control Officer may take appropriate action to relieve pain and suffering; this
shall include the option of immediate humane euthanasia of the animal.
   (B)   The Animal Welfare Animal Control Officer may issue a citation to the
owner for a violation of §
95.012, and/or may specify the terms and conditions under which the owner may
regain or maintain custody of the animal, which terms and conditions statement
shall be signed by the owner.  Violation of the terms and conditions by the
owner is an offense against the city, and shall be cause for the issuance of a
citation and may result in the impoundment of the animal.
(Ord. 1871, passed 2-19-13; Am. Ord. 1883, passed 8-19-14)
VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS
§ 95.020  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONFINED ON THE PREMISES.  The condition in which an animal is securely and
physically confined and restrained on and within the premises of the owner by
means of walls, fences, rope, chain, leash or other device of the strength and
size as to physically prevent the animal from leaving the premises, and to
physically prevent the animal from causing physical injury to persons or other
animals which are off the premises on which the confined animal is located.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL.  An animal that, without provocation, has chased or
approached in either a menacing fashion or in an apparent attitude of attack or
has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person or other animal while
the animal alleged to be dangerous is off the premises of the owner or while
the animal is not physically restrained or confined on the premises.  DANGEROUS
ANIMAL does not include a police dog while the police dog is being used to
assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their duty.
   DISEASED ANIMAL.  An animal believed to be infected with a dangerous or
communicable disease.
   MENACING FASHION.  An animal would cause any person observing the animal to
reasonably believe that the animal will cause physical injury to persons or
other animals.
   OWNER.  The owner of an animal and every other person having the care or
custody of or harboring, keeping or maintaining any animal.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL.
      (1)   An animal that, without provocation, has killed or caused physical
injury to any person or has killed or caused physical injury to another animal.
      (2)   VICIOUS ANIMAL does not include a police dog while the police dog
is being used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their
official duties and where any injury inflicted by the police dog was reasonably
related to the duties being performed.
   WITHOUT PROVOCATION.  An animal was not teased, tormented or abused and also
means where the animal was not protecting its owner or owner's property from
criminal activity by a perpetrator of a crime.
(Prior Code, § 4-109)
§ 95.021  VICIOUS, DANGEROUS AND DISEASED ANIMALS.
   The keeping of vicious, dangerous or diseased animals within the city is
hereby declared unlawful, except as may be permitted in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-110) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.022  SUMMONS AND COMPLAINT.
   (A)   Any person who witnesses or has personal knowledge that an act or acts
made unlawful by this subchapter have been committed may sign a complaint
against the alleged violator.
   (B)   Any police officer, animal welfare officer or code enforcement officer
who is employed by the city is authorized to issue a summons and complaint when
the officer personally observes a violation of this subchapter.
   (C)   The complainant must provide a sworn complaint to the officer
receiving the complaint containing the following information:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the complainant and other
witnesses to the incident;
      (2)   Date, time and location of the incident;
      (3)   Description of the animal;
      (4)   Name, address and telephone number, if known, of the animal owner;
      (5)   A statement that the animal attacked the complainant or some other
person or animal as witnessed by the complainant or the facts as warrant a
finding that the animal is vicious,  dangerous or diseased; and
      (6)   Other facts and circumstances of the incident.
(Prior Code, § 4-111)
§ 95.023  IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer, upon receipt of a
verified complaint as outlined in
§ 95.022, to cause the animal involved to be impounded pending a determination
as required by this subchapter.
   (B)   Any and all expenses associated with the impounding including shelter,
food, handling and veterinary care shall be born by the owner of the animal
during the period of impoundment.
(Prior Code, § 4-112)
§ 95.024  HEARING.
   (A)   The Municipal Judge, in addition to any hearings which may be required
on criminal charges, shall hold a hearing within ten days of the date of
impoundment to determine if the animal is vicious, dangerous or diseased as
defined by this code.
   (B)   The hearing may be held in conjunction with any criminal proceedings
if so ordered by the Judge, but, in no event, shall this delay the hearing on
determination of viciousness.
(Prior Code, § 4-113)
§ 95.025  DETERMINATION.
   The Municipal Judge shall be empowered to make one of the following
determinations as a result of the hearing:
   (A)   The animal is in fact not vicious, dangerous, or diseased, in which
event the animal control officer shall cause it to be surrendered to the owner
of the animal, upon payment by the owner of the expenses outlined in
§ 95.023, and upon compliance with
§§ 95.035 through
95.037;
   (B)   The animal is in fact vicious, dangerous or diseased and should be
destroyed;
   (C)   The animal is vicious, dangerous or diseased, but that for good cause
shown the animal should not be destroyed, in which event the Judge shall order
one of the following:
      (1)   The animal be immediately removed from the corporate limits of the
city and not to ever be again allowed within the corporate limits of the city
and that the owner pay all fees required by
§ 95.023;
      (2)   The owner be allowed to maintain the vicious animal within the
corporate limits of the city under the following conditions:
         (a)   Payment of all fees required by
§ 95.023 and compliance with
§§ 95.035 through
95.037;
         (b)   Leash and muzzle; (No person shall permit an animal covered by
this section to go outside its kennel or pen unless the animal is securely
leashed with a leash no longer than four feet in length.  No person shall
permit the animal to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside
its kennel or pen unless a person is in physical control of the leash.  The
animal may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings
and the like.  In addition, all animals on a leash outside the animal's kennel
must be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent the animal from
biting persons or other animals.)
         (c)   Confinement; (All animals covered by this section shall be
securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel,
except when leashed and muzzled as above provided.  The pen, kennel or
structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides.  All
structures used to confine the animals must be locked with a key or combination
lock when the animals are within the structure.  The structure must have a
secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pen
must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet.  All structures erected
to house the animals must comply with all zoning and building regulations of
the city.  All structures must be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in
a clean and sanitary condition.
         (d)   Confinement indoors; and/or  (No animal covered by this section
may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would
allow the animal to exit the building on its own volition.  In addition, no
animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when
screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the animal from
exiting the structure.)
         (e)   All owners, keepers or harborers of animals covered by this
section within the city shall display in a prominent place on their premises a
sign easily readable by the public using the words “BEWARE OF VICIOUS ANIMAL.” 
In addition, a similar sign is required to be posted on the kennel or pen of
the animal.
   (D)   All owners whose animal is adjudged to be vicious at the hearing and
sentence is imposed by the Municipal Judge pursuant to this section, upon
written demand, may appeal the Judge's decision within ten days to the District
Court of the county where a trial in the District Court shall be accorded them
de novo.
(Prior Code, § 4-114) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
DOGS AND CATS
§ 95.035  VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any dog or cat
within the city without first having the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies. 
The person shall obtain a certificate by a licensed veterinarian stating that
the dog or cat has been vaccinated as required by this section.
   (B)   At all times, a tag showing the vaccination registration number and
year vaccination given must be displayed on the dog or cat by attaching it to
the animal's collar or harness, or otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 4-201) (Am. Ord. 1648, passed 11-21-00) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.036  CONFINEMENT ON PREMISES.
   (A)   Any person who keeps, maintains or harbors a dog shall keep the dog
confined on the premises.
   (B)   The confinement shall be accomplished by the following means:
      (1)   A fence or similar enclosure to prevent the dog from escaping;
      (2)   Keeping inside a house or other building; or
      (3)   Keeping on a leash to prevent the dog from escaping from the
premises.
(Prior Code, § 4-207) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.037  DOGS AT-LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit the dog to be at-
large or trespass on the property of another within the city.  The animal
control officer is hereby authorized to pick up and impound any dog found at-
large in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 4-208) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.038  BARKING DOGS AND HOWLING CATS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any dog or cat
that causes annoyance or disturbance to any resident of the city by loud or
frequent barking, howling or yelping.  Prosecutions under this section shall be
made only upon the written complaint filed by any person so annoyed or
disturbed.
(Prior Code, § 4-209) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.039  NUISANCES.
   It shall be unlawful to harbor a dog or cat that is a nuisance, as
hereinafter defined.  A dog or cat that causes either danger, annoyance or
discomfort to residents of the city by howling, barking, fighting, destruction
of property or unhealthy state is hereby declared a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 4-210) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.040  BITING INCIDENTS.
   Any person owning or having under his or her control any dog or cat who
bites any person or any person who has been bitten by any dog or cat shall
forthwith notify the Police Department of the city, giving the location and
license number of the dog, if available, the name and address of the person
bitten. Failure to make a report shall be an offense.
(Prior Code, § 4-211)
§ 95.041  IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Any person owning, possessing, harboring or in control of a dog,
cat or other carnivorous animal inflicting a bite or other contact with a human
resulting in a potential exposure to rabies shall immediately secure and
confine the animal until the animal control officer is notified and arrives. 
The animal inflicting the exposure shall be impounded and observed in a
veterinary hospital by a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten days from
the date of the bite unless the State Health Department directs that the animal
be euthanized for special rabies diagnosis.
      (2)   The provisions of the “Rules and Regulations for Quarantine of
Animals Suspected of Having Rabies,” of the State Health Department are hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this section.  The expense of
impoundment under this section shall be the responsibility of the person
owning, keeping or harboring the animal.
(Prior Code, § 4-212)  (Am. Ord. 1484, passed 1-7-92)
   (B)   Any animals impounded under the provisions of division (A) above shall
be held by the city animal control officer, and shall not be released until the
impoundment expense is paid.  If the owner cannot be located or found or
refuses to pay for the keeping of the dog or cat, the dog or cat shall be
disposed of at the expiration of ten days as provided hereby.  (Prior Code, §
4-213)  (Am. Ord. 1230, passed 1-4-83)
   (C)   The animal control officer is hereby authorized to impound any animals
observed to be in violation of any of the provisions hereof.  (Prior Code, § 4-
214)  (Am. Ord. 1326, passed 4-16-85)
§ 95.042  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS.
   It shall be a violation of this code for any owner or occupant of any
residence in the city to keep, maintain, or harbor on the premises more than a
total of four dogs or cats over the age of six months.
(Ord. 1754, passed 6-21-05) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
CITY POUND
§ 95.060  ESTABLISHMENT.
   A city pound shall be provided and maintained at the expense of the city in
which all animals found at large in the city contrary hereto be impounded.  The
pound shall be constructed in a manner as to provide shelter for all animals
impounded therein, with sufficient stalls to separate one breed of animal from
that of another and to separate a ferocious or diseased animal from other
animals.  It shall be constructed out of strong material to insure the safe
keeping of all animals.  Animals held for observation shall be maintained in
separate stalls or pens.
(Prior Code, § 4-301)
§ 95.061  REDEMPTION OF ANIMALS; PICK- UP CHARGES AND EXPENSES.
   (A)   If the owner of any animal impounded hereunder shall apply to and pay
the city the costs, charges and expenses hereinafter provided at any time
before the disposal of the animal, the animal control officer shall release the
animal unless the animal is being held for rabies observation, or is hereby
held as diseased, vicious or dangerous.
   (B)   The animal control officer shall not release any impounded animal to
its owner until all charges against the animal are paid.
(Prior Code, §4-302)  (Ord. 1469, passed 12-18-90; Am. Ord. 1745, passed 3-15-
05)
§ 95.062  TRANSFER OF PROCEEDS.
   (A)   The animal control officer shall, at least weekly, transfer to the
City Clerk all the proceeds from the redemption of any dog, cat, other animal,
fowl or reptile, together with all fees and charges collected and the same
shall be placed in the General Fund of the city.
   (B)   Receipt of amount shall be issued to the redeemer of animals from
impoundment.
(Prior Code, § 4-303)
§ 95.063  SALE OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   (1)   Any animal taken up and impounded, except dogs and cats may be
sold at public auction by the animal control officer at any time after the
expiration of five days from the impounding of the same.
      (2)   The animal control officer shall personally attend to the selling
of all animals and shall give at least five days' notice of the time and place
of the sale, by causing notices thereof to be posted in at least four public
places, including the City Pound, the Police Headquarters and the City Hall,
and by mailing the notice to the owner of the animal when the name of the owner
is known.
   (B)   The notice shall be in substantially the following form:
NOTICE OF SALE OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS
Taken up and impounded in the City Pound of the City of Bethany, Oklahoma, on
the                  day of                ,              , the following
described animals found running at large contrary to the ordinances of the City
of Bethany, to wit:                                                           
                                                                               
                                                          , said animals,
unless redeemed will be sold at public auction for cash to the highest bidder
at the City Pound, at the hour of                      o 'clock,             , 
on the                  day of                          ,                     
.
Signed                                                                       
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER
(Prior Code, § 4-304)
§ 95.064  DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS; RECLAIMING OR ADOPTING.
   (A)   Any dog or cat impounded under the provisions hereof, other than a dog
or cat suspected of biting or scratching a person and other than dogs or cats
which are known to be diseased or which are known to be vicious or dangerous,
shall be destroyed unless claimed by its owner after payment of redemption
charges or unless adopted by a person over the age of 18 years of age, as
hereinafter provided.
   (B)   The owner of any impounded dog or cat other than those dogs and cats
excepted in division (A) above, may claim and redeem the animal within 72 hours
from date and time of impoundment under the following conditions:
      (1)   The person provides sufficient proof of ownership;
      (2)   The owner provides proof of current rabies vaccination; and
      (3)   The owner pays the charges for redemption provided for hereinafter.
   (C)   If a dog or cat impounded under the provisions hereof other than a dog
or cat, excepted in division (A) above, is not claimed by its owner within the
72-hour period provided for above, then the dog or cat shall be eligible for
adoption under the following conditions:
      (1)   The person adopting the animal is over 18 years of age;
      (2)   The animal has a current rabies vaccination;
      (3)   The animal has been sterilized, except in the case of infant
animals;
      (4)   The person adopting the animal pays the costs of vaccination and
sterilization, as may be established by the City Manager;
      (5)   The person signs a written agreement releasing the city, its agents
and employees from any liability for damages or injury caused by the animal and
risk involved with the adoption of the animal; and
      (6)   Other rules or regulations as the City Manager may establish.
   (D)   Any animals not claimed by the owner within 72 hours after impoundment
and not adopted within seven days after impoundment shall be disposed of by the
animal control officer.  Before the disposition of impounded dogs and cats, the
animal control officer shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner
thereof where the owner is known.  No liability shall be incurred by the city
or by the animal control officer by reason of failure of notification of the
owner.  The method and manner of disposing of impounded dogs and cats shall be
as directed by the City Manager.
   (E)   The City Manager is authorized to negotiate with licensed
veterinarians for provision of the vaccination, sterilization and euthanasia
services required in this section.
(Prior Code, §4-305)  (Am. Ord. 1326, passed 4-16-85; Am. Ord. 1469, passed 12-
18-90; Am. Ord. 1745, passed 3-15-05)
Statutory reference:
   Lawful means of disposing of animals in shelters or pounds, see 4 O.S. §§
501 to 508
§ 95.065  ANIMALS EXPOSED TO RABIES; CONFINEMENT.
   (A)   Any domestic dog or cat which is not effectively immunized against
rabies virus encephalitis and is exposed to rabies through a rabid animal shall
be euthanized immediately either by the veterinarian in charge or by the animal
control officer or his or her agent or non-immunized, rabies-exposed dog or cat
shall be strictly quarantined and observed for a period of six months by either
a veterinarian or by the local animal control officer or his or her agent and
the animal shall be immunized against rabies at least 30 days prior to release.
   (B)   Expenses of quarantine and immunization shall be borne by the owner or
other person responsible for the animal.  Any domestic animal other than a dog
or cat which is not immunized against rabies and is exposed to a rabid animal
shall be immediately reported to the rabies control division of the State
Department of Health for consultation concerning the disposition of that
animal.  Any immunized domestic animal which is exposed to a wild skunk, bat or
carnivore where the biting animal has escaped or is not available for
laboratory study, shall be considered exposed to rabies and shall be dealt with
accordingly as stated in this section.  Any effectively immunized domestic
animal which is exposed to a rabid animal shall be immediately re-immunized and
restrained, by leashing and confinement, for a period of a least 90 days.
(Prior Code, § 4-306)
§ 95.066  BREAKING IN THE POUND; OBSTRUCTION.
   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to tamper with, break
open, assist or advise in the breaking open or tampering with the pound, animal
control officer's truck or any other equipment of the animal control officer. 
No person shall wilfully or wantonly molest any animal in the city pound,
obtain or attempt to obtain any animal from the Pound without complying
herewith or hinder, delay or obstruct any person duly authorized to pick up or
impound any animal liable to be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 4-307) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.067  FEES AND CHARGES PERTAINING TO ANIMALS; ESTABLISHMENT BY CITY COUNCIL
RESOLUTION.
   (A)   The following services pertaining to animal control shall be subject
to fees:
      (1)   Impoundment of small animals (including but not limited to dogs and
cats).
      (2)   Impoundment of large animals (such as horses, cows, and similar
animals).
      (3)   Daily cost of care, room, and board for small animals.
      (4)   Daily cost of care for large animals.
      (5)   Dead animal pickup fee for small animals.
      (6)   Dead animal pickup fee for large animals.
      (7)   Abandonment fee for small animals.
      (8)   Abandonment fee for large animals.
   (B)   The fees for the services described in division (A) shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 1745, passed 3-15-05)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 95.080  ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS.
   (A)   A qualified person or persons shall be appointed by the City Manager
as an animal control officer for the purpose of enforcing the provisions
hereof.  The animal control officer shall have the duty to take up and impound
all dogs, cats and other animals, fowl or reptiles running at large contrary to
the regulations of the city and to safely keep and dispose of all animals
coming into his or her possession, as provided by the regulations of the city. 
He or she shall provide suitable and necessary sustenance, shelter and care to
the animals while the animals are in the city pound and shall take precaution
while they are impounded, for the safety of the animals.  The animal control
officer shall have full police power to pick up, impound and release on
redemption all dogs and cats and other animals, fowl or reptiles as provided by
the regulations of the city and to destroy and bury all unredeemed dogs and
cats and to sell other animals as provided hereby.
   (B)   Animal control officers as designated by the City Manager are
authorized to enforce the provisions dealing with animals.  In carrying out the
duties, animal control officers may arrest any person violating the provisions
and, without a warrant, may issue a citation to the person to appear in court,
if the animal control officer observes violation.
(Prior Code, § 4-401)
§ 95.081  ISSUANCE OF CITATION.
   In issuing a citation, the animal control officer shall proceed as follows:
   (A)   He or she shall prepare a written citation to appear in court
containing the name and address of the cited person and the offense charged,
and stating when the person shall appear in court unless the person requests an
earlier date, the time specified in the citation to appear shall be at least
five days after the issuance of the citation.
   (B)   One copy of the citation to appear shall be delivered to the person
cited and the person shall sign a duplicate written citation which shall be
retained by the officer.
   (C)   The officer shall thereupon release the cited person from any custody.
   (D)   The officer shall verify the citation and cause one copy of the
citation to be filed with the city's Municipal Court.
(Prior Code, § 4-402)
§ 95.082  FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   If a person fails to appear in response to a citation, a warrant for his or
her arrest shall be issued and any person who wilfully fails to appear in
response to a citation is guilty of an offense of “failure to appear.”
(Prior Code, § 4-403)
§ 95.083  PAYMENT OF FINES; APPEARANCE BEFORE MAGISTRATE.
   The Municipal Judge may designate specified offenses dealing with animals or
regulations, in respect to which payment of fines may be accepted by the
Municipal Court.  Unless otherwise provided in this code, the Municipal Judge
may specify what number of the offenses shall require appearances before the
magistrate, and may specify, by suitable schedules, the amount of fine which
may be accepted in satisfaction of each specified offense for first, second and
subsequent offenses.  The fines shall be within the limits declared by the city
code.
(Prior Code, § 4-404)
CHAPTER 96:  ABANDONED, JUNKED AND DISCARDED VEHICLES
Section
   
96.01   Junk/derelict vehicles; nuisance; removal
   
96.02   Junk yards
§ 96.01  JUNK/DERELICT VEHICLES; NUISANCE; REMOVAL.
   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      JUNK/DERELICT VEHICLE.  Any vehicle, as defined herein, which is any of
the following: wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative,
deteriorated, decayed, lacks necessary repairs or maintenance, abandoned,
bearing no state license plate or bearing a state license plate that is more
than three months out of date, discarded or stored or parked outside of an
enclosed building on the premises of a motor vehicle repair facility for a
period of more than 30 days.
      OWNER.  Any person, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable
interest in the property, including an officer, guardian, executor,
administrator, mortgagee in possession, managing or leasing agent of such
person, firm or corporation.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY.  Any real property which is not public.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Property which is dedicated to the public use and over
which the federal, state or municipal government or any political subdivision
thereof exercises control and dominion.
      VEHICLE.  A device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices designed to be moved by
human power or used exclusively upon  stationary rails or tracks, including,
but not limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor
scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, boats, trailers and
recreational vehicles and campers.
   (B)   Prohibited; nuisance declared.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to park, store,
leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any junk/derelict vehicle of
any kind, whether attended or not, upon any public or private property within
the city for a period of time in excess of 72 hours. The presence of junk
vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property is hereby declared a
public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
      (2)   The provisions of division (B)(1) above shall not apply to any
vehicle enclosed within a building on private property, or to any vehicle held
in connection with a lawful business enterprise and property operated in the
appropriate zone pursuant to the zoning ordinance, or to any vehicle in
operable condition specifically adopted or designed for operation on drag
strips or raceways, or any vehicle retained by the owner for antique collection
purposes in a storage place in an enclosed building on private property
maintained in a lawful place and manner. However, this section does not exempt
vehicles parked or stored outside an enclosed building for a period in excess
of 30 days on the premises of a motor vehicle repair facility.
   (C)   Order of abatement. In all cases where it shall have been determined
that any nuisance shall be abated, and the nuisance is not abated within the
time specified in the notice, an order of abatement shall be entered by the
City Manager or designee who shall assign a value to the vehicle and cause the
vehicle or its parts to be removed and stored in a proper place for not more
than 30 days.
   (D)   Responsibility for removal.
      (1)   Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the
private property on which the junk/derelict vehicle is located shall be
responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the
city or its designee, the owner of the private property where the vehicle is
located shall be liable for the expenses incurred.
      (2)   The owner of any vehicle so removed may regain possession thereof
by making application to the Community Development Department within 30 days
after its removal. The owner shall pay the designated wrecker service all
reasonable costs of towing and storage liens which shall have accrued to such
vehicle.  If the vehicle is not reclaimed within 30 days, it may be sold
without further notice from the city.
   (E)   Notice to remove.
      (1)   The City Manager, or designee, shall give notice of removal to the
owner of the private property where a nuisance, as defined by this section, is
located.  At least ten days notice shall be given to the owner of the property
by mail at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the County
Treasurer's Office before the city takes action.  It shall constitute
sufficient notice when at the time of mailing of the notice to the property
owner the Director shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service,
which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of
the mailee; and if such person or entity cannot be found, then a copy of the
notice may be served by posting a copy in some conspicuous place on the
premises upon which the vehicle is located, at least ten days prior to any
abatement action by the enforcement official.
      (2)   The notice shall order the property owner to abate the nuisance,
and shall further state that unless such abatement is performed within ten days
of the date of the notice the nuisance may be abated by the city.
   (F)   Hearing.
      (1)   The owner may give written consent authorizing the city to abate
the nuisance under this section. Such consent shall waive the right to a
hearing under division (F)(2) below.
      (2)   At any time within ten days from the date of the notice and order
provided for in this section, the owner may request, in writing to the City
Manager, a hearing to be conducted for the purpose of contesting the
determination that a nuisance exists upon his or her property.  The City
Manager shall conduct such hearing as soon as may be practicable but not
earlier than five days after receipt of the owner's request for such hearing,
and not later than 15 days after such receipt.
      (3)   At such hearing the owner shall have the right to be represented by
counsel, to present testimony, evidence and arguments, and to cross-examine
witnesses.  All testimony shall be taken under oath.  If the City Manager,
after such hearing, shall determine that the junk/derelict vehicle constitutes
a growing blight or a substantial detriment to the health and safety of the
residents of the community, he or she shall file, in writing, findings of fact,
and order that such nuisance be abated within ten days, and shall cause such
findings and order to be served upon the owner at the conclusion of the
hearing.
   (G)   Removal of motor vehicle from property.  If the violation described in
the notice served pursuant to this division has not been remedied within the
ten-day period of compliance, or in the event that a notice requesting a
hearing has not been timely filed and the existence of the violation is
affirmed by the City Manager, then the City Manager or designee may continue to
recommend prosecution of criminal charges on a daily basis for failure to abate
the nuisance and/or shall have the right to take possession of the inoperative
or junk/derelict vehicle and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful
for any person to interfere, hinder or to refuse to allow the person or persons
to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the
provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 9-501) (Am. Ord. 1683, passed 10-1-02; Am. Ord. 1856, passed 10-
18-11)   
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.02  JUNK YARDS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      JUNK YARD.  A storage yard or building for the use of carrying on the
occupation or business of buying brass, copper, iron, rubber and leather
belting, junk automobiles and other items commonly known as junk.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep or
maintain a junk yard or junk storage yard in the city unless the same is
enclosed by a board or picket fence, with pickets four inches wide with not
more than one-inch openings between pickets, at least eight feet high, which
fence shall be at all times kept painted and in good repair.
(Prior Code, § 9-502) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 97:  AIR QUALITY CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
97.01   Definitions
   
97.02   Enforcement
   
97.03   Air pollution prohibited
Types of Emissions; Prohibitions
   
97.15   Dense smoke
   
97.16   Incinerators
   
97.17   Fuel burning equipment
   
97.18   Process equipment or operations
   
97.19   Hot mix asphalt plants
   
97.20   Open burning
   
97.21   Motor vehicle pollution-control devices
   
97.22   Fugitive dust control
Administration and Enforcement
   
97.35   Notice
   
97.36   Test; data sampling
   
97.37   Air Quality Control Variance Board
   
97.38   Applications for variance
   
97.39   Fees
   
97.40   Variances
   
97.41   Public hearings
   
97.42   Nuisances declared
   
97.43   Abatement procedure
   
97.44   Emergency
   
Appendix A:   Allowable Rate of Particle Matter of Emission
   
Appendix B:   Hot Mix Asphalt Plants
   GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR CONTAMINANT.  Any smoke, soot, fly ash, dust, cinder, dirt, noxious,
obnoxious acids, fumes, oxides, gases, vapors, odors, toxic or radio active
substances, waste particulates, solid, liquid or gaseous matter in the
atmosphere which when in sufficient quantities is capable of injuring human,
plant or animal life or depriving the enjoyment thereof.
   AIR POLLUTION.  The emission of any air contaminants in a place or manner
which when by itself or combined with other air contaminants present in the
atmosphere is detrimental to or endangers the health, comfort or safety of any
person or which may cause injury or damage to property or premises.
   ATMOSPHERE.  The air that envelops or surrounds the earth.
   BOARD.  The Bethany Board of Adjustment setting as the Air Quality Control
Variance Board.
   CERTIFIED VISIBLE EMISSIONS READER.  Anyone certified by the State Health
Department, Air Quality Service, as having satisfactorily completed their
visible emissions training course.
   CHIMNEY or STACK.  Chimney, stack, conduit, duct, vent, flue or opening of
any kind whatsoever arranged to conduct any products to the atmosphere.
   COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS AND FUELS.  Any substance which will readily burn and
shall include those substances which, although generally considered non-
combustible, are or may be included in the mass of the combustible material
burned or to be burned.
   DIRECTOR.  The Community Development Director of the City of Bethany or his
or her designee.
   EMISSION.  The emission of air contaminants into the atmosphere.
   EVAPORATING LOSS CONTROL SYSTEM.  A system or device designed and installed
in a manner as to reduce or prevent the emission to the atmosphere of the
vapors of the hydrocarbon fuel contained in the fuel tank, carburetor or fuel
pump of the motor vehicle.
   EXHAUST EMISSION CONTROL SYSTEM.  A system, device or engine modification
designed and installed in a manner as to reduce or prevent the emission to the
atmosphere of air pollutant gases, vapors and particulate matter released from
the motor vehicle engine through the exhaust manifold and tailpipe.
   FUEL BURNING EQUIPMENT.  Any equipment, machinery, device, structure or
contrivance, and all appurtenances thereto, including ducts, breeching, fuel-
feed equipment, ash removal equipment, internal combustion engines, combustion
controls, stacks and chimneys, which burn fuel or combustible material for the
purpose of producing heat or energy, but shall not mean process equipment or
operations or incinerators.
   FUGITIVE EMISSIONS.  An emission or dust which from some point other than a
point source.
   INCINERATOR.  Any device, structure or contrivance used to dispose of refuse
or other waste by burning or the processing of salvageable material by burning
but excluding flares.
   MOTOR VEHICLE.  A self-propelled, wheeled vehicle designed for normal use on
public streets and highways.
   MOTOR VEHICLE POLLUTION CONTROL DEVICE.  Any or all of the devices or
systems referred to in this section and designed to control or prevent air
pollution emissions from motor vehicles.
   MULTIPLE CHAMBER INCINERATOR.  Any incinerator consisting of two or more
combustion chambers of in line or retort type physically separated by curtained
walls with gas passage ports or ducts and designed for maximum combustion of
the material to be burned.
   OPACITY.  The percent of reduction of light visible through the emission.
   OPEN BURNING.  The burning of combustible materials or refuse in a manner
that the products of combustion are emitted directly into the atmosphere.
   OPEN-PIT INCINERATOR.  A device consisting of a pit, into which the material
to be burned is placed, nozzles, pipes and other appurtenances designed and
arranged in a manner to deliver additional air and/or auxiliary fuel to, or
near, the zone of combustion so that theoretically complete combustion is
accomplished or approached.
   PARTICULATE MATTER.  Discrete particles of liquid, except uncombined water,
or solid matter or both which may or may not be suspended in air.
   POSITIVE CRANKCASE VENTILATOR.  A system or device designed and installed in
a manner as to prevent or reduce the release or emission into the  atmosphere
of gases or vapors produced or otherwise present in the crankcase of the engine
of a motor vehicle.
   PROCESS EQUIPMENT OR OPERATION.  Any equipment, machinery, device or
premises used for the treating, processing or manufacturing of materials,
products or substances which operation may emit smoke, particulate matter or
other air contaminants.
   PROCESS WEIGHT.  The total weight of all materials introduced into any
specific process, equipment or operation.  Solid fuels shall be considered as
part of the process weight but liquids and gases used solely as fuel shall not.
   PROCESS WEIGHT PER HOUR.  The weight derived by dividing the total process
weight by the number of hours in one complete operation from the beginning of
any given process to the completion thereof excluding any time during which the
equipment is idle.
   PRODUCTS OF COMBUSTION.  All particulate matter and other air contaminants
emitted as a result of the burning of refuse and combustible materials.
   REFUSE.  Garbage, rubbish, trade waste, leaves, salvageable material,
agricultural waste and other wastes.
   SOURCE.  Any physical arrangement or structure which may emit air
contaminants.  It includes, but is not limited to stacks, chimneys, building
openings, open fires, vehicles, processes, equipment, structures and premises.
   SOURCE GAS VOLUME.  The total amount of gas including air contaminants,
emitted from any process, equipment or operation into the atmosphere.
(Prior Code, § 9-601)  (Am. Ord. 1888, passed 11-18-14)
§ 97.02  ENFORCEMENT.
   The Director shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-602)
§ 97.03  AIR POLLUTION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall permit or cause an air contaminant to be emitted from any
source or premises under his or her jurisdiction or control in sufficient
amounts as to exceed those permissible under this chapter, or in quantities
such that it interferes with the health, comfort or safety of any person or
which may cause injury or damage to property or premises.
(Prior Code, § 9-603) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
   TYPES OF EMISSIONS; PROHIBITIONS
§ 97.15  DENSE SMOKE.
   No person shall cause or permit the emission of dense visible emissions from
any source whatever, except as specifically permitted.
(Prior Code, § 9-604) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.16  INCINERATORS.
   (A)   No person shall install or make any alteration or modification to an
incinerator which affects the emission of air contaminants without first having
obtained a permit from the director and paying the fee provided for in the
general schedule of fees.
   (B)   A person making application for a permit shall furnish the information
concerning the incinerator, as the Director may request, including the plans,
specifications, manufacturer's descriptive literature and test reports.
   (C)   (1)   All incinerators installed after the effective date of this
chapter shall be multiple chambered, gas fired in the primary and secondary
chamber and water scrubbed.  All incinerators shall have a capacity of 75
pounds per hour or greater provided that this capacity shall not be applicable
to incinerators designed and used exclusively as pathological incinerators.
      (2)   An incinerator of different construction may be used when the
Director determines that the incinerator will be equally effective in
controlling the emission of air contaminants and approves its installation.
   (D)   All incinerators shall be maintained and operated according to good
practices.
   (E)   Incinerators with a maximum burning capacity of 200 pounds per hour or
more shall not emit particulate matter in excess of 0.2 grains per dry cubic
foot corrected to 12% CO, of exhaust gas under standard conditions. 
Incinerators with a maximum burning capacity of less than 200 pounds per hour
or more shall not emit particulate matter in excess of 0.3 grains per dry cubic
foot corrected to 12% of exhaust gas under standard conditions.
   (F)   Incinerators may emit dense smoke up to, but not exceeding an opacity
designated as 40% as recorded by a certified visible emissions reader, for
periods not exceeding 5 minutes in any 60-minute period and not exceeding 20
minutes in any 24-hour period.
   (G)   No permit shall be granted for the proposed installation, alteration
or modification of an incinerator unless the conditions contained herein are
satisfied.
(Prior Code, § 9-605) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.17  FUEL BURNING EQUIPMENT.
   Fuel burning equipment shall not emit particulate matter in excess of that
indicated in the documents relating to fuel burning equipment and process
equipment or operations hereby adopted by reference and available for
inspection during normal business hours in the Office of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 9-606) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.18  PROCESS EQUIPMENT OR OPERATIONS.
   (A)   Process equipment or operations shall not emit from the premises upon
which the equipment or operation is located, particulate matter in excess of
that indicated in
Appendix A to this chapter and in documents relating to process equipment or
operation hereby adopted by reference and available for inspection in the
Office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   The owner or operator of any process equipment or operation shall
maintain dust control of the plant premises and plant owned, leased or
controlled access roads by paving, oil treatment or other suitable measures,
good operating practices, including water spraying or other suitable measures,
shall be employed to minimize dust generation and emission when bins are
pulled.
(Prior Code, § 9-607) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.19  HOT MIX ASPHALT PLANTS.
   (A)   Hot mix asphalt plants shall not emit particulate matter into the
atmosphere in excess of the quantity set out in
Appendix B to this chapter.
   (B)   No hot mix asphalt plant shall be operated unless it is equipped with
a fugitive dust control system for the hot aggregate which prevents the
emission of particulate matter from any other chimney.
(Prior Code, § 9-608) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.20  OPEN BURNING.
   No person shall cause or permit an open burning in any public or private
place outside any building, provided that open burning may be conducted if no
public nuisance is or will be created, as follows:
   (A)   Fires purposely set for the instruction and training of fire-fighting
personnel, when authorized by the Fire Chief;
   (B)   Fires set for the elimination of fire hazards or hazardous materials
when there is no other practical or lawful method of disposal and the burning
is authorized by the Director and the Fire Chief;
   (C)   Camp fires and other fires used solely for recreational or ceremonial
purposes or for outdoor non-commercial preparation of food;
   (D)   Fires purposely set for the management of forest or game in accordance
with practices recommended by the State Department of Agriculture or the United
Sates Forest Service and which are authorized by the Fire Chief;
   (E)   The burning of refuse and other combustible materials generated in the
operation of a domestic household when no regular garbage services are
available;
   (F)   The burning of combustible material in an open pit incinerator which
is designed and operated for the control of smoke and particulate matter;
   (G)   The burning of hydrocarbons by atmospheric flares when no other means
of disposal is practical; and
   (H)   The burning of trees, brush, grass and other vegetable matter for the
purpose of clearing land and agricultural crop burning when:
      (1)   The burning is not within 150 feet of an occupied residence or
structure other than those located on property where the burning is conducted:
      (2)   Care is used to minimize the amount of dirt on the material being
burned;
      (3)   Oils, rubber and other similar materials which produce unreasonable
amounts of air contaminants and smoke are not burned;
      (4)   The burning occurs between three hours after sunrise and three
hours before sunset; and
      (5)   No traffic hazard is created.
(Prior Code, § 9-609) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.21  MOTOR VEHICLE POLLUTION- CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   This section shall apply to all motor vehicles registered or
subject to registration with the State Tax Commission in which, as new
vehicles, motor vehicle pollution control devices have been installed by virtue
of federal laws and regulations, in effect now and hereafter, requiring the
devices to be installed.
      (2)   However, nothing in this chapter shall supersede or otherwise
modify the federal laws and regulations, nor shall anything in this chapter be
construed to require the installation of motor vehicle pollution-control
devices on motor vehicles not referred to by federal laws and regulations.
   (B)   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the removal,
disconnection or disabling of a motor vehicle pollution-control device which is
on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   Operation of a motor vehicle or its engine which uses liquefied
petroleum gas as fuel is hereby exempt from provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-610) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.22  FUGITIVE DUST CONTROL.
   No person shall permit, allow or cause fugitive dust or emissions from any
facility under his or her control or jurisdiction without having exhausted all
known methods of controlling the same.
(Prior Code, § 9-611) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 97.35  NOTICE.
   All notice required under this chapter, unless otherwise specified, shall be
in writing and shall be served upon the person being given notice personally or
mailed to his or her last known address, postage prepaid.  The date of mailing
shall be considered as the date the notice is given.
(Prior Code, § 9-612)
§ 97.36  TESTS; DATA SAMPLING.
   Upon written notice, the Director may require from any person subject to
this chapter, data to establish the nature, extent, quantity or degree of air
contaminants which are or may be discharged by a source under the person's
control and may require that the data be certified by a professional engineer
registered in the state.  The Director may, at his or her expense, designate an
agent to independently gather data as to the nature, extent, quantity and
degree of any air contaminants which are or may be discharged from the source. 
An agent as so designated is authorized to inspect any facilities and equipment
necessary to gather the data.  The owners of the premises being inspected will
make the same available to inspection and shall permit the Director to install
and maintain sampling and testing apparatus as is reasonable and necessary for
measurement of emissions of air contaminants, provided that they shall not
unduly interfere with the operations of the owner. The Director may, in
writing, require the owner to provide, and maintain means of access to
locations for sampling and testing purposes, in order to secure data that will
disclose the nature, extent and quantity or degree of air contaminants
discharged into the atmosphere.
(Prior Code, § 9-613)
§ 97.37  AIR QUALITY CONTROL VARIANCE BOARD.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby created the Variance Board which shall consist
of the personnel of the Board of Adjustment of the city.
      (2)   The members of the Board shall have the power to subpoena
witnesses, require the production of records, documents and other matters and
administer oaths.
      (3)   Three members shall constitute a quorum.
   (B)   No variance shall be granted or revoked without the concurrence of at
least three members.  Meetings and hearings of the Board shall be called by the
Chairperson.
   (C)   The Board shall make rules and regulations concerning the procedures
in granting or revoking variance as they shall deem necessary.
(Prior Code, § 9-614)
§ 97.38  APPLICATIONS FOR VARIANCE.
   Any person may make an application for a variance from the terms of this
chapter by paying the required fee and by filing a written application with the
Director.  The application form shall be verified by the applicant and set
forth all information required by the Board including the full name and address
of the applicant, the nature of the violation and the extent to which a
variance is sought.
(Prior Code, § 9-615)
§ 97.39  FEES.
   Any applicant for a variance shall pay to the City Clerk a fee in the amount
of $50.  The fee shall be paid each time a variance is sought provided that the
Board may in its discretion review any variance denied within 90 days from the
date of each denial without additional cost to the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 9-616)
§ 97.40  VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variances from the strict provisions of this chapter may be granted by
the Board, pursuant to applications therefor when:
      (1)   Due to conditions beyond the control of the person in violation,
and which are not self imposed, compliance with this chapter shall result in an
arbitrary and unreasonable taking of the property or the practical closing and
elimination of any lawful business, occupation or activity; and
      (2)   There are not sufficient corresponding benefits or advantage to the
public in the reduction of air pollution.
   (B)   Variances shall be for a specified time but not to exceed one year. 
Upon expiration of a variance, additional variances may be granted.
   (C)   A variance shall be personal to the applicant and not transferable.
   (D)   All variances granted are subject to review and revocation by the
Board.
(Prior Code, § 9-617)
§ 97.41  PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   (A)   (1)   No variance shall be granted or revoked without first holding a
public hearing.
      (2)   No less than ten days' notice shall be given to all interested
persons as appear in the file and records of the Board.
   (B)   In addition, notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper
of general circulation and published within the city not less than ten days
prior to the date of hearing.
(Prior Code, § 9-618)
§ 97.42  NUISANCES DECLARED.
   The emission of air contaminants in violation of this chapter is declared to
be a public nuisance and may be abated by the Director, as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 9-619)
§ 97.43  ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   (1)   In addition to any penalties, upon determination by the Director
that a violation of this
chapter has occurred and that the person in violation has not furnished
satisfactory proof that corrective measures have been or are being taken to
abate the nuisance, the Director shall give written notice to the person in
violation to abate the nuisance.
      (2)   The notice shall specify the section which is being violated and a
reasonable time not exceeding 20 days within which to abate the nuisance.
   (B)   If at the end of the time allowed in division (A) above, the violation
has not been corrected, the Director shall abate the nuisance as provided by
law.
(Prior Code, § 9-620)
§ 97.44  EMERGENCY.
   When a violation of this chapter creates a hazardous or dangerous condition
capable of immediately harming life or property, the Director shall summarily
abate the nuisance immediately and without notice.
(Prior Code, § 9-621)
APPENDIX A:  ALLOWABLE RATE OF PARTICLE MATTER OF EMISSION
   (A)   Allowable rate of particulate matter emission based on process weight
rate.
 
Process Weight Rate Rate of Emission Process Weight Rate Rate of Emission
Lb/Hr               Tons/Hr Lb/Hr    Lb/Hr Tons/Hr       Lb/Hr
100    0.05 0.551 16,000    8     16.5
200    0.10 0.877 18,000    9     17.9
400    0.20 1.40  20,000    10    19.2
600    0.30 1.83  30,000    15    25.2
800    0.40 2.22  40,000    20    30.5
1,000  0.50 2.58  50,000    25    35.4
1,500  0.75 3.38  60,000    30    40.0
2,000  1.00 4.10  70,000    35    41.3
2,500  1.25 4.76  80,000    40    42.5
3,000  1.50 5.38  90,000    45    43.6
3,500  1.75 5.96  100,000   50    44.6
4,000  2.00 6.52  120,000   60    46.3
5,000  2.50 7.58  140,000   70    47.8
6,000  3.00 8.56  160,000   80    49.0
7,000  3.50 9.49  200,000   100   51.2
8,000  4.00 10.4  1,000,000 500   69.0
9,000  4.50 11.2  2,000,000 1,000 77.6
10,000 5.00 12.0  6,000,000 3,000 92.7
12,000 6.00 13.6
NOTES TO TABLE:

* - Interpolation of the data in this table for process weight rates up to
60,000 lb/hr shall be accomplished by use of the equation:  E = 4.10p0.57. 
Interpolation and extrapolation of the data for process weight rates in
excess of 60,000 lb/hr shall be accomplished by the use of the equation:  E
= 55.0p0.11-40; where E equals the rate of emission in lb/hr and P equals
the process weight in tons/hr.

* - Utilization of this table is accomplished by first determining the
process rate in lb/hr or in tons/hr and then reading the allowable rate of
emission in lb/hr horizontally to the right.
 
   (B)   Allowable rate of particulate matter of emission based on volume per
SCFM.
 
Source Gas Volume, Concentration GR/SCF Source Gas Volume, Concentration, GR/
SCFM                                    SCFM               SCH
7,000 or less 0.100 140,000           0.038
8,000         0.096 160,000           0.036
9,000         0.092 180,000           0.035
10,000        0.089 200,000           0.034
20,000        0.071 300,000           0.030
30,000        0.062 400,000           0.027
40,000        0.057 500,000           0.025
50,000        0.053 600,000           0.024
60,000        0.050 800,000           0.021
80,000        0.045
100,000       0.042 1,000,000 or more 0.020
120,000       0.040
NOTES TO TABLE:

* - Interpolation of the data in this table shall be accomplished by the use
of the equation:  C = 1.78S - 0.325; where S equals the source gas volume,
SCFM and C equal the concentration in grains per SCF and GR equals grains.

* - Utilization of this table is accomplished by first determining the
source gas volume in SCFM and then reading the allowable concentration in
GR/SCF horizontally to the right.
 
APPENDIX B:  HOT MIX ASPHALT PLANTS
 
Aggregate Process in Weight Per Hour  Particulate Matter Emission Rate Per Hour
(Pounds)                              (Pounds)
10,000  10
20,000  16
30,000  22
40,000  28
50,000  31
100,000 33
200,000 37
300,000 40
400,000 43
500,000 47
600,000 50
NOTE TO TABLE:

* - For a process weight between any two consecutive process weights stated in
this table, the emission limitations shall be determined by interpolation.
 
CHAPTER 98:  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
   
98.01   Property Maintenance Code adopted
§ 98.01  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Property Maintenance Code of the city for regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary, and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of the
existing strictures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the Property Maintenance Code on
file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made
a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division (B) below.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1, insert: City of Bethany;
      (2)   Section 103.5, insert: Schedule of fees as adopted by City Council;
      (3)   Section 112.4, insert: $200 and $500;
      (4)   Section 302.4, insert: 12 inches;
      (5)   Section 304.14, insert: March 1 to December 1;
      (6)   Section 602.3, insert: September 15 to May 1; and
      (7)   Section 602.4, insert: September 15 to May 1.
      (8)   Section 111.2 of the International Property Maintenance Code is
hereby amended to read as follows: The Board of Appeals shall consist of the
duly appointed members of the Bethany Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 1868, passed 10-2-12; Am. Ord. 1934, passed 6-20-17)
CHAPTER 99:  IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
Section
General Provisions
   
99.01   Short title
   
99.02   Purpose
   
99.03   Definitions
   
99.04   Findings
   
99.05   Process of establishing a covered account
   
99.06   Access to covered account information
   
99.07   Credit card payments
   
99.08   Sources and types of red flags
   
99.09   Prevention and mitigation of identity theft
   
99.10   Updating the program
   
99.11   Program administration
   
99.12   Outside service providers
Treatment of Address Discrepancies
   
99.25   Short title
   
99.26   Purpose
   
99.27   Definitions
   
99.28   Policy
   
99.29   Furnishing consumer’s address to consumer reporting agency
   
99.30   Methods of confirming consumer addresses
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 99.01  SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Identity Theft Prevention Program.
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
§ 99.02  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to comply with 16CFR § 681.2 in order to
detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting
identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that
will prevent identity theft.
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
§ 99.03  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  Other than CITY and
PERSONAL IDENTIFYING INFORMATION, definitions provided in this section are
based on the definitions provided in 16 CFR §681.2.
   CITY.  The City of Bethany.
   COVERED ACCOUNT. 
      (1)   An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or
maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves
or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit
card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone
account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and
      (2)   Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers
or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or
to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from
identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or
litigation risks.
   CREDIT.  The right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of
debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or
services and defer payment therefore.
   CREDITOR.  Any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit;
any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation
of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the
decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies
and telecommunications companies.
   CUSTOMER.  A person that has a covered account with a creditor.
   IDENTITY THEFT.  A fraud committed or attempted using identifying
information of another person without authority.
   PERSON.  A natural person, a corporation, government or governmental
subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association.
   PERSONAL IDENTIFYING INFORMATION.  A person’s credit card account
information, debit card information bank account information and drivers’
license information and for a natural person includes their social security
number, mother’s birth name, and date of birth.
   RED FLAG.  A pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the
possible existence of identity theft.
   SERVICE PROVIDER.  A person that provides a service directly to the city.
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
§ 99.04  FINDINGS.
   (A)   The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR §681.2 due to its provision
or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears.
   (B)   Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city
services include: water, sewer, sanitation services, building inspection and
zoning application, court proceedings, and various public safety purposes.
   (C)   The city’s previous experience with identity theft related to covered
accounts is not recorded.
   (D)   The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing
covered account, and making payments on such accounts, have been identified as
potential processes in which identity theft could occur.
   (E)   The city limits access to personal identifying information to those
employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered
accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts.
   (F)   The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft
occurring in the following ways (if any):
      (1)   Use by an applicant of another person’s personal identifying
information to establish a new covered account;
      (2)   Use of a previous customer’s personal identifying information by
another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer’s
name;
      (3)   Use of another person’s credit card, bank account, or other method
of payment by a customer to pay such customer’s covered account or accounts;
      (4)   Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer’s covered
account of another person’s credit card, bank account, or other method of
payment;
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
§ 99.05  PROCESS OF ESTABLISHING A COVERED ACCOUNT.
   (A)   As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each
applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the
customer (for example, a valid government issued identification card containing
a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a
photograph of the customer’s agent opening the account).  Such information
shall be entered directly into the city’s computer system and shall not
otherwise be recorded.
   (B)   Each account shall be assigned an account number which shall be unique
to that account.
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
§ 99.06  ACCESS TO COVERED ACCOUNT INFORMATION.
   (A)   Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be
limited to authorized city personnel.
   (B)   Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to
be reported immediately to the City Manager and the password changed
immediately.
   (C)   Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is
considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be
immediately forwarded to the City Manager and the City Attorney.
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
§ 99.07  CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS.
   (A)   In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet
are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service
provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention
program in place that is applicable to such payments.
   (B)   All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city’s website
shall be entered directly into the customer’s account information in the
computer data base.
   (C)   Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include
only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used
for payment of the covered account.
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
§ 99.08  SOURCES AND TYPES OF RED FLAGS.
   All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a
covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered
account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and
such red flags may include:
   (A)   Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include:
      (1)   Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or
forged;
      (2)   Identification on which the photograph or physical description is
inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer;
      (3)   Identification on which the information is inconsistent with
information provided by the applicant or customer;
      (4)   Identification on which the information is inconsistent with
readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution
or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or
      (5)   An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or
appears to have been destroyed and reassembled.
   (B)   Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address
change.  Examples of suspicious identifying information include:
      (1)   Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not
consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the
customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of
birth.
      (2)   Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is
associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by
internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor.
      (3)   Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address,
mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or
answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity.
      (4)   The personal identifying number provided is the same as that
submitted by other applicants or customers.
      (5)   The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar
to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large
number of applicants or customers.
      (6)   The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal
identifying information on an application or in response to notification that
the application is incomplete.
      (7)   Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal
identifying information that is on file.
      (8)   The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information
beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer
report.
   (C)   Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account.
Examples of suspicious activity include:
      (1)   Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account,
city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account.
      (2)   A new account is used in a manner commonly associated with known
patterns of fraud patterns.  For example: the customer fails to make the first
payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments.
      (3)   An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with
established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example:
nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments;
      (4)   An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used
(taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage
and other relevant factors).
      (5)   Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable
although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the
customer’s account.
      (6)   The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper
account statements.
      (7)   The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in
connection with a customer’s account.
      (8)   The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another
person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity
theft.
   (D)   Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable
sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered
accounts.
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
§ 99.09  PREVENTION AND MITIGATION OF IDENTITY THEFT.
   (A)   In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in
restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered
account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with
respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her
discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags
suggests a threat of identity theft.  If, in his or her discretion, such
employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely
or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to their
supervisor.  If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity
theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red
flags, the employee shall convey this information to their supervisor, who may
in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary.  If the
supervisor in his or her discretion determines that further action is
necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following
responses, as determined to be appropriate by the supervisor:
      (1)   Contact the customer;
      (2)   Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the
customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the
customer’s covered account:
         (a)   Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other
security devices that permit access to an account; or
         (b)   Close the account;
      (3)   Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and
decline to sell the customer’s account to a debt collector in the event that
the customer’s account has been accessed without authorization and such access
has caused additional charges to accrue;
      (4)    Notify a debt collector within 36 hours of the discovery of likely
or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to
such debt collector.  In the event that a customer’s account has been sold to a
debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of
identity theft relating to such account;
      (5)   Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the
customer has accessed the customer’s account causing additional charges to
accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or
      (6)   Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity
theft.
   (B)   In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in
opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible
identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee
shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or
combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft.  If, in his or
her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted
identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report
such red flags to their supervisor.  If, in his or her discretion, such
employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is
available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to
their supervisor, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further
action is necessary.  If the supervisor in his or her discretion determines
that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of
the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the supervisor:
      (1)   Request additional identifying information from the applicant;
      (2)   Deny the application for the new account;
      (3)   Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or
      (4)   Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity
theft.
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17–09)
§ 99.10  UPDATING THE PROGRAM.
   The City Council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the
Council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant
red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety
and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft.  In so
doing, the City Council shall consider the following factors and exercise its
discretion in amending the program:
   (A)   The city’s experiences with identity theft;
   (B)   Updates in methods of identity theft;
   (C)   Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate
identity theft;
   (D)   Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains;
and
   (E)   Updates in service provider arrangements.
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
§ 99.11  PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The department supervisor is responsible for oversight of the program
and for program implementation.  The City Manager is responsible for reviewing
reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and
with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion
of the City Manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify
new or discontinued types of covered accounts.  Any recommended material
changes to the program shall be submitted to the City Council for consideration
by the Council.
   (B)   The department supervisor will report to the City Manager at least
annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements.  The report will
address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as:
      (1)   The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in
addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered
accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts;
      (2)   Service provider arrangements;
      (3)   Significant incidents involving identity theft and management’s
response; and
      (4)   Recommendations for material changes to the program.
   (C)   The department supervisor is responsible for providing training to all
employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account,
restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered
account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity
theft prevention program.  The department supervisor shall exercise his or her
discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary.
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
§ 99.12  OUTSIDE SERVICE PROVIDERS.
   In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity
in connection with one or more covered accounts the department supervisor shall
exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to
ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider’s
activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed
upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in
the performance of the service provider’s activities and take appropriate steps
to prevent or mitigate identity theft.
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES
§ 99.25  SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Treatment of Address Discrepancies.
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
§ 99.26  PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this subchapter is to establish a
process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a
consumer report relates to the consumer about  whom it has requested a consumer
credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
Currently the city is not using consumer credit reports but this section is
included in the event such reports are utilized in the future.
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
§ 99.27  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY.  The City of Bethany Oklahoma.
   NOTICE OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCY.  A notice sent to a user by a consumer
reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(l), that informs the user
of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user
provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency’s
file for the consumer.  (See also 16 CFR §681.1(b))
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
§ 99.28  POLICY.
   In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the
city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of
providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform
one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by
such employee.
   (A)   Compare the information in the consumer report with:
      (1)   Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer’s
identity in accordance with the requirements of the Customer Information
Program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1);
      (2)   Information the city maintains in its own records, such as
applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account
records or tax records; or
      (3)   Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are
deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or
   (B)   Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer.
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
§ 99.29  FURNISHING CONSUMER’S ADDRESS TO CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCY.
   (A)   In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address
provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide
such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a
notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer.  This information
is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when:
      (1)   The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer
report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report;
      (2)   The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and
      (3)   The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides
information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice
of address discrepancy.
   (B)   Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as
part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the
reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the
customer.
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
§ 99.30  METHODS OF CONFIRMING CONSUMER ADDRESSES.
   The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or
her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the
following methods:
   (A)   Verifying the address with the consumer;
   (B)   Reviewing the city’s records to verify the consumer’s address;
   (C)   Verifying the address through third party sources; or
   (D)   Using other reasonable processes.
(Ord. 1816, passed 2-17-09)
TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
         
APPENDIX A:   LICENSE TAXES
         
APPENDIX B:   PERMIT FEE ASSESSMENTS
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   CARE FACILITIES
      
113.   PAWNBROKERS
      
114.   MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERS
      
115.   SECURITY SERVICES
      
116.   SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS; TEMPORARY MERCHANTS
      
117.   TAXICABS
      
118.   WRECKER SERVICES; BLASTING
      
119.   GARAGE SALES, SIDEWALK SALES AND THE LIKE
      
120.   FORTUNE TELLING
      
121.   AUCTIONS
      
122.   FOOD SERVICES AND RESTAURANTS
      
123.   CABLE TELEVISION
CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.01   License or permit required
   
110.02   Levying a license tax
   
110.03   Assessment of permit fee
   
110.04   Free license or permit; rebates; incentive for new businesses
   
110.05   License due; delinquency
   
110.06   Officials' right of entry
   
110.07   License or permit to be produced
   
110.08   Sales tax number
   
Appendix A:  License Taxes
   
Appendix B:  Permit Fee Assessments
§ 110.01  LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   No person, firm or corporation, either as principal or agent,
shall conduct, pursue or operate any calling, trade, profession or occupation
listed in Appendix A or carry on any activity set forth in Appendix B, without
first procuring a license or permit therefore, whichever the case may be,
except as may be otherwise prescribed by law.
      (2)   Licenses shall be signed by the City Clerk.
      (3)   Permits shall be signed by the City Inspector.
      (4)   In no case shall a license or permit be returned or transferred.
   (B)   A separate license must be obtained for each branch of an
establishment or separate place of business in which the trade, calling,
profession or occupation listed in Appendix A is carried on.  Each license
shall authorize the party obtaining it to carry on, pursue or conduct only that
trade, calling, profession or occupation described in the license.
   (C)   Unless otherwise provided, a separate permit for an activity
enumerated in Appendix B must be obtained for each occurrence of the activity
and each permit shall authorize the party obtaining the permit to carry on or
conduct only the activity described in the permit.
(Prior Code, § 10-101) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Municipal authority to tax and regulate occupations, see 11 O.S. §§ 22-106
and 22-107
§ 110.02  LEVYING A LICENSE TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby levied a license tax on certain callings, trades,
businesses, avocations and occupations.  The tax shall be paid to the City
Clerk prior to the issuance of the license required in § 110.01.
   (B)   The taxes shall be in the specific amounts, annually unless otherwise
stated in Appendix A to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-102)  (Am. Ord. 1960, passed 10-2-18)
Statutory reference:
   Alcoholic beverage sales; maximum fines levied by cities, see 37 O.S. § 518
   Day-care center licensing, see 10 O.S. §§ 401 et seq.
   Electrical contractor and journeyman licensing, see 59 O.S. §§ 1680et seq.
   Plumbers licensing, see 59 O.S. §§ 1001 et seq.
§ 110.03  ASSESSMENT OF PERMIT FEE.
   (A)   There is hereby assessed a permit fee on the activities listed in
Appendix B to this chapter.
   (B)   The fee shall be paid to the City Clerk prior to issuance of the
permit by the City Inspector as required in
§ 110.02. The fees shall be in Appendix B to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-103)
§ 110.04  FREE LICENSE OR PERMIT; REBATES; INCENTIVE FOR NEW BUSINESSES.
   (A)   No free licenses or permits shall be granted, nor rebates allowed, for
any cause, nor any sum accepted less than the amount specified in this chapter
nor for shorter period than required in this chapter except as provided in
division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Effective January 1, 2012, a new business, required to be licensed
under this section, which business has never before held a business license in
Bethany shall become licensed before commencing operation of the business and
the fee for the new license shall become due on July 1 of the year next
succeeding the date of issuance of the new license.  This provision is adopted
as an incentive to new business locating in Bethany.  This division (B) shall
not include the group of occupations described as contractors as listed in
Appendix A of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-104)  (Am. Ord. 1864, passed 7-3-12)
§ 110.05  LICENSE DUE; DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, all licenses shall expire on June 30
next after the same are issued.  All license taxes shall become due on July 1
or at the commencement of business, whichever event first occurs.  If not paid
within 15 days thereafter, a penalty of 10% shall be added to the cost of the
license and an additional 10% shall be added to the cost of the license and
previous penalty on the first day of each month thereafter.
   (B)   (1)   If the license tax remains unpaid by November 1 of each year,
the amount of the license shall be doubled and the penalty shall be collected
in the same manner as the license.
      (2)   The addition of a penalty, if any, to a license shall not exempt
the person from whom the license tax may be collected for any penalty to which
he or she may be liable for violating any provisions of this title.
(Prior Code, § 10-105)  (Ord. 1311, passed 11-6-84)
§ 110.06  OFFICIALS' RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   The City Inspector or any police officer shall have power to enter any
place requiring a license or permit hereunder, during business hours, to
ascertain whether this title and other ordinances of the city are being
complied with.
   (B)   It shall be the special duty of all the officials to see that all
licenses and permits required hereunder are paid when due.
(Prior Code, § 10-106)
§ 110.07  LICENSE OR PERMIT TO BE PRODUCED.
   Every person having a license or permit under the provisions of this title
shall place and exhibit the same at all times while in force, in some
conspicuous part of his or her place of business or taxicab or carry the same
on his or her person in the case of solicitors and shall produce or exhibit the
same when applying for a renewal thereof, when requested to do so by any
inhabitants, police or other official of the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-107)
§ 110.08  SALES TAX NUMBER.
   At the time of application or renewal for any license or permit required in
this title, the applicant shall disclose its sales tax identification number
assigned by the State Tax Commission.  The use of the number for purposes other
than the enforcement of the city and state sales tax codes is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 10-108)  (Ord. 1361, passed 2-4-86)  Penalty, see §
10.99
APPENDIX A:  LICENSE TAXES
 
Type of License Taxes* Ord. No. Date Passed
Auction merchants                                                          -     -
Contractors
  Building moving                                                         -     -
  Electrical, first year; thereafter                                      -     -
  Electrical journeyman                                                   -     -
  Fence contractor                                                        -     -
  Forced air heating-refrigeration; first year; thereafter                -     -
  Forced air heat/refrigeration journeyman                                -     -
  Gas Fitter, first year; thereafter                                      -     -
  Refrigeration or plumbing journeyman                                    -     -
  General building                                                        -     -
  Plumbing, first year; thereafter                                        -     -
  Plumbing journeyman                                                     -     -
  Refrigeration, industrial and first year; thereafter                    -     -
  Sidewalk and drive approach                                             -     -
  Sign, not required for employees in the course of their employment for
licensed sign contractors, and licensed electrical contractors installing  -     -
the electrical system of signs in the course of their business as
electrical contractors
  Storm shelter/fallout shelter                                           -     -
  Water well drillers                                                     -     -
Day-care centers                                                           -     -
Home occupations                                                           -     -
Incinerators                                                               -     -
                                                                                 11-
                                                                                 6-
Itinerant vendors                                                          1413; 87;
                                                                           1709  11-
                                                                                 4-
                                                                                 03
                                                                                 8-
Motor vehicle dealers, first year; renewal                                 1448  1-
                                                                                 89
Nursing, rest or convalescent homes                                        -     -
Pawnbrokers                                                                -     -
Solicitors and peddlers                                                    -     -
Taxicabs
  Ten or fewer cabs in fleet                                              -     -
  More than ten cabs in fleet                                             -     -
Wrecker service referrals                                                  -     -
                                                                                 4-
Wrecker service attendants                                                 1286  17-
                                                                                 87
                                                                                 9-
                                                                                 16-
                                                                                 86
                                                                           1383  6-
Any business not listed above which has taxable sales                      1445  20-
                                                                           1454  89
                                                                                 10-
                                                                                 17-
                                                                                 89
Arts and crafts vendors at events on non-city owned property, valid for    -     -
day of event only
All other vendors at any event, valid for day of event only                -     -
 
*   All fees for such license, taxes and permit fee assessments shall be
determined and amended, from time to time, by the City Council of the City of
Bethany, Oklahoma, by duly adopted resolution.
(Prior Code, § 10-102)  (Am. Ord. 1765, passed 6-20-06; Am. Ord. 1960, passed
10-2-18) 
 
APPENDIX B:  PERMIT FEE ASSESSMENTS
 
Type of Activity Fee* Ord. No. Date Passed
Auctions, estate sales, closing-out sales and the like, per    -    -
auction
Blasting per project                                           -    -
Building moving per structure                                  -    -
Carnivals per day                                              -    -
Circuses per day                                               -    -
Garage sales, maximum number of days allowed per year is five  -    -
Oil and gas drilling, each well                                -    -
Underground lines or pipeline, not applicable to franchise
holders of utility companies paying gross receipt tax to the   1250 10-4-83
city, per rod
Water well drilling per well                                   -    -
 
*   All fees for such license, taxes and permit fee assessments shall be
determined and amended, from time to time, by the City Council of the City of
Bethany, Oklahoma, by duly adopted resolution.
(Prior Code, § 10-103)  (Am. Ord. 1765, passed 6-20-06) 
CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Regulation of Low-Point Beer  & Alcoholic Beverages
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Occupational tax levied
   
111.03   Amount of occupational tax relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages
   
111.04   Hours of operation
   
111.05   Mixed beverage or beer or wine certificate of compliance
   
111.06   Retail spirits, retail beer and retail wine certificate of compliance
   
111.07   Sale of mixed beverages, beer or wine by persons of certain ages
   
111.08   Signs
Cross-reference:
   Alcohol-Related Offenses, see
§§ 132.035 et seq.
§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABLE COMMISSION. The Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement Commission.
   ALCOHOL. Means and includes hydrated oxide of ethyl, ethyl alcohol, ethanol
or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. It
does not include wood alcohol or alcohol which has been denatured or produced
as denatured in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, beer and wine and also includes every
liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by human beings.
   APPLICANT. Any individual, legal or commercial business entity, or any
individual involved in any legal or commercial business entity allowed to hold
any license issued in accordance with the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control
Act.
   BEER. Any beverage of alcohol by volume and obtained by the alcoholic
fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley, or other grain, malt or
similar products. It may or may not contain hops or other vegetable products.
It includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and other
malt or brewed liquors, but does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine.
   BEER DISTRIBUTOR. Means and includes any person licensed to distribute beer
for retail sale in the state, but does not include a holder of a small brewer
self-distribution license or brewpub self-distribution license.
   BREWER. Means and includes any person who manufactures for human consumption
by the use of raw materials or other ingredients any beer upon which a license
fee and a tax are imposed by any law of the State of Oklahoma.
   BREWPUB. A licensed establishment operated on the premises of, or on
premises located contiguous to, a small brewer, that prepares and serves food
and beverages, including alcoholic beverages, for on-premises consumption.
   CIDER. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of
fruit juice, including, but not limited to flavored, sparkling or carbonated
cider. For the purposes of the distribution of this product, cider may be
distributed by either wine and spirits wholesalers or beer distributors.
   DISTILLER. Any person who produces spirits from any source or substance, or
any person who brews or makes mash, wort or wash, fit for distillation or for
the production of spirits (except a person making or using such material in the
authorized production of wine or beer, or the production of vinegar by
fermentation), or any person who by any process separates alcoholic spirits
from any fermented substance, or any person who, making or keeping mash, wort
or wash, has also in his or her possession or use a still.
   MIXED BEVERAGES. One or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or
part of an alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of any legal
size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the holder of a
mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, charitable event or
special event license.
   RECTIFIER. Any person who rectifies, purifies or refines spirits or wines by
any process (other than by original and continuous distillation, or original
and continuous processing, from mash, wort, wash or other substance, through
continuous closed vessels and pipes, until the production thereof is complete),
and any person who, without rectifying, purifying or refining spirits, shall by
mixing (except for immediate consumption on the premises where mixed) such
spirits, wine or other liquor with any material, manufactures any spurious,
imitation or compound liquors for sale, under the name of whiskey, brandy, rum,
gin, wine, spirits, cordials or any other name.
   RETAILER. A package store, grocery store, convenience store or drug store
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for off-premise consumption pursuant to a
Retail Spirits License, Retail Wine License or Retail Beer License.
   SMALL BREWER. A brewer who manufactures less than 65,000 barrels of beer
annually pursuant to a validly issued Small Brewer License hereunder.
   SPIRITS. Any beverage other than wine or beer, which contains more than one-
half of one percent (1/2  of 1%) alcohol measured by volume, and obtained by
distillation, whether or not mixed with other substances in solution and
includes those products known as whiskey, brandy, rum, gin, vodka, liqueurs,
cordials and fortified wines and similar compounds, but shall not include any
alcohol liquid completely denatured in accordance with the Acts of Congress and
regulations pursuant thereto.
   WINE. Means and includes any beverage containing more than one-half of one
percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol by volume and not more than 24% alcohol by volume
at 60 degrees Fahrenheit obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents
of fruits, vegetables, honey, milk or other products containing sugar, whether
or not other ingredients are added, and includes vermouth and sake, known as
Japanese rice wine.
   WINE AND SPIRITS WHOLESALER OR WINE AND SPIRITS DISTRIBUTOR. Means and
includes any sole proprietorship or partnership licensed to distribute wine and
spirits in the State of Oklahoma.
(Prior Code, § 3-101)  (Ord. 1340, passed 8-20-85; Am. Ord. 1961, passed 10-2-
18)
Statutory reference:
   Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, see 37 O.S. §§ 501 et seq.
   State license and permit fees, see 37 O.S. § 518
§ 111.02  OCCUPATIONAL TAX LEVIED.
   (A)   No person shall operate or maintain a brewery or brewpub without
having previously paid the occupational tax as provided in §
111.03 of this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall operate or maintain any business serving mixed
beverages or beer or wine without having previously paid the occupational tax
as provided in §
111.03 of this chapter.
   (C)   No person shall operate, manage, or work in any retail establishment
that sells, for off-premises consumption only, any type of alcoholic beverage
without having previously paid the occupational tax as provided in §
111.03 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-102)  (Am. Ord. 1857, passed 12-6-11; Am. Ord. 1961, passed
10-2-18)
§ 111.03  AMOUNT OF OCCUPATIONAL TAX RELATING TO THE SALE OF ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES.
   Occupational Taxes relating to the Sale of Alcoholic Beverages as set forth
in the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act are as follows:
 
Brewer, per year                                                  $1,250
Small Brewer, per year                                            $125
Brewpub, per year                                                 $1,000
Brewpub, if licensee also holds a Mixed Beverage or Wine and Beer $50
Permit, per year
Distiller, per year                                               $3,125
Retail spirits store                                              $900
Mixed beverages, first year                                       $1,005
Mixed beverages, renewal per year                                 $905
On-premises beer or wine, first year                              $500
On-premises beer or wine, renewal, per year                       $450
Mixed beverages/caterer combination                               $1,250
Mixed beverages/caterer combination, renewal, per year            $1,250
Caterer, first year                                               $1,005
Caterer, renewal                                                  $905
Rectifier, per year                                               $3,125
Winemaker, per year                                               $625
Small Winemaker, per year                                         $75
Wine and spirits wholesaler, per year                             $3,000
Beer distributor, per year                                        $750
Retail spirits, per year                                          $905
Retail beer, per year                                             $500
Retail wine, per year                                             $1,000
 
(Prior Code, § 3-103)  (Ord. 1340, passed 8-20-85; Am. Ord. 1961, passed 10-2-
18) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.04  HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   No brewery or brewpub to which the brewery or brewpub occupational tax
is applicable shall be open to the public between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:
00 a.m.
   (B)   No establishment to which the mixed beverage or on-premises beer and
wine occupational tax is applicable shall be open to the public between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (C)   No retail spirits store to which the occupational retail spirits store
occupational tax is applicable shall be open between midnight on Saturday until
Monday at 8:00 a.m. Further, no retail spirits store to which the occupational
retail spirits store occupational tax is applicable shall be open on
Independence Day, Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day.
   (D)   No retail beer or retail wine stores to which the occupational retail
beer or retail wine stores occupational tax is applicable shall sell any beer
or wine between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 3-104)  (Ord. 1340, passed 8-20-85; Am. Ord. 1961, passed 10-2-
18)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.05  MIXED BEVERAGE OR BEER AND WINE CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   A mixed beverage or beer and wine certificate of compliance, on forms
furnished by the city, shall be completed by every applicant for an original
license pursuant to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
   (B)   This certificate shall be reviewed and approved by the City Manager or
his or her designee.
   (C)   The applicant's proposed location and use thereof must comply with all
municipal zoning ordinances, as verified by the Community Development Director,
or his or her designee.
   (D)   The applicant's proposed site and structure must comply with all
building codes as set forth in the Bethany Code of Ordinances, as verified by
the Community Development Director, or his or her designee.
   (E)   The applicant's proposed site, structure, and location must comply
with all Fire and Life Safety Codes as set forth in the Bethany Code of
Ordinances, as verified by the Fire Chief or his or her designee.
   (F)   The applicant's proposed location and use thereof must comply with all
provisions regarding food service requirements as set forth in the Bethany Code
of Ordinances, as verified by the Health Department Inspector or his or her
designee.
(Ord. 1961, passed 10-2-18)
§ 111.06  RETAIL SPIRITS, RETAIL BEER AND RETAIL WINE CERTIFICATE OF
COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   A retail spirits, retail beer, and retail wine certificate of
compliance, on forms furnished by the city, shall be completed by every
applicant for an original license pursuant to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act.
   (B)   This certificate shall be reviewed and approved by the City Manager or
his or her designee.
   (C)   The applicant's proposed location and use thereof must comply with all
municipal zoning ordinances, as verified by the Community Development Director,
or his or her designee.
   (D)   The applicant's proposed site and structure must comply with all
building codes as set forth in the Bethany Code of Ordinances, as verified by
the Community Development Director, or his or her designee.
   (E)   The applicant's proposed site, structure, and location must comply
with all Fire and Life Safety Codes as set forth in the Bethany Code of
Ordinances, as verified by the Fire Chief or his or her designee.
(Prior Code, § 3-106)  (Ord. 1340, passed 8-20-85; Am. Ord. 1961, passed 10-2-
18)  Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37 O.S. § 516
§ 111.07  SALE OF MIXED BEVERAGES, BEER OR WINE BY PERSONS OF CERTAIN AGES.
   No person shall employ any person under 18 years of age in the selling of
beer or wine or employee any person under 21 years of age in the selling of
spirits. Provided:
   (A)   A mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, special event,
retail wine or retail beer licensee may employ servers or sales clerks who are
at least 18 years of age, except persons under 21 years of age may not serve in
designated bar or lounge areas; and
   (B)   A mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, special event
licensee may employ or hire musical bands who have musicians who are under 18
years of age if each such musician is either accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian or has on their person, to be made available for inspection upon
demand by any employee of the ABLE Commission or law enforcement officer, a
written, notarized affidavit from the parent or legal guardian giving the
underage musician permission to perform in designated bar or lounge areas.
(Ord. 1340, passed 8-20-85; Am. Ord. 1857, passed 12-6-11; Am. Ord. 1961,
passed 10-2-18)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.08  SIGNS.
   All signs of businesses addressed in this chapter shall be in compliance
with the Bethany Zoning Ordnance and the Bethany Code of Ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 3-112)  (Ord. 1340, passed 8-20-85; Am. Ord. 1961, passed 10-2-
18)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 112:  CARE FACILITIES
Section
Day-Care Facilities
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Scope
   
112.03   Operation at home
   
112.04   Adoption of minimum standards; compliance
   
112.05   License application procedures
   
112.06   Revocation, suspension or denial of license
   
112.07   Inspections
Nursing Care Facilities, and Drug and/or Alcohol Abuse Treatment Facilities
   
112.20   Definitions
   
112.21   Scope
   
112.22   License required; application
   
112.23   Location
   
112.24   Standard facilities
   
112.25   Storage
   
112.26   Inspection
   
112.27   Compliance with rules of state governing agency
DAY-CARE FACILITIES
§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASEMENT.  The portion of a building or structure having one-half or more of
its clear height below the ground level.
   CHILD.  Any person who has not attained the age of 18.
   DAY CARE.  Supplemental care of a child away from the home in which he or
she resides, and provided by someone other than the child's natural parents,
custodians or legal guardians for periods of less than 24 hours per day and on
a regular schedule more often than once a week.  This definition does not
include babysitting or custodial care.  BABYSITTING or CUSTODIAL CARE means
care of a child by a non-professional person in an occupied residence, which is
not conducted on a regular schedule, where the caregiver is not compensated and
where no advertising is done in any way.
   DAY-CARE CENTER.  Both nurseries and family day-care homes, as defined in
this subchapter.
   DIRECTOR.  The City Manager or his or her designee.
   ELECTRICAL APPLIANCE.  Any device which utilizes electricity to produce
light, heat or power.
   EXIT.  A means of egress which is specifically designed for that purpose
giving access from one floor to another or to the ground level outside the
building.
   FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME.
      (1)   An occupied residence which receives seven or fewer children for
day care.  This number includes the caregivers' own children under five years
of age who are present in the home while children are in care and the children
of any substitutes or assistant caregivers.
      (2)   This requirement is based on the rules of the State Department of
Human Services, and, in the event the number of children is increased or
decreased by the State Department of Human Services, then the maximum number of
children allowed herein shall likewise be adjusted.  (Ord. 1633, passed 4-4-00)
   FIRE CHIEF.  The Chief of the City Fire Department or his or her designated
representative.
   GAS APPLIANCE.  Any device which utilizes gas fuel to produce light, heat or
power.
   INFANT.  Any person who has not attained the age of two.
   NURSERY.  Any day nursery, nursery school, foster home or preschool, or any
place, home or institution which receives six or more children, including the
parents' own preschool children under five years of age living in the nursery,
but excluding all other members of the family occupying the premises, for day
care or foster care, when received on a regular schedule more often than once a
week. This definition does not include public and private schools organized,
operated and approved under the laws of the state, but it does include churches
or other religious or public institutions caring for children within the
institutional building.
(Prior Code, § 10-301)
§ 112.02  SCOPE.
   This subchapter shall apply to any type of establishment outside of the
child's own home, but shall not apply to:
   (A)   The custody of any child or children of legal age in a public or
private school, organized, operated or approved under the laws of the state;
   (B)   To children whose custody is fixed by a court of competent
jurisdiction;
   (C)   To children related by blood or marriage within the third degree to
the custodial person; or
   (D)   To churches or religious institutions caring for children while their
parents or legal guardians are attending church services or engaged in church
activities.
(Prior Code, § 10-302)
Statutory reference:
   State Day-Care Facilities Licensing Act, see 10 O.S. §§ 401 et seq.
§ 112.03  OPERATION AT HOME.
   No person shall operate or maintain a nursery or family day-care home
subject to the terms of this subchapter unless the nursery or family day-care
home conforms to the requirements, specifications and provisions contained in
this subchapter or any other provisions of this code.
(Prior Code, § 10-303) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.04  ADOPTION OF MINIMUM STANDARDS; COMPLIANCE.
   The City Council shall, from time to time, adopt, amend and/or supplement
minimum standards for the various types of day-care centers as may be
necessary. The standards and regulations shall be adopted, amended or
supplemented by resolution duly adopted by the City Council.  Once regulations
and standards are adopted, they shall be incorporated by reference within this
section, and a violation of any of the regulations so adopted shall be an
offense.  At least three copies of the regulations shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Clerk, and made available to the public at a reasonable
cost.  The regulations on file at the time of the adoption of this section
shall remain in full force and effect until amended, supplemented or modified
by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 10-304)
§ 112.05  LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   No person shall open, operate or maintain a nursery or family day-care
home subject to the provisions of this subchapter without first having obtained
a license and paid tax thereon as required.
   (B)   Application for a license shall be made in writing to the City Clerk. 
The application shall be referred to the Director and Fire Chief, who shall
cause strict inquiry and investigation to be made regarding the fitness,
character and reputation of the applicant, the suitability of the
accommodations, including adequate facilities, cleanliness, ventilation,
heating, lighting, location, fire safety and all other matters pertinent to the
health, safety and general welfare of the public.
   (C)   All applicants for a license shall comply with the minimum standards
adopted for day-care centers and no license shall be issued, continued or
reissued unless the compliance is shown.
   (D)   Either the Director or the Fire Chief shall have full authority to
approve or disapprove the issuance of a license based on the findings of their
investigations and subject to procedures set forth in
§ 112.06.
   (E)   Every licensee shall keep and maintain records and make reports to the
Director as he or she may reasonably require upon the forms as he or she may
prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 10-305)
§ 112.06  REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   If the Director or the Fire Chief, based upon their findings,
determine that a license shall not be issued or renewed, they shall then issue
to the applicant a written notice of denial or non-renewal, specifying the
grounds therefore.  Any denial of license may be appealed to the City Council.
   (B)   If the Director or the Fire Chief, by their inspections, observe
violations of this subchapter or state law sufficient to warrant revocation or
suspension of a license, written notice of revocation and the grounds therefore
shall be delivered to the licensee by personal service or by certified mail. 
Any revocation or suspension of a licensee may be appealed to the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 10-306)
§ 112.07  INSPECTIONS.
   The Director and the Fire Chief shall investigate all nurseries and family
day-care homes, as defined herein, as often as they shall deem necessary for
the adequate supervision thereof, and they shall have the right to enter all
places at any reasonable time for the purpose of making an investigation. 
Acceptance of a license shall constitute expressed consent to the inspections.
(Prior Code, § 10-307)
NURSING CARE FACILITIES, AND DRUG AND/OR ALCOHOL ABUSE TREATMENT FACILITIES
§ 112.20  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NURSING FACILITY and RELATED INSTITUTIONS.  All of those facilities required
to be licensed under the Oklahoma Nursing Home Care Act (63 O.S. §§ 1-1902 et
seq.), and the definitions within the Oklahoma Nursing Home Care Act shall be
used in interpreting the provisions of this subchapter.
   LICENSEE.  The person, corporation, partnership, association, or other
entity which is licensed by the Oklahoma State Department of Health pursuant to
the provisions of the Oklahoma Nursing Home Care Act or the Oklahoma Department
of Mental Health Substance Abuse Services pursuant to the Oklahoma Alcohol and
Drug Abuse Act.
   DRUG AND/OR ALCOHOL ABUSE TREATMENT FACILITIES.  Approved treatment
facility, transitional living facility, and halfway house or drug and/or
alcohol abuse as defined in 43 O.S. § 3-403 (Oklahoma Alcohol and Drug Abuse
Act).  The definitions of Alcohol and Drug Abuse Act shall be used in
interpreting this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-601)  (Am. Ord. 1671, passed 5-21-02)
§ 112.21  SCOPE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to nursing facilities and drug
and/or alcohol abuse treatment facilities within the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-602)  (Am. Ord. 1671, passed 5-21-02)
Statutory reference:
   State nursing home regulations, see 63 O.S. §§ 1-801 et seq.
§ 112.22  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   No person, partnership, association corporation, or other entity shall
establish, conduct or maintain in the city any nursing care facility or drug
and/or alcohol abuse treatment facility or related facility without first
obtaining a license and paying the tax required in
§ 110.02.
   (B)   Application for license shall be in writing, showing the location of
the nursing care facility or drug and/or alcohol abuse treatment facility,
showing the size and type of structure, the number of patients or persons to be
housed therein, the name of the  licensee, the number and date of the license
issued by the State Department of Health or State Department of Mental Health
Substance Abuse Services and the type of facility to be conducted.
(Prior Code, § 10-603)  (Am. Ord. 1671, passed 5-21-02)
§ 112.23  LOCATION.
   A nursing care facility, or drug and/or alcohol abuse treatment facility, or
related institution shall be permitted at only those locations permitted in the
zoning code.  Drug and/or alcohol abuse treatment facilities require issuance
of a special use permit under the zoning code.
(Prior Code, § 10-604)  (Am. Ord. 1671, passed 5-21-02)
§ 112.24  STANDARD FACILITIES.
   All nursing care facilities and drug and/or alcohol abuse treatment
facilities shall provide the following:
   (A)   Safe water supply;
   (B)   Sanitary sewer and garbage disposal;
   (C)   Natural gas or other approved fuel;
   (D)   Electricity;
   (E)   Telephone service;
   (F)   Fire extinguishers or other fire-fighting facilities, as approved by
the Fire Chief;
   (G)   Enclosed yard where needed for use by persons cared for;
   (H)   Safe dry storage space for bulky items belonging to persons cared for;
   (I)   Storage space for medicine and first aid equipment;
   (J)   Storage space for poisons in a locked cabinet located other than in
the bathroom;
   (K)   Linen storage;
   (L)   Adequate refrigeration;
   (M)   Provisions for fire safe storage of janitor supplies and cleaning
equipment;
   (N)   Sanitary handling of dishes and foods;
   (O)   All outside doors, windows and other openings to be screened, a
heating system to be approved by the Fire Chief;
   (P)   A hot water tank located other than in a bedroom.
(Prior Code, § 10-605)  (Am. Ord. 1671, passed 5-21-02)
§ 112.25  STORAGE.
   Storage of combustible materials in the attic or basement of the facility is
hereby prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 10-606)  (Am. Ord. 1671, passed 5-21-02) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.26  INSPECTION.
   The Fire Chief of the city shall inspect the facility annually.  He or she
shall issue a certificate of inspection which shall be displayed in a prominent
place in the facility.
(Prior Code, § 10-607)  (Am. Ord. 1671, passed 5-21-02)
§ 112.27  COMPLIANCE WITH RULES OF STATE GOVERNING AGENCY.
   All nursing care facilities must comply with the rules and regulations of
the State Health Department and must, at all times, have a valid license issued
by the State Health Department.  All drug and/or alcohol abuse treatment
facilities shall comply with rules and regulations of the Oklahoma Department
of Mental Health Substance Abuse Services, and must at all times have a valid
license issued by that agency.
(Prior Code, § 10-608)  (Am. Ord. 1671, passed 5-21-02)
CHAPTER 113:  PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Regulations
   
113.03   License required
§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PAWNBROKER.  A person engaged in the business of making pawn transactions.
   PAWN SHOPS.  An establishment where pawn transactions are conducted.  This
term includes pawn shops, but does not include antique or collectibles stores
or other retail sales establishments that would be classified as retail sales
and service.
   PAWN TRANSACTION.  The act of lending money on the security of pledged goods
or the act of purchasing tangible personal property on condition that it may be
redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period
of time.
   PERSON.  An individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust,
association or any other legal entity however organized.
   PLEDGED GOODS.  Tangible personal property other than choses in action,
securities or printed evidences of indebtedness, which property is deposited
with or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in the
course of his business in connection with a pawn transaction.
(Ord. 1863, passed 6-5-12)
§ 113.02  REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall solicit business for any pawnshop from any person on
the streets or other public place, or call to or in any manner attract the
attention of any person on the streets or other public place for the purpose of
asking the person to patronize any pawnshop.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all persons engaged in
business as pawnbrokers shall hold separate and apart, for a period of ten
days, all goods or chattels purchased before mixing with other goods already in
stock in such establishment.
   (C)   No person in charge of any pawnshop shall knowingly purchase from or
advance money to any minor upon articles of value, or have any dealings
respecting the title of property in the possession of a minor, without the
written consent of the parent or guardian of such minor.
   (D)   (1)   Every pawnbroker shall keep at his or her place of business a
register in which he shall enter in writing the following:
         (a)   A minute description of all property taken, purchased or
received by him;
         (b)   Any serial or other identification number that may be in or upon
any article, if reasonably available;
         (c)   The name, address, sex, Social Security, driver's license or
other identification number, race, age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes,
the signature of the person pawning, selling, mortgaging, hypothecating, or
leaving the goods, chattels or merchandise, date and time of transaction; and
         (d)   The amount loaned, the finance charges and the time when the
loan falls due.
      (2)   The pawnbroker shall make such entry within one hour after the
receipt or purchase of such property. Every entry shall be made in ink and
shall not in any manner be obliterated or erased.
      (3)   The pawnbroker shall give a receipt to the person negotiating or
leaving the property; the receipt shall be legible, and shall contain a full
and perfect copy of all the entries required by law to be kept in the
register.  No charge shall be made for the receipt.
   (E)   (1)   Any pawnbroker shall make available a copy or report within
three days of any buy transaction to the Police Department; provided,
merchandise bought on invoice from a manufacturer or wholesaler with an
established place of business is exempt from this reporting requirement. 
However, such invoice shall be shown upon request to the Administrator or his
duly authorized representative or any authorized peace officer.  The copy or
report shall include:
         (a)   The name and address of the pawnshop;
         (b)   The name, address, race, sex, weight, height, date of birth and
either identification number of the seller as verified by either a state-issued
identification card, driver's license or federal government-issued
identification card or by readable fingerprint of right or left index finger on
the back of the pawn or buy transaction copy to be retained for the
pawnbroker's record;
         (c)   The buy transaction number;
         (d)   The date and time of the transaction;
         (e)   The manufacturer of the item;
         (f)   A description of the item; and
         (g)   The serial number and model number where available and any other
identifying markings.
      (2)   Items bought, except on invoice from a manufacturer or wholesaler
with an established place of business, shall be held for ten days before being
disposed of or sold.
      (3)   Any pawnbroker shall make available a copy or report within three
days of any pawn transaction to the Police Department.  The copy or report
shall include:
         (a)   The name and address of the pawnshop;
         (b)   The name, address, race, sex, weight, height, date of birth and
either identification number of the seller as verified by either a state-issued
identification card, driver's license or federal government-issued
identification card or by readable fingerprint of right or left index finger on
the back of the pawn or buy transaction copy to be retained for the
pawnbroker's record;
         (c)   The pawn transaction number;
         (d)   The date and time of the transaction;
         (e)   The manufacturer of the item;
         (f)   A description of the item; and
         (g)   The serial number and model number where available and any other
identifying markings.
      (4)   The pawnbroker shall obtain a written declaration of ownership from
the seller or pledgor on all buy and pawn transactions, except refinance pawn
transactions or merchandise bought from a manufacturer or wholesaler with an
established place of business.  The seller or pledgor shall be required to
state how long he has owned the property described in the transaction.  The
declaration of ownership shall appear on the bill of sale or pawn ticket, to be
completed by the seller or the pledgor at the time of the transaction.
   (F)   No pawnbroker shall be required to furnish a description of any
property purchased from manufacturers or wholesale dealers having an
established place of business or of any goods purchased from any bankruptcy
estate, or from any other person having an established place of business. Such
goods shall be accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of open and
legitimate purchase; the bill shall be shown to any officer upon demand.
   (G)   The register required by this chapter shall at all times be kept open
to the inspection of the Chief of Police and the sheriff of the county or the
deputy of either, to any officer of the Police Department, to the Municipal
Counselor and to the district attorney, and to anyone authorized in writing for
that purpose by the Chief of Police, exhibiting that authority to the
pawnbroker.  The pawnbroker shall, upon request, show and exhibit any article
or articles purchased, taken or received by him to the authorized person or
officer for inspection.
(Ord. 1863, passed 6-5-12)
§ 113.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate as a pawnbroker without a license issued by
the City Clerk.
   (B)   A person who is required by the provisions of this section to obtain a
license shall make application to the City Clerk upon a form furnished by the
City Clerk giving the information required upon the form and shall present to
the City Clerk a current pawnbroker's license issued by the State of Oklahoma.
   (C)   A person making application for the license required by this division
shall pay to the City Treasurer the regulatory fee of $50.
      (1)   Every person applying for a license to engage in or carry on the
business of pawnbroker shall, before the license is issued to him, provide
proof to the city of a current bond filed with the State of Oklahoma, with
approved sureties, in the penal sum of $5,000, conditioned that the applicant
will strictly observe all laws, regulations and requirements in relation to
pawnbrokers or their business, and will pay all costs, fines and penalties
incurred on account of his failure or neglect in that regard and will pay all
damages to any person by reason of the pawnbroker wrongfully taking, purchasing
or receiving in pledge or on deposit any stolen property, or the property of
any minor.
      (2)   (a)   A copy of the bond shall be filed with the City Clerk and may
be sued upon by any person damaged as aforesaid.
         (b)   A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section
shall expire on June 30 of each year, unless sooner suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 1863, passed 6-5-12)
CHAPTER 114:  MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERS
Section
   
114.01   Purpose
   
114.02   License and tax required
   
114.03   Application for license
   
114.04   Conditions for issuance of license
§ 114.01  PURPOSE.
   The city is required to inspect and issue certificates of local compliance
to the State Motor Vehicle Commission or the Used Motor Vehicle Commission on
an annual basis and the inspection and administrative details of the inspection
and reporting have real costs to the city.  It is further necessary that the
city provide a means to keep records of all new and used motor vehicle dealers
in order to properly provide the necessary reporting information and the city
finds that the health, safety and welfare of its citizens requires that certain
minimum requirements be established to regulate the location and maintenance of
properties used for motor vehicle sales.
(Prior Code, § 10-501)
§ 114.02  LICENSE AND TAX REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, corporation or
trust to engage in business as or serve in the capacity of, or act as a new or
used motor vehicle dealer in the city without first obtaining a license and
paying a tax, as required in
§ 110.02.
   (B)   A separate license shall be required for each place where the business
is carried on in the city and only one license shall be issued for each
location, parcel or tract where the business is conducted.
(Prior Code, § 10-502)
§ 114.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   The application for license shall be verified under oath by the applicant,
shall be on forms prescribed by the city and shall include the following
information:
   (A)   Name and address of the applicant;
   (B)   Location within the city for which the license is sought;
   (C)   Location(s) of other places where the applicant engages in new or used
motor vehicle sales;
   (D)   Site plan showing the location and layout of the establishment,
including lot width, lot depth, designated parking, any structure on the
property and location of display area;
   (E)   Proof of license issued by the state; and
   (F)   Other information as the Community Development Department may require
to evaluate the application.
(Prior Code, § 10-503)
§ 114.04  CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   New or used motor vehicle dealers shall meet the requirements of this
section as conditions for the issuance or renewal of a license.
   (B)   Each existing and future dealer location in the city shall:
      (1)   Have a minimum of five permanently designated parking spaces for
customers;
      (2)   Be a legally recorded lot(s), as defined herein, and be the only
licensee located on the lot(s); and
      (3)   For a dealer location not existing in the city on the effective
date of this chapter, the location shall also have permanently paved hard
surface parking for customers and all areas used for display of vehicles.
   (C)   In addition to other conditions of this section, the location,
structures and use of all existing and future dealers shall comply with the
applicable provisions hereof.
(Prior Code, § 10-504)  (Ord. 1447, passed 8-1-89)
CHAPTER 115:  SECURITY SERVICES
Section
   
115.01   Registration required
§ 115.01  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   All security agencies, investigative agencies, private investigators
and security guards, armed or unarmed, doing business in the city shall be in
compliance with State Security Guard and Private Investigator Act, 59 O.S. §§
1750.1 et seq.
   (B)   All persons required to be licensed under the State Security Guard and
Private Investigator Act shall, prior to doing business in the city, present to
the Chief of Police or his or her designee, the following:
      (1)   License or provisional license issued under the State Security
Guard and Private Investigator Act;
      (2)   Location and duration of services in the city; and
      (3)   Number of employees of agency involved and their state license
classification.
(Prior Code, § 10-701)
CHAPTER 116:  SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS; TEMPORARY MERCHANTS
Section
Solicitors and Peddlers
   
116.01   Definition
   
116.02   License and tax required
   
116.03   Application for license
   
116.04   Bond
   
116.05   Solicitation between sunset and sunrise
Temporary Vendors/Merchants
   
116.15   Temporary vendors
   
116.16   Special event and farmers’ market licenses
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate by city, see 11 O.S. § 22-106
   Ex-servicemen exempt, see 72 O.S. § 1
   State licensing of itinerant merchants, see 47 O.S. §§ 421et seq.
   SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
§ 116.01  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SOLICITOR.
      (1)   Any person who goes from house to house, from door to door or from
place to place offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares,
merchandise or product, or for offering services to be performed, or for the
making, manufacturing or repairing of any article or thing whatever.
      (2)   A SOLICITOR shall include a peddler, drummer or hawker, as those
terms are commonly understood. The term SOLICITOR shall not include those
occupations licensed under state law which the city is preempted from
regulating, and SOLICIT means to perform those acts described in the definition
of SOLICITOR.
(Prior Code, § 10-801)  (Ord. 1465, passed 9-4-90)
§ 116.02  LICENSE AND TAX REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a solicitor within the
meaning and application of this subchapter without first securing a license and
paying a tax, as required in
§ 110.02.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any resident of the city under the age
of 18 years or any person under the age of 18 years attending public schools of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-802) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring a license to engage as solicitor within the city shall
make application therefor to the City Clerk on forms to be provided stating:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant;
   (B)   The name and address of the person which he or she represents;
   (C)   The kind of goods offered for sale or kinds of services to be
performed; and
   (D)   Whether or not he or she desires to accept or receive payment or
deposit of money in advance of final delivery.
(Prior Code, § 10-803)
§ 116.04  BOND.
   If the applicant desires to accept or receive payment or deposit of money in
advance of final delivery, the application shall be accompanied by a bond in
the penal sum of $1,000 executed by corporate surety, licensed to do business
in the state, conditioned upon the making of final delivery of the goods
ordered or services to be performed in accordance with the terms of the order,
or failing therein, that the advanced payment of the order be refunded.  Any
person aggrieved by the action by the solicitor shall have the right of action
on the bond for the recovery of the money or damages or both.
(Prior Code, § 10-804)
§ 116.05  SOLICITATION BETWEEN SUNSET AND SUNRISE.
   No person, firm or corporation shall solicit within the city between sunset
and sunrise.
(Prior Code, § 10-805)  (Ord. 1465, passed 9-4-90) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
TEMPORARY VENDORS/MERCHANTS
§ 116.15  TEMPORARY VENDORS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      TEMPORARY VENDORS.  Any person, firm or corporation engaging in the sale
of firewood, Christmas trees, fruit, produce or foodstuffs, and which begins
doing business with the intent to remain in a given location for not more than
the time period specified herein. Food trucks licensed under Oklahoma Health
Department Rules are not included in the definition of TEMPORARY VENDORS.
   (B)   No person shall operate as a temporary  vendor in the city unless a
license has been issued and a tax paid, in accordance with §
110.02. A separate license shall be required for each vendor.  The issuance of
the license shall be conditioned upon the following:
      (1)   The temporary vending operation is located in either the C-G,
commercial general, C-H, commercial highway, CBD, central business district, or
E-I, educational-institutional, zoning districts.
      (2)   The temporary vendor must submit to the city a written statement
from the property owner authorizing the vending to take place;
      (3)   Adequate off-street parking is provided, as required;
      (4)   Where fruit, produce, or foodstuffs are to be sold, the temporary
vendor has obtained applicable permits of the Health Department; and
      (5)   If the vendor is to receive money in advance of final delivery,
then a surety or cash occupation bond in the amount of $1,000 shall be provided
in a manner similar to §
116.04.
   (C)   All structural, electrical, or plumbing installations shall be made in
accordance with applicable city codes.
   (D)   No more than two signs, with a combined total of 50 square feet in
area, shall be permitted for each property, regardless of the number of vendors
using the site.  The signs may be mounted on a vehicle or structure located off
the public right-of-way.
   (E)   Temporary vending shall be exempt from open display regulations,
provided that no sales or display of merchandise shall be permitted on public
right-of-way.
   (F)   A licensee shall not operate at any given location for more than 150
days in a calendar year.
   (G)   Upon expiration of the license, the licensee shall remove all
merchandise and other material from the premises.
(Prior Code, § 10-1905)  (Ord. 1412, passed 11-6-87; Am. Ord. 1593, passed 5-8-
98; Am. Ord. 1605, passed 2-2-99; Am. Ord. 1849, passed 4-19-11; Am. Ord. 1881,
passed 6-17-14; Am. Ord. 1929, passed 4-4-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.16  SPECIAL EVENT AND FARMERS’ MARKET LICENSES.
   (A)   A farmers’ market license or special event license may be issued for a
local farmers’ market or special event operated by a not-for-profit
organization, or a city-licensed business with a physical location in the city,
which business or organization agrees in writing to be responsible for co-
ordination of the market/event and agrees to require that each vendor in the
market obtain a sales tax permit and furnish proof of such permits to the city
at the time of issuance of the license for the special event. A single license
may be issued for the special event or farmers’ market which covers all vendors
located at the event as approved by the sponsor. The fee for each farmers’
market or special event paid by the sponsor shall initially be $10 per special
event, provided that the City Council may amend the fee in the future by
resolution duly adopted.
   (B)   A special event license or farmers’ market license shall not authorize
vendors to establish a temporary  vendor location as described in division (A),
but is rather intended to provide for periodic special events and periodic
farmers’ market vendors.
(Ord. 1929, passed 4-4-17)
CHAPTER 117:  TAXICABS
Section
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   License and fees
   
117.03   Application for license
   
117.04   Indemnity deposit
   
117.05   Revocation of license
   
117.06   Fares
§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PASSENGER.  A person riding in an automobile as distinguished from the
operator of same.
   PERSON.  Individuals, firms, corporations, co- partnerships or other legal
entities or organizations.
   TAXICAB.  All automobiles carrying passengers for hire within the limits of
the city, excepting ambulances and vehicles licensed by the Corporation
Commission to transport passengers between towns and cities in the state,
excepting buses operating with the approval of the city on certain designated
routes or streets within the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-901)
Statutory reference:
   Regulation of taxicabs, see 11 O.S. § 22-118
§ 117.02  LICENSE AND FEES.
   (A)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any taxicab in the
city unless a license has been issued to the owner thereof and a tax paid, in
accordance with
§ 110.02.
   (B)   The tax required shall be in addition to any fee required by the laws
of the state.
(Prior Code, § 10-902) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   An application for a license to operate a taxicab in the city shall be
in writing, verified by the applicant or his or her duly authorized
representative.
   (B)   The application shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   The name of the applicant, if a partnership, the names and
addresses of all the partners, if a corporation, the state of incorporation and
the names and addresses of the officers and directors thereof;
      (2)   The address of the principal place of business of the applicant;
      (3)   The cities or towns in which the applicant operates a taxicab and
the number of taxicabs in the fleet; and
      (4)   A certificate of liability insurance policy by an insurance company
authorized to do business within the state, providing liability coverage for
each taxicab within the applicant's fleet of not less than $10,000 for the
injury or death of one person, $20,000 for the injury or death of two or more
persons in any one accident and $10,000 for property damage in any one
accident.  The insurance coverage shall be effective whether the taxicab was,
at the time of the accident, being driven by the owner, his or her agent,
servant or employee, lessee or licensee, and the policy shall contain a
provision that it cannot be canceled until ten days' written notice of the
cancellation shall have been filed with the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 10-903)
§ 117.04  INDEMNITY DEPOSIT.
   In lieu of the certificate of liability insurance policy provided for in
§ 117.03, the applicant may, at his or her option, file with his or her
application for license a certificate of the State Treasurer verifying that the
applicant has deposited with the State Treasurer $30,000 in cash or securities
such as may legally be purchased by savings banks or for trust funds of a
market value of $30,000.  The deposit shall be held by the State Treasurer to
satisfy any execution on a judgment issued against the person making the
deposit for damages resulting from the ownership, maintenance, use or operation
of a taxicab within the city after the deposit was made.
(Prior Code, § 10-904)
§ 117.05  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The City Council may, after proper hearing, revoke a license issued
whenever it shall appear, upon investigation, that a license was obtained as a
result of misrepresentation or fraud.
   (B)   If for any reason the required policy of insurance or indemnity
deposit terminates, lapses, becomes ineffective or falls below the minimum
standards specified in this chapter, then any license issued thereon shall
automatically terminate after five days unless the licensee obtains a new
policy or restores the deposit, whichever the case may be.
(Prior Code, § 10-905)
§ 117.06  FARES.
   The licensee shall file with the City Clerk a schedule of all fares or rates
charged, which shall not exceed the fares or rates charged in Oklahoma City.
(Prior Code, § 10-906)
CHAPTER 118:  WRECKER SERVICES; BLASTING
Section
General Provisions
   
118.01   Definitions
   
118.02   Referrals; license and tax required
   
118.03   Application for referral license
   
118.04   Review of application
   
118.05   [Reserved]
   
118.06   Standards for issuance of referral license
   
118.07   Rotation list
   
118.08   Dispatching procedure
   
118.08.1   Special towing services
   
118.09   Operating rules and regulations
   
118.10   Written reports
   
118.11   Revocation or suspension of hearing
   
118.12   Expiration of license
Attendants
   
118.25   License and tax required
   
118.26   Application for license
   
118.27   Police investigation
   
118.28   Issuance of license
   
118.29   Nature of license
   
118.30   Revocation of license
Blasting or Explosives
   
118.40   Permit required
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 118.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATTENDANT.  An employee of an operator qualified by knowledge and experience
to operate a wrecker.
   OPERATOR.  Any person owning or operating a wrecker service, including any
employee of any person owning or operating a wrecker service.
   REFERRAL.  A request of the Police Department to an operator that the
operator provide wrecker service provided that a request to an operator
expressly designated by the owner/operator of the vehicle to be impounded shall
not constitute a referral.
   SERVICE or WRECKER SERVICE.  The use of the wreckers for hire.
   SPECIAL TOWING SERVICE REFERRAL.  A request by the Police Department to an
operator to provide wrecker service for vehicles that cannot be provided by the
licensees on the approved rotation list.
   WRECKER.  A truck or other vehicle equipped and used for the purpose of
towing or removing wrecked, damaged, disabled or impounded vehicles from the
place where they were wrecked, damaged, disabled or impounded.
(Prior Code, § 10-1001) (Am. Ord. 1751, passed 5-17-05)
§ 118.02  REFERRALS; LICENSE AND TAX REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall be eligible to receive referrals until,
first, he or she has obtained a license and paid the tax thereon.
(Prior Code, § 10-1002) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.03  APPLICATION FOR REFERRAL LICENSE.
   (A)   The applicant for a referral license shall make a written application
to the City Clerk between February 15 and March 15 of each year.  The
application shall be signed by the applicant under oath and shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The name, home address and proposed business address of the
applicant;
      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership, the name, residence address and
telephone number of each partner;  (If the application is a corporation, the
name, residence address and telephone number of each director, each officer and
the general manager.)
      (3)   The financial status of the applicant, including the amount of all
unpaid judgements against the applicant and the nature of the transaction or
actions giving rise to the judgment.
      (4)   A statement of all felonies and misdemeanors, including moving
traffic violations, but excluding parking violations, for which the applicant
has been convicted within the five years immediately preceding the date of the
application;  (If the applicant is a partnership, the information shall be
provided for each partner.  If the applicant is a corporation, the information
shall be provided for each director, each officer and the general manager.)
      (5)   The experience of the applicant in the wrecker business;
      (6)   The location, number, description and hourly availability of the
wreckers owned or operated by the applicant;
      (7)   Whether the applicant has adequate enclosed space within the city
limits for properly accommodating and protecting all vehicles that are to be
impounded with an attendant available at all times;  (For the purposes of this
provision, an attendant available at all times shall mean that an attendant
will respond to summons by the owner of an impounded car by arriving at the
storage area within 15 minutes after being requested to do so.)
      (8)   The names and addresses of all proposed attendants; and
      (9)   Any further information as deemed necessary by the City Council.
   (B)   The applicant shall attach to the application the following as
requirements to obtain the license:
      (1)   A copy of the current Class A or AA license granted to the
applicant by the State Department of Public Safety; and
      (2)   A certificate of general liability insurance policy by an insurance
company authorized to do business within the state, providing liability
coverage with the following limits:  $25,000 for any claim or to any claimant
for loss of property arising out of a single accident or occurrence, $100,000
to any claimant for his or her claim for bodily injury and $1,000,000 for any
number of claims arising out of a single occurrence or accident.  The policy
shall provide no exclusion for hired automobiles, fire, theft or explosion. 
Each policy required by this section shall contain an endorsement providing for
15 days' notice to the city in the event of any material change or
cancellation.
(Ord. 1606, passed 2-2-99; Am. Ord. 1607, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 1613, passed
5-4-99)
   (C)   The application shall include a statement that the applicant agrees to
release at no expense to the vehicle owner any vehicle impounded at the city's
request when it is determined by the city that the impoundment was in error,
and further, that applicant has read, understands and agrees to abide by the
provisions of this subchapter.  (Ord. 1379, passed 7-1-86)
(Prior Code, § 10-1003) (Am. Ord. 1751, passed 5-17-05
§ 118.04  REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   When an application is received by the City Clerk, he or she shall
forward the same to the City Manager for review and inspections as required in
this section.
   (B)   The applicant's wrecker and equipment shall be inspected by the city
to ensure that:
      (1)   Each vehicle to be used as a wrecker must be designed for this
purpose and shall be maintained in first-class mechanical condition.
      (2)   Each wrecker shall bear the name of the wrecker service on each
side in letters at least 2½-inches in width and colored so as to be  easily
readable.
      (3)   Each wrecker shall have a least one red or amber rotating or
flashing beacon visible from 360 degrees.  Each vehicle shall have an emergency
flasher system capable of emitting two amber lights to the front and two red
lights to the rear of the vehicle which shall flash simultaneously.  All
lighting systems shall be visible from a minimum of 500 feet.
         (a)   Two scotch blocks or similar type device capable of adding
stability to the wrecker in preparing the impounded vehicle for towing;
         (b)   Dollies for the purpose of providing a method of towing
impounded vehicles, which are otherwise incapable of being towed, or equipment
capable of adequately and safely loading the impounded vehicle;  (The
provisions of this requirement shall not apply to the loading or transporting
of impounded vehicles of 10,000 pounds or more gross weight.)
         (c)   At least one easily accessible fire extinguisher with an NAPA
rating of 10BC or higher;
         (d)   All truck warning devices required by 47 O.S. to protect the
scene of an accident day or night;
         (e)   Two chains for pulling or towing;
         (f)   One push-type broom;
         (g)   One axe;
         (h)   One shovel;
         (i)   One set of tire chains;
         (j)   One pry-bar or wrecker bar capable of prying open vehicle doors;
and
         (k)   One sling, stay-bar or other type device capable of protecting
an impounded vehicle while being towed or transported.
      (4)   Each wrecker shall be equipped with a radio receiver and
transmitter capable of  communications with the applicant's dispatcher and the
applicant's dispatcher shall have base station equipment capable of the
communication.
   (C)   The applicant's premises shall be inspected by the city to ensure that
there is adequate enclosed space for properly accommodating and protecting all
impounded vehicles and that the space complies herewith and
Chapter 158 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 10-1004)  (Ord. 1606, passed 2-2-99; Am. Ord. 1607, passed 2-16-
99; Am. Ord. 1613, passed 5-4-99)
§ 118.05  [RESERVED].
§ 118.06  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF REFERRAL LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon completion of review of the submitted application the City
Manager shall make the following findings:
      (1)   Whether the applicant maintains its principal place of business
within the city limits and whether dispatching and the applicant’s wreckers are
located at the place;
      (2)   Whether the applicant and all employees are fit and proper persons
to receive referrals;
      (3)   Whether the applicant has at his or her central place of business
an attendant on duty or available at all times; and
      (4)   Whether the requirements of this subchapter and all other governing
laws and ordinances have been met.
   (B)   If the findings of the City Manager show that an applicant meets the
standards described herein, the City Manager shall cause a license to be issued
in accordance with  the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   The City Manager shall make the final determination in approving or
denying an application for a referral license.
(Prior Code, § 10-1006)  (Ord. 1606, passed 2-2-99; Am. Ord. 1607, passed 2-16-
99; Am. Ord. 1623, passed 5-4-99; Am. Ord. 1935, passed 6-20-17)
§ 118.07  ROTATION LIST.
   Each licensee shall be placed on a list maintained by the Police Department
for the purpose of referrals. Referrals shall be directed only to the licensees
appearing on the list.  Referrals shall be rotated among the licensees for
equal time periods to be determined by the City Manager.  Licensees for special
towing services as hereinafter provided will not be on the regular rotation
list.
(Prior Code, § 10-1007)  (Am. Ord. 1751, passed 5-17-05)
§ 118.08  DISPATCHING PROCEDURE.
   Referrals shall be made according to the following procedures:
   (A)   The Police Department dispatcher shall notify the licensee currently
at the top of the rotation list.
   (B)   The licensee shall not accept a referral from the police dispatcher
unless a wrecker and attendant are immediately available for dispatch at the
time referral is received.
   (C)   Every referral accepted shall be answered promptly.  In the event an
attendant will be delayed more than 15 minutes from the time of dispatch to
arrival at the scene, the attendant shall notify his or her dispatcher who
will, in turn, inform the police dispatcher that the licensee is unable to
provide immediate service.
   (D)   In the event the licensee is unable to provide immediate service, the
police dispatcher shall be advised of the reason therefor and shall notify the
next licensee on the rotation list.  If all licensees are unable to provide
immediate service, the dispatcher shall call the nearest state-licensed
operator until service is obtained.
   (E)   No licensee shall proceed to the scene of impoundment until and unless
it has been directed to do so by the police dispatcher.
   (F)   If the licensee arriving at the scene feels that he or she is not
properly equipped or capable of performing required service, he or she shall
immediately notify the police dispatcher for additional instructions or
directions.
(Prior Code, § 10-1008)  (Am. Ord. 1751, passed 5-17-05)
§ 118.08.1  SPECIAL TOWING SERVICES.
   (A)   In the event the wrecker service licensee is unable to provide service
by reason of size, weight, or condition of the vehicle to be impounded, the
police dispatcher is authorized to call the licensed wrecker service located
outside the city limits which has been approved and licensed by the City
Council for special towing services (not capable of being performed by the
licensed wrecker service within the city).

   (B)   The City Council, within 30 days following adoption of this section,
shall solicit proposals forspecial towing services licensees; and upon receipt
and review of proposals, the City Council shall select a licensee to provide
towing for vehicles which are in need of impoundment but cannot be towed by the
local licensees due to size, weight, or condition.  Such selection shall be
based upon the applicant's ability to perform the special towing services, upon
the proximity of their facility to the city, and the applicant's other
qualifications as demonstrated by its application.  The applicants for special
towing services licensee shall meet all the application criteria for wrecker
operators and attendants, including licensing fees, except the special towing
services licensee shall not be required to maintain facilities within the
corporate limits of the city.  After the initial selection of special towing
services licensee, the licensing procedures contained in this chapter shall
govern special towing services licensing.
(Ord. 1751, passed 5-17-05)
§ 118.09  OPERATING RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   A licensee shall provide wrecker service in compliance with the following
rules and regulations:
   (A)   The licensee holder shall provide immediate service 24 hours per day
each and every day.
   (B)   Every licensee shall have available for immediate service at least one
attendant on duty between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily and one
dispatcher and attendant on duty between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
daily.
   (C)   The licensee shall maintain a direct telephone line to the Police
Department dispatcher, which line shall be personally answered 24 hours a day,
seven days a week.
   (D)   Each attendant dispatched to the scene of an accident shall be
responsible for clearing from the street all debris existing as a result of the
accident.
   (E)   The steering wheel of all impounded vehicles shall be secured with a
tie-down before towing.
   (F)   An inventory of all visible personal possessions and/or equipment in
each impounded vehicle shall be prepared by the attendant before the vehicle is
removed and the inventory shall be verified by the police officer at the scene
by signature.  Any erasures on the inventory shall be initialed by both the
attendant and police officer.
   (G)   Any other rule or regulation which the Chief of Police deems necessary
to ensure effective service and proper impoundment of vehicles.
   (H)   The licensee shall not subcontract any towing services for wrecker
service referrals.
(Prior Code, § 10-1009)  (Am. Ord. 1751, passed 5-17-05)
§ 118.10  WRITTEN REPORTS.
   Every licensee shall make a written report with all pertinent information to
the Police Department within 24 hours of the following events:
   (A)   Upon refusal to accept a referral because of equipment failure or the
lack of available attendant;
   (B)   Unusual delay in arriving at the scene;
   (C)   Damage or alleged damage to the impounded vehicle caused by the
wrecker or attendant; and
   (D)   Loss or alleged loss of personal property and/or equipment from the
impounded vehicle during the time it was in possession of the licensee or its
employees.
(Prior Code, § 10-1010)
§ 118.11  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF HEARING.
   (A)   The City Council shall revoke or suspend a license issued under this
subchapter on any of the following grounds:
      (1)   The license was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement
of a material fact or a fact concerning the applicant was not disclosed at the
time of this application, and the fact would have constituted just cause for
refusal to issue the license;
      (2)   The licensee illegally employs a short wave radio to intercept
police communications;
      (3)   The licensee has failed to respond to two referrals, without
justification, during the license year;
      (4)   The licensee has failed to respond to five referrals, regardless of
reason, during the license year;
      (5)   The licensee has failed to maintain adequate and properly operating
equipment as required by this subchapter; and/or
      (6)   The licensee or his or her agents and/or employees have violated
any provisions of this subchapter or have committed any other acts the
violation of which reflects unfavorable on the fitness of the licensee to offer
public services.
   (B)   The City Manager shall bring to the attention of the City Council the
existence of any of the above grounds for revocation or suspension.
   (C)   Prior to suspension or revocation, the licensee shall be given notice
of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard
before the City Council.  At least ten days notice of hearing shall be given to
the licensee.  Upon the completion of the hearing, the City Council, based on
its findings shall:
      (1)   Decline to revoke or suspend the license;
      (2)   Revoke the license; or
      (3)   Suspend the license for a period not to exceed 90 days.
(Prior Code, § 10-1011)
§ 118.12  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   A license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall expire on June 30, next
after the same is issued.  To obtain a new license, an operator shall make
application under the provisions of this subchapter as required of any other
applicant.
(Prior Code, § 10-1012)  (Ord. 1311, passed 11-6-84)
   ATTENDANTS
§ 118.25  LICENSE AND TAX REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate or be permitted to operate a wrecker used for
referrals without first obtaining a license and paying the tax thereon, as
required in
§ 110.02.
(Prior Code, § 10-1020) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.26  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   An application for an attendant's license shall be made upon blank
forms furnished by the city and shall contain:
      (1)   An applicant's full name, present residence address and any other
residence address during the past year;
      (2)   Age, date of birth, weight, height, color of eyes and hair and
driver's license number;
      (3)   A statement of all felonies and misdemeanors, including moving
traffic violations and excluding parking violations, for which the applicant
has been convicted within the five years immediately preceding application for
the license;
      (4)   A statement of past experiences as a wrecker attendant, including
the name and address of each employment as a wrecker attendant within the five
years immediately preceding application for the license; and
      (5)   All applications shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of
perjury.
   (B)   Applications for an attendant's license shall be submitted to the City
Clerk together with the payment of $3 for a processing fee for each
application.
(Prior Code, § 10-1021)
§ 118.27  POLICE INVESTIGATION.
   The City Clerk shall forward the application to the Chief of Police for
investigation.  The Chief of Police shall cause to be conducted an
investigation of each applicant for an attendant's license and a report of the
investigation, including a copy of the traffic and police report of the
applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application.
(Prior Code, § 10-1022)
§ 118.28  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, upon consideration of an application for an
attendant's license and the investigation reports and documents attached
thereto, shall approve or reject the application in accordance with this
section.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall authorize the City Clerk to issue an
attendant's license if he or she finds the applicant:
      (1)   Is of the age of 18 years or over;
      (2)   Is able to speak, read and write the English language;
      (3)   Has a current, valid commercial chauffeur's license issued by the
state, and is not currently under revocation or suspension by the State
Department of Public Safety;
      (4)   Has not been convicted, within the five years immediately preceding
application for a license, of any of the following offenses:
         (a)   Any offense involving honesty, veracity, violence or involving
dangerous or deadly weapons;
         (b)   Use or possession of controlled dangerous substances, as defined
in the State Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substance Act, 63 O.S. §§ 2-101 et
seq.;
         (c)   Operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol
or intoxicants, as defined in 47 O.S. § 11-902;
         (d)   Operating a motor vehicle while ability is impaired by alcohol
or intoxicants, as defined in 47 O.S. § 11-902;
         (e)   Operating a motor vehicle with a blood or breath alcohol
concentration of ten- hundredths or more;
         (f)   Operating a motor vehicle while the operator's privilege to
drive has been suspended or revoked; and
         (g)   Attempting to elude a police officer.
      (5)   Has met all the requirements of this subchapter and all other
applicable laws and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 10-1023)  (Am. Ord. 1304, passed 10-2-84; Am. Ord. 1306, passed
10-16-84)
§ 118.29  NATURE OF LICENSE.
   The attendant's license shall be in the form of a card which shall bear the
signature, photograph and fingerprints of the applicant.  The card shall be
issued in duplicate.  One copy with the fingerprints, photograph and signature
of the applicant shall be placed on file with the Chief of Police.  The other
card shall be carried on the person of the licensee or in the wrecker driven by
the licensee at all times while operating a wrecker.
(Prior Code, § 10-1024)
§ 118.30  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke any attendant's license
issued under this subchapter for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Upon conviction of the following offenses:
         (a)   Any offense involving honesty, veracity, violence or involving
dangerous or deadly weapons, any drug or drug-related offense, any sex offense;
         (b)   Use or possession of controlled dangerous substances as defined
in the State Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substance Act, 63 O.S. §§ 2-101 et
seq.;
         (c)   Operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol
or other intoxicants, as defined in 47 O.S. § 11-902;
         (d)   Operating a motor vehicle while ability is impaired by alcohol
or other intoxicants, as defined in 47 O.S. § 11-902;
         (e)   Operating a motor vehicle with a blood or breath alcohol
concentration of eight-hundredths or more;
         (f)   Operating a motor vehicle while the operator's privilege to
drive has been suspended or revoked; and/or
         (g)   Attempting to elude a police officer.
      (2)   For leaving the scene of an accident in which the wrecker is
involved;
      (3)   For failure to make a full report of an accident to the Police
Department within 24 hours of the time of occurrence;
      (4)   For permitting any other person to use his or her license;
      (5)   For obliterating or erasing any official entry on his or her
license identification card;
      (6)   Upon conviction of a third traffic violation while operating a
wrecker during any one license year;
      (7)   Misrepresentation of any material facts by an attendant in his or
her application for license; and/or
      (8)   Upon revocation or suspension of the attendant's commercial
chauffeur's license by the State Department of Public Safety.
   (B)   Whenever an attendant's license is revoked or suspended, the Chief of
Police shall take up the license and license identification card and forward
same to the City Manager together with a full report on reasons for revocation.
   (C)   No person whose license has been revoked shall be eligible to receive
a new license until one year from the date of the revocation.
   (D)   (1)   Any licensee whose wrecker attendant's license is revoked or
suspended under this section may request an appeal hearing before the City
Council by filing a written request therefor with the City Clerk within ten
days of notification of the suspension or revocation.
      (2)   After the hearing, the City Council may:
         (a)   Reverse the order of suspension or revocation by the Chief of
Police;
         (b)   Affirm the action of the Chief of Police and sustain the
revocation or suspension;
         (c)   Modify the revocation or suspension as circumstances warrant and
impose any conditions upon the modification as may be appropriate; and
         (d)   Suspend the license for a period not to exceed 90 days.
      (3)   The decision of the City Council on the appeal shall be final.  An
appeal or request for hearing hereunder shall not stay or supersede the order
of suspension or revocation issued by the Chief of Police pending hearing
thereon.
(Prior Code, § 10-1025)  (Ord. 1285, passed 4-17-84; Am. Ord. 1304, passed 10-
2-84; Am. Ord. 1306, passed 10-16-84; Am. Ord. 1751, passed 5-17-05)
   BLASTING OR EXPLOSIVES
§ 118.40  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person who shall blast any rock or other substance within the
corporate limits of the city shall, before blasting any rock or other
substance, procure a permit and pay the fee required in
§ 110.03.
   (B)   Written application for the permit shall be filed with the City
Inspector describing the location of the property on which the person proposes
to blast rock or other substance and the character, size and number of charges
of explosives which the person proposes to use in the blasting.  The
application shall be passed on to the City Engineer, and the City Engineer and
the City Inspector shall inspect the premises.
   (C)   (1)   Before the permit is issued, the applicant shall file with the
City Clerk a good and sufficient bond with corporate surety licensed to do
business in the state in any sum not less than $25,000 to be approved by the
City Manager and the City Attorney, on condition that the makers of the bond
will pay all damages to any and all persons that may be injured in person or
property by reason of blasting being done, or caused to be done, by the
principal.
      (2)   Any person injured by the blasting being done may recover from and
on the bond which may occur to the person.
      (3)   The bond shall remain in full force and effect for one year after
same is made and filed.
   (D)   If, after the inspection, the City Inspector deems the location to be
a safe and reasonable place for the blasting and the provisions of this section
are complied with, including payment of the required fee, the City Inspector
may issue a permit setting forth the location and premises on which the
blasting is to be done and the character of explosives and size and number of
charges which the applicant may use in the blasting.  No person shall set off
any explosives other than the kind specified in the permit, nor greater number
of charges, nor except on the premises therein mentioned.
(Prior Code, § 10-1901) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 119:  GARAGE SALES, SIDEWALK SALES AND THE LIKE
Section
Garage Sales
   
119.01   Limitations; offenses
Street or Sidewalk Sales
   
119.15   Minimum provisions
   GARAGE SALES
§ 119.01  LIMITATIONS; OFFENSES.
   (A)   Garage sales may be conducted by the residents and on the premises of
occupied residential properties within the city only under the following
conditions:
      (1)   A city permit shall be obtained prior to a garage sale under the
provisions of
§ 110.03.
      (2)   Sales tax will be reported and paid on all sales of merchandise in
accordance with the State Sales Tax Code.
      (3)   Garage sales will be limited to five days per year per location.
      (4)   Only merchandise incidental to the occupancy of the residence may
be sold, i.e. no merchandise shall be sold which is purchased for resale or
brought onto the premises for resale.  Flea market-type sales where new or used
merchandise not incidental to occupancy of the premises is brought to the
premises for sale are prohibited under garage sale permits.
      (5)   A copy of the permit shall be prominently displayed on the premise
throughout the sale.
      (6)   A permit for an estate sale may be issued under the above
conditions where the sale is conducted on the premises of the deceased person.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and an offense to conduct or allow the conduct of
a garage sale, except as provided in this section.
(Ord. 1659, passed 10-2-01) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
   STREET OR SIDEWALK SALES
§ 119.15  MINIMUM PROVISIONS.
   The sale or display of goods, wares or merchandise shall not be permitted on
any public sidewalk other than one which directly abuts the merchant's
established place of business.
(Prior Code, § 10-1904) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 120:  FORTUNE TELLING
Section
   
120.01   Prohibition
§ 120.01  PROHIBITION.
   No person may engage in the business of fortune telling, clairvoyance,
horoscope reading, palmistry or similar vocation within the limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-1902)
CHAPTER 121:  AUCTIONS
Section
   
121.01   Auctions; definition and class
§ 121.01  AUCTIONS; DEFINITION AND CLASS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AUCTIONEER.  Any person who sells or offers for sale any goods, wares and
merchandise at public auction for another on commission or for a recompense or
any person who shall conduct a public sale at auction of any goods, wares and
merchandise, irrespective of whether the goods sold or offered for sale are
owned by another or the auctioneer.
   (B)   No auction sale of any class of merchandise shall be held or
conducted, except by an auctioneer holding a license or permit, whichever may
be required according to the provisions of
§§ 110.02 and
110.03.
   (C)   At least five days prior to any auction to be held within the
corporate limits of the city, the auctioneer shall submit to the Police Chief
of the city a list of all goods, wares and merchandise auctioned giving a
description of each and accompanying serial numbers, if any, the sale
identification number of the goods, wares and merchandise and the name of the
seller and buyer of the same.
(Prior Code, § 10-1903) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 122:  FOOD SERVICES AND RESTAURANTS
Section
   
122.01   Food Sanitation Manual adopted
§ 122.01  FOOD SANITATION MANUAL ADOPTED.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for the inspection of food service establishments, the issuance,
suspension or revocation of permits to operate the establishment and the sale
of unsound or mislabeled food or drink, including penalties, that certain code
known as the Food Code, 1999 Recommendations of the United States Public Health
Service, Food and Drug Administration, and all amendments thereto, save and
exempt the portions that are deleted, modified or amended, of which no less
than three copies have been and now are filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
The same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein.
   (B)   The provisions of the manual, as herein modified, shall be controlling
in the inspection of food service establishments, the issuance, suspension or
revocation of permits to operate the establishments and the sale of unsound or
mislabeled food or drink within the corporate limits of the city.  As the
manual is subsequently amended or modified, the changes shall be incorporated
herein by reference.
(Prior Code, § 9-801)
CHAPTER 123:  CABLE TELEVISION
Section
General Provisions
   
123.001   Definitions
   
123.002   Applications for franchise; contents and filing
   
123.003   Compliance with FCC and federal law required
   
123.004   Franchise/license fee
Broadband Telecommunications Franchise
   
123.020   Franchise required
   
123.021   Term of franchise
   
123.022   Customer service standards
   
123.023   Nature of non-exclusive franchise
   
123.024   Franchise agreement
   
123.025   Renewal
   
123.026   Transfer
   
123.027   Franchise territory
   
123.028   Extension of network
System Requirements
   
123.045   Network description
   
123.046   Public service installations
   
123.047   Emergency alert override
   
123.048   Performance monitoring
   
123.049   Interconnection
Network Installation, Operation and Maintenance
   
123.060   Regulatory jurisdiction and procedures
   
123.061   Construction standards
   
123.062   Maps
   
123.063   Inspection of property
Rules Governing Grantee
   
123.075   Employment practices
   
123.076   Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited
   
123.077   Compliance with applicable laws and regulations
   
123.078   Liability and indemnification
   
123.079   Rights reserved by city
   
123.080   Procedure prior to revocation
   
123.081   Protection of privacy
   
123.082   Unlawful connections
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 123.001  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES. All revenues derived by a grantee from the operation
of its cable system to provide cable service as defined in a franchise. (47 USC
542(b))
   BASIC SERVICE. Any service tier which includes the retransmission of local
television broadcast signals. (47 USC 522(3))
   CABLE SERVICE.
      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of:
         (a)   Video programming, or
         (b)   Other programming service, and
      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection
or use of such video programming or other programming service. (47 (USC 522(6))
   CABLE SYSTEM. A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is
provided to multiple subscribers within the city, but such term does not
include:
      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations;
      (2)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-
of-way;
      (3)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provision of Title II of the Federal Communications Act of 1934,
47 USC 201, er seq., except that such facility shall be considered a cable
system (other than for purposes of 47 USC 541(c)), to the extent such facility
is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers,
unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand
services;
      (4)    An open video system that complies with 47 USC 573; or
      (5)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility systems. (47 USC 522(7))
   CITY. The City of Bethany, a municipal corporation of the State of Oklahoma,
in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated,
enlarged or reincorporated form.
   COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of Bethany or other legally
appointed or elected successor or agency constituting the governing body of the
city.
   FCC. The U.S. Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or
elected successor.
   FRANCHISE. An initial authorization, or renewal thereof (including a renewal
of an authorization which has been granted subject to 47 USC 546), issued by
the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit,
license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which
authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.
   GRANTEE. Any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and under
the granting franchise ordinance and its lawful successor, transferee or
assignee.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE. Information that a grantee makes available to all
subscribers generally. (47 USC 522(14))
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, association, organization, corporation
or any lawful successor, transferee or assignee of the individual, partnership,
association, organization or corporation.
   PUBLIC SCHOOL. Any accredited K-12 educational institution operated within
the city by any public school system.
   SERVICE AREA. The geographic area within the corporate limits of the city
and any additional area hereafter included in the corporate limits.
   SHALL and MUST. The act(s) referred to is mandatory and not merely
directory.
   STATE. The State of Oklahoma.
   STREET. Each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or
hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by
others and located within the city limits:
      (1)   Streets;
      (2)   Roadways;
      (3)   Highways;
      (4)   Avenues;
      (5)   Lanes;
      (6)   Alleys;
      (7)   Sidewalks;
      (8)   Easements;
      (9)   Rights-of-way; and
      (10)   Similar public ways and extensions and additions thereto, together
with the other public property and areas that the city shall permit to be
included within the definition of street from time to time.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person lawfully receiving basic service from the grantee.
   VIDEO PROGRAMMING. Programming provided by, or generally considered
comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. (47 USC
522(20))
(Prior Code, § 6-101)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.002  APPLICATIONS FOR FRANCHISE; CONTENTS AND FILING.
   (A)   Applications for an original franchise grant hereunder shall be filed
with the City Clerk in accordance with the filing instructions promulgated by
the city and will be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee of $100.
   (B)   The applications shall contain written information, as outlined in the
filing instructions and presented in the specific form required, which
information shall include, but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   The name and business address of the applicant, date of application
and signature of applicant or appropriate corporate officer(s);
      (2)   A general description of the applicant's proposed operations;
   (C)   A description of the services to be provided;
   (D)   A description of the educational and governmental access channels to
be provided;
   (E)   Statement detailing and setting forth the names and addresses of all
persons having proprietary or equitable interest in the franchise and in the
event the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers,
directors and shareholders of said corporation together with the number of
shares held by each shareholder, both nominal and beneficial, owning 10% or
more of the outstanding shares of the corporation's outstanding stock;
   (F)   A statement describing all intracompany relationships of the
applicant, if any, including parent, subsidiary or affiliated companies.
(Prior Code, § 6-103)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.003  COMPLIANCE WITH FCC AND FEDERAL LAW REQUIRED.
   This chapter shall be amended where necessary to conform to all amendments
to Part 76 of the Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission within 12 months of the order of the amendments, and with Title VI
of the federal Communications Act of 1934 (47 USC 522, et seq.) within 12
months of such amendments.
(Prior Code, § 6-108)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.004  FRANCHISE/LICENSE FEE.
   A grantee of a franchise hereunder shall pay to the city a fee in an amount
equal to 5% of the annual gross revenues as defined above, and on the schedule
described in the franchise. Such payment shall be in addition to any other
payment, charge, permit fee, or bond of general applicability owed to the city
by the grantee, and shall not be construed as payment in lieu of personal or
real property taxes levied by state, county, or local authorities.
(Prior Code, § 6-204) (Am. Ord. 1696, passed 3-18-03; Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-
18-07)
BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE
§ 123.020  FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   No person shall construct, install, maintain or operate on or within any
street any equipment or facilities for the distribution of cable service over a
cable system to any subscriber unless a franchise authorizing the use of the
streets has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and
thereafter only while legally operating under the terms and provisions of the
franchise.
(Prior Code, § 6-201)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.021  TERM OF FRANCHISE.
   The non-exclusive franchise and the rights, privileges, obligations and
authority thereby granted shall take effect and be in force, as provided
herein, within 30 days from and after final adoption by the city and shall
continue in full force and effect for a term of up to 20 years from date of
acceptance by grantee, however, subject to the right of the city or grantee to
terminate the franchise, as provided herein or in a franchise.
(Prior Code, § 6-203)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.022  CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.
   A grantee shall comply with the customer service standards promulgated by
the FCC. (47 CFR 76.309).
(Prior Code, § 6-405)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.023  NATURE OF NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Any franchise granted hereunder shall not be exclusive and the city
reserves the right to grant a similar franchise to any other person at any
time.
   (B)   (1)   Any franchise granted hereunder shall give to the grantee, the
right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain in, upon,
along, above, over and under the streets, the towers antennas, cables,
electronic equipment and other network appurtenances necessary for the
operation of a cable system in the city.
      (2)   The exercise of the right and privilege shall not interfere with
the use of the streets by the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-206)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.024  FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.
   The grantee awarded a franchise shall execute a franchise agreement which
shall set forth the terms and provisions of the franchise.
(Prior Code, § 6-207)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.025  RENEWAL.
   A franchise shall be renewed pursuant the procedures set forth in federal
law, 47 USC 546.
(Prior Code, § 6-210)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.026  TRANSFER.
   Any franchise granted hereunder shall be a privilege to be held for the
benefit of the public. It may be transferred, sold or assigned as set forth in
the franchise.
(Prior Code, § 6-211)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.027  FRANCHISE TERRITORY.
   A franchise shall encompass the entire city. (Prior Code, § 6-212)  (Am.
Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.028 EXTENSION OF NETWORK.
   A grantee shall extend its network to serve customers as described in the
franchise.
(Prior Code, § 6-213)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
§ 123.045  NETWORK DESCRIPTION.
   The cable system permitted to be installed herein shall comply with all
technical standards promulgated by the FCC. The system shall include capacity
for the airing of non-commercial educational and governmental access
programming as set forth in the franchise.
(Prior Code, § 6-301)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.046  PUBLIC SERVICE INSTALLATIONS.
   (A)   The grantee shall provide one connection for basic service offered by
the grantee to each public school, public library and to municipal buildings
passed by the cable system.
   (B)   Any service provided pursuant to division (A) above, may be extended
by the persons receiving the service to as many areas within the building where
the service is granted or adjacent buildings which are a part of the total
complex receiving the service.
   (C)   The person receiving the service shall pay all expenses for any
extension and shall complete the extension so as not to interfere with the
operation of the cable system.
(Prior Code, § 6-302)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.047  EMERGENCY ALERT OVERRIDE.
   The grantee shall comply with the federal Emergency Alert System regulations
promulgated by the FCC. (47 CFR Part 11).
(Prior Code, § 6-303)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.048 PERFORMANCE MONITORING.
   A grantee shall comply with the testing requirements promulgated by the FCC.
(47 CFR 76.609, Subpart K).
(Prior Code, §6-305)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.049  INTERCONNECTION.
   The franchisee shall so construct and operate the network so as to have the
capability to interconnect the same into all other networks adjacent to the
city.
(Prior Code, § 6-306)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
NETWORK INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
§ 123.060  REGULATORY JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURES.
   The city shall have regulatory jurisdiction over a grantee's cable system
consistent with federal and state laws and the city's policy powers. The daily
routine, administrative responsibilities and supervision of the franchise shall
be the responsibility of the City Manager.
(Prior Cod; § 6-401)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.061  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   A grantee shall comply with all applicable building and safety codes in the
construction and operation of its cable system.
(Prior Code, § 6-404)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.062  MAPS.
   Upon request, a grantee shall provide a map showing the route of its cable
system in the streets.
(Prior Code, § 6-407)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.063  INSPECTION OF PROPERTY.
   Consistent with its police powers, the city shall have the right to inspect
all grantee property located in the streets.
(Prior Code, § 6-408)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
RULES GOVERNING GRANTEE
§ 123.075  EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.
   In the carrying out of the construction, maintenance and operation of the
cable system, the grantee shall comply with all applicable federal and state
laws prohibiting discrimination against any employee or applicant for
employment because of race, creed, color, sex or national origin.
(Prior Code, § 6-502)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.076 PREFERENTIAL OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, services, rules,
regulations or in any other manner discriminate against any person, nor subject
any person to any prejudice or disadvantage.
   (B)   This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit promotional campaigns
to stimulate subscription to the network or to other legitimate uses thereof;
nor shall it be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of
charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within the
classifications shall be entitled.
(Prior Code, § 6-503)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.077  COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
   The grantee, at its expense, shall comply with all laws, orders and
regulations of federal, state and municipal authorities and with any directive
of any public officer pursuant to law who shall legally impose any regulation,
order or duty upon the grantee with respect to the franchise.
(Prior Code, § 6-504)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.078  LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   (1)   The grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its
officers, boards, commission, agents and employees, against and from any and
all claims, demands, cause of actions, actions, suits, proceedings, damages
(including, but not limited to damages to city property and damages arising out
of copyright infringements and damages arising out of any failure by grantee to
secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of
programs to be delivered by grantee's cable system), costs or liabilities
(including costs or liabilities of the city with respect to its employees), of
every kind and nature whatsoever, including but not limited to damages for
injury or death or damage to person or property, and regardless of the merit of
any of the same, and against all liability to others, and against any loss,
cost and expense resulting or arising out of any of the same, including any
attorney fees, accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs,
per diem expense, traveling and transportation to the exercise or the enjoyment
of any franchise hereunder by grantee, or the granting thereof by the city.
      (2)   The grantee shall not be liable for any damages, fees or expenses
where any lawsuit is based on the actions or omissions of the city but not on
any act or omission by the grantee.
   (B)   (1)   The grantee shall maintain a general comprehensive liability
insurance policy naming as an additional insured the city, its officers,
boards, commissions, agents and employees, in a company mutually acceptable by
the grantee and the city in a form satisfactory to the city protecting the city
and all persons against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death
or property damage, occasioned by the operations of the grantee under any
franchise granted hereunder in amounts not less than the limits provided in the
Oklahoma Political Subdivision Tort Claims Act.
      (2)   Worker's compensation insurance in the coverage as may be required
by the worker's compensation insurance and safety laws of the state and
amendments thereto.
   (C)   The insurance policies referred to above shall contain an endorsement
stating that the policies are extended to cover the liability assumed by the
grantee under the terms of this chapter and shall contain the following
endorsement:
      "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled
nor the amount of coverage thereof reduced until 30 days after receipt by the
city by registered mail, of written notice of the intent to cancel or reduce
the coverage."
(Prior Code, § 6-505) (Am. Ord. 1251, passed 9-6-83; Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-
18-07)
§ 123.079  RIGHTS RESERVED BY CITY.
   (A)   Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in
any way, to any extent, the right of the city to acquire property by eminent
domain, at a fair and just value, and nothing herein contained shall be
construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, whether for a term or in
perpetuity, the city's right of eminent domain.
   (B)   There is hereby reserved to the city every right and power which is
required to be herein reserved or provided by any law. Nothing in this chapter
nor any provision in a franchise agreement shall be deemed a waiver of the
right of the city to regulate cable services or systems as now or may hereafter
be authorized by federal or state law.
   (C)   Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision hereof shall
constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power
of the city.
   (D)   If the Federal Communications Commission or any other federal or state
body or agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over
the subject matter of any franchise granted under this chapter, then to the
extent the jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like
jurisdiction by the city, the jurisdiction of the city shall cease and no
longer exist.
   (E)   At the expiration of the term for which this franchise is granted or
upon the termination and cancellation as provided therein, the city reserves
the right to require the franchisee to remove at its own expense any and all
portions of the cable system from the public ways within the city.
   (F)   In the event of a conflict or ambiguity between any terms or
provisions of the franchise and this chapter, this chapter shall control.
(Prior Code, § 6-510)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.080  PROCEDURE PRIOR TO REVOCATION.
   The following procedures are applicable to revocation proceedings:
   (A)   (1)   The City Manager may make written demand that the grantee do or
comply with any requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation.
      (2)   If the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a
period of 30 days following the written demand, the City Manager may place his
or her request for termination of the franchise upon the next regular Council
meeting agenda.
      (3)   The City Manager shall cause to be served upon the grantee, at
least ten days prior to the date of the Council meeting, a written notice of,
his or her intent to request the termination and the time and place of the
meeting, notice of which shall be published by the City Clerk at least once ten
days before the meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
   (B)   The Council shall consider the request of the chief administrative
officer and shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine, in
its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee
was with just cause.
   (C)   If the failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause,
the Council shall direct the grantee to comply within the time and manner and
upon the terms and conditions as are reasonable.
   (D)   If the Council shall determine the failure, refusal or neglect by the
grantee was without just cause, then the Council may, by resolution, declare
that the franchise of the grantee shall be terminated and bond forfeited unless
there be compliance by the grantee within the period as the Council may fix.
(Prior Code, § 6-512)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.081  PROTECTION OF PRIVACY.
   A grantee shall comply with all applicable federal and state statutes
governing the protection of subscriber privacy.
(Prior Code, § 6-518)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
§ 123.082  UNLAWFUL CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person without the expressed consent of
the grantee to make any connection, extension or division, whether physically,
acoustically, inductively, electronically or otherwise with or to any segment
of a franchised cable system for any purpose whatsoever.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully interfere, tamper,
remove, obstruct or damage any part, segment or content of a franchised cable
system for any purpose whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 6-520)  (Am. Ord. 1791, passed 12-18-07)
TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC HEALTH, WELFARE AND MORALS
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
      
135.   STATE CRIMINAL CODE
CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Attempts to commit offenses
   
130.02   Aiding in offenses
§ 130.01  ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OFFENSES.
   Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the
city, and, in an attempt, does any act toward the commission of the offense,
but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty
of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the attempted
offense itself.
(Prior Code, § 11-101)
§ 130.02  AIDING IN OFFENSES.
   When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a
particular offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who
counsels or aids another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense or
misdemeanor, and punishable in the same manner as the principal offender.
(Prior Code, § 11-102)
CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Petit larceny
   
131.02   Pump Pirates Act
   
131.03   Injuring automobiles and other vehicles
   
131.04   Trespass
   
131.05   Illegal entrance
   
131.06   Unlawful intrusion upon land
   
131.07   Destroying or injuring buildings and other property
   
131.08   Parking on private property
   
131.09   Placing signs on private property
   
131.10   Public streets and trees
   
131.11   Tampering with public utilities
   
131.12   Taking water; fire hydrants
   
131.13   Fire Department property and equipment
   
131.14   Injuring parks
   
131.15   Pilfering or scavenging materials
   
131.16   Embezzlement
   
131.17   Receiving stolen property
§ 131.01  PETIT LARCENY.
   (A)   Petit larceny is the taking of personal property of value not
exceeding $1,000 accomplished by fraud or stealth and with intent to deprive
another thereof, when the property is not taken from the person of another.
   (B)   Petit larceny is unlawful and any person who commits petit larceny
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 11-201)  (Am. Ord. 1231, passed 1-4-83; Am. Ord. 1661, passed
10-16-01; Am. Ord. 1950, passed 11-7-17)  Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Petit larceny defined, see 21 O.S. §§ 1704 and 1706
§ 131.02  PUMP PIRATES ACT.
   Any person who pumps gasoline into the gasoline tank of a vehicle and leaves
the premises where the gasoline was pumped without making payment for the
gasoline shall be guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 11-201A)  (Ord. 1575, passed 10-21-97) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.03  INJURING AUTOMOBILES AND OTHER VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for any person to start, otherwise meddle with, molest,
enter, occupy, loiter in, take or drive away any automobile or other vehicle
belonging to another without the consent of the owner or person in charge
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 11-203) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.04  TRESPASS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall trespass on public property or school property.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         OFFICIAL SIGN.  Any permanently fixed notice posted by the federal,
state or municipal government owning or maintaining any public property.
         PUBLIC PROPERTY.  The property which is dedicated to the public use
and over which the federal, state or municipal governments or any political
subdivision thereof exercises control and dominion.
         SCHOOL PROPERTY.  Any property or institution devoted primarily to the
education of children from pre-school through the 12th grade.
         TRESPASS.  Each and every actual entry upon public property in
violation and contrary to the provisions of any official sign posted to
regulate and govern the entry or use.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall trespass on private property.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         PRIVATE PROPERTY.  Any property other than public property.
         PUBLIC PROPERTY.  The meaning ascribed to it in division (A) above.
         TRESPASS.
            1.   Each and every actual entry upon the premises of an owner or
other person in lawful possession of the premises without the express or the
implied consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession.
            2.   TRESPASS shall also mean remaining upon the premises of an
owner or other person in lawful possession after having been told to leave the
premises by the owner, or the agent, or employee of the owner, or other person
in lawful possession of the premises.
            3.   TRESPASS shall also be defined as the act of remaining on
private property at any time other than during posted hours of business
operation after having been directed to vacate the premises by a police
officer; provided that the provisions of this sentence shall not apply to
persons, including employees, whose presence upon the premises is authorized by
the owner or by a person in lawful possession of the premises; nor shall the
provisions of this sentence apply unless hours of business operation are posted
upon the premises.
            4.   TRESPASS shall also be defined as the act of returning to
private property before the posted time of opening for business operation on
the next business day after having been directed to vacate the premises under
the terms of this section.
            5.   TRESPASS shall also be defined as the act of remaining on
premises, whether private or public, when such is posted forbidding the act at
any time other than during the posted hours of business operation.
(Prior Code, § 11-204)  (Ord. 1509, passed 2-15-94) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.05  ILLEGAL ENTRANCE.
   It is illegal for any person to enter upon the property of another or into
an area or structure on the property, whether the property, area or structure
is public or private, when the entrance is plainly forbidden by signs or
otherwise or when the property, area or structure is enclosed, except when the
entrance is in the line of duty, or with the expressed or tacit consent of the
owner or person in charge, or otherwise by authority of law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 11-205) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.06  UNLAWFUL INTRUSION UPON LAND.
   Every person who intrudes or squats upon any lot or piece of land within the
city without a license or authority from the owner thereof, or who erects or
occupies thereon any hut, hovel, shanty or other structure without the license
or authority, and every person who places, erects or occupies within the bounds
of any street, alley or avenue of the city, any hut, hovel, shanty or other
structure whatever, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 11-206) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.07  DESTROYING OR INJURING BUILDINGS AND OTHER PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, deface, besmear or molest
any structure, building, outbuilding, fence or any other property, real or
personal, public or private, belonging to another; to use any property
wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person entitled to its use;
or to interfere wrongfully with the use of any property by its owner or any
other person entitled to its use.
(Prior Code, § 11-207) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.08  PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to park an automobile or other vehicle,
or to place any structure or object on the driveway, yard or property of
another without the expressed or tacit consent by the owner or person in charge
thereof, or when necessary for the performance of a duty, or where the property
is provided as public parking and the general use of the property is not
restricted by signs or proper markings.
   (B)   Where entry with any vehicle is made upon real property owned or
legally occupied by another without the owner's or occupant's consent, except
on
unrestricted public parking, and is complained of by the owner or legal
occupant of the premises, the burden is put upon the person making the entry to
show that permission for the entry was given.
(Prior Code, § 11-208) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.09  PLACING SIGNS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to cut, carve, engrave, place, stick, tack,
paste, post, paint, mark, write, inscribe or print any sign, mark, poster,
picture, announcement, advertisement, effigy, bill placard, device or
inscription upon any public or private building, fence, street, sidewalk, curb,
pavement, bridge, viaduct, post, automobile, other vehicle or other property of
another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof.  This
section shall not prohibit sidewalk contractor's name plates.
(Prior Code, § 11-209) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.10  PUBLIC STREETS AND TREES.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Wilfully or wantonly cut, deface or in any way injure any tree or
sapling standing or growing in any of the streets, alleys or public places
within the city;
   (B)   Attach any guy wires, telephone, telegraph or electric wire or any
wire to any live tree;
   (C)   Dig any hole, ditch or trench in any public street, road, avenue or
alley, or any other public premises or ground within, belonging to or under the
supervision or control of the city;
   (D)   Take or remove any dirt, earth or any substance from any street, road,
alley or other public place in the city; or to cut, break or otherwise injure
any pavement, curb or gutter therein; or
   (E)   Construct a sidewalk on any city right of way or other public place or
connect any driveway to any street or other public place without first securing
a permit from the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-210) (Am. Ord. 1959, passed 7-17-18)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.11  TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   It is unlawful for any person to damage, molest, tamper with, remove,
relocate or destroy any utility service equipment or facilities, including but
not limited to the electric and telephone systems.  It is also unlawful for any
person to connect or attach any kind of pipe, wire or other contrivance to any
pipe, line, wire or other conductor carrying gas, water or electricity and
belonging to a public utility, whether publicly or privately owned, in a manner
as to enable him or her to consume or use the gas, water or electricity without
it passing through the meter or any other way so as to evade payment therefor.
(Prior Code, § 11-211) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.12  TAKING WATER; FIRE HYDRANTS.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to:
   (A)   Take any water from any hydrant, faucet or pipe in any park, street,
public room or building in the city, except for use on the premises where the
same is permitted to be taken;
   (B)   Conceal or in any manner hinder the accessibility or reduce the
effectiveness of any fire hydrant within the city; or
   (C)   Use, molest or connect any hose or any apparatus with any of the fire
hydrants within the city without first securing permission in writing from the
Chief of the Fire Department or Utility Superintendent, as authorized by the
Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 11-212) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.13  FIRE DEPARTMENT PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No person shall wilfully and without proper authority remove, take
away or conceal any tool, appliance or other article belonging to the Fire
Department or anything used in connection with the Fire Department.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to wilfully damage
in any manner any hose, fire engine or other apparatus belonging to the
Department or to damage any building used for housing the same.
(Prior Code, § 11-213) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.14  INJURING PARKS.
   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully and without authority cut, pull,
pluck or otherwise injure any flowers, flowering plants, shrubs or trees
growing in or around any park or public street within the city, or wilfully or
without authority tear down, remove, cut or otherwise injure or destroy any
stand, bench, seat or other property situated upon the park or ground.
(Prior Code, § 11-214) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.15  PILFERING OR SCAVENGING MATERIALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or
corporation to tamper with, pilfer or remove the contents of a container
intended for the disposal of solid waste without the express consent of the
owner or occupant of the property upon which the container for disposal of
solid waste is kept.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, containers for disposal of solid waste
shall include commercial dumpster bins, trash or garbage cans, plastic or paper
trash bags or other similar containers containing solid waste for disposal by
the city's solid waste service.
(Prior Code, § 11-215)  (Ord. 1516, passed 7-19-94) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.16  EMBEZZLEMENT.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      EMBEZZLEMENT.  The fraudulent appropriation of property by a person to
whom it has been entrusted.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to commit embezzlement.
(Ord. 1661, passed 10-16-01)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.17  RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful to buy, receive in any manner, upon any consideration,
any personal property valued at less than $1,000 that has been stolen,
embezzled, obtained by false pretenses or robbery, knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe the same to have been stolen, embezzled, obtained by false
pretense or robbery, or to conceal, withhold, or aid in concealing or
withholding such property from the owner.
   (B)   Any person who, without making reasonable inquiry, to buy, receive,
conceal, withhold or aid in concealing or withholding any property which has
been stolen, embezzled, obtained by false pretense or robbery, or otherwise
illegally obtained, under such circumstance as should cause such person to make
reasonable inquiry to ascertain that the person from whom such property was
bought or received had the legal right to sell or deliver it, shall be presumed
to have bought or received such property knowing it to have been stolen or
wrongfully obtained. This presumption may, however, be rebutted by proof.
(Prior Code, § 11-202) (Ord. 1947, passed 11-7-17)  Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provision, 21 O.S. § 1713
CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC HEALTH, WELFARE AND MORALS
Section
Disturbing the Peace; Disorderly Conduct
   
132.001   Disturbing the peace
   
132.002   Insulting signs, literature or language
   
132.003   Obscenity, threats, or harassment by telephone or electronic
communications
   
132.004   Storing or keeping explosives
   
132.005   Fireworks
   
132.006   Low-flying planes
   
132.007   Definitions
   
132.008   Disorderly conduct
   
132.009   Exemptions
Drug-Related Offenses
   
132.020   Definitions
   
132.021   Possession of controlled dangerous substance
   
132.022   Drug paraphernalia
   
132.023   Inhalation of glue or other substances; exceptions
   
132.024   Possession and sale of certain toxins
Alcohol-Related Offenses
   
132.035   Definition of alcoholic beverage
   
132.036   Misrepresentation of age prohibited
   
132.037   Consumption of alcoholic beverages
   
132.038   Public intoxication
   
132.039   Sale, delivery or furnishing alcoholic beverages to any person who is
intoxicated or who has been adjudged insane or mentally deficient
   
132.040   Possession/consumption of alcohol by a minor
   
132.041   Sale, delivery or furnishing alcoholic beverages to any person under
21 years of age
Tobacco-Related Offenses
   
132.050   Smoking; prohibitions on smoking; smoking in certain public places
   
132.051   Sale to minors prohibited
   
132.052   Purchase and possession by minors prohibited
   
132.053   Adoption of Prevention of Youth Access to Tobacco Act; penalties
Truancy
   
132.065   Refusal to compel child to attend school
   
132.066   Truancy prohibited
   
132.067   Temporary detention of truants
Solicitation
   
132.070   Aggressive solicitation prohibited
Disorderly Houses
   
132.075   Definition
   
132.076   Maintenance or lease
   
132.077   Residents and visitors to disorderly houses
Vagrancy; Loitering
   
132.090   Vagrancy
   
132.091   Loitering and sleeping on private property
   
132.092   Curfew
Deception
   
132.105   Definition; prohibited activity
   
132.106   Fraudulent use of credit cards
   
132.107   Obtaining food or services by false pretenses
   
132.108   False or bogus checks
   
132.109   Making false declaration of ownership to a pawnbroker
Harmful Material and Behavior
   
132.135   Displaying material harmful to minors
   
132.136   Prostitution
   
132.137   Sale of motor vehicles on Sunday
   
132.138   Contributing to the delinquency of a minor prohibited
Weapons and Firearms
   
132.150   Definitions
   
132.151   Carrying weapons; exceptions
   
132.152   Repealed
   
132.153   Repealed
   
132.154   Repealed
   
132.155   Repealed
   
132.156   Repealed
   
132.157   Firearms in vehicles
   
132.158   Repealed
   
132.159   Repealed
   
132.160   Discharge
   
132.161   Repealed
DISTURBING THE PEACE; DISORDERLY CONDUCT
§ 132.001  DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   It is unlawful to disturb or alarm the peace of another or others by
doing any of the acts set out in division (B) below.
   (B)   Disturbing the peace is the doing of any of the following in a manner
as would foreseeably alarm or disturb the peace of another or others:
      (1)   Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening,
violent or insulting language or conduct;
      (2)   Appearing in an intoxicated condition;
      (3)   Engaging in a fistic encounter;
      (4)   Lewdly exposing one's person or private parts thereof, in any
public place or in any place where there are present other persons to be
offended or annoyed thereby;
      (5)   Pointing any pistol or any other deadly weapon whether loaded or
not at any person or persons either in anger or otherwise;
      (6)   Holding an unlawful assembly of two or more persons, including
being assembled together and acting in concert, to do any unlawful act against
the peace or to the terror of others or preparing for or moving toward such
acts, or otherwise assembly unlawfully or riotously;
      (7)   Interrupting any lawful assembly of people by making noise, by
rude, indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language or
in any other manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing
distance thereof;
      (8)   Making unnecessarily loud, offensive noises;
      (9)   Disturbing any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for
religious worship by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by
profane, improper or loud language or in any other manner, either within the
place of worship or within hearing distance thereof; or
      (10)   Committing any other act in a manner as to unreasonably disturb or
warn the public.
(Prior Code, § 11-301) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.002  INSULTING SIGNS, LITERATURE OR LANGUAGE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within
the city, to display any sign, emblem, badge, flag or device, which in its
common acceptance is insulting, profane or abusive to the citizens of the city,
and which is calculated or of which the natural consequence is, to cause a
breach of the peace or an assault.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully use, utter, publish,
circulate or distribute any profane, violent, abusive or insulting language or
literature where:
         (a)   A natural consequence of the language or literature is to cause
a breach of the peace or an assault; or
         (b)   The language or literature, in its common acceptance is
calculated to cause a breach of the peace or an assault.
(Prior Code, § 11-302)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to utter, publish, distribute or
circulate any literature or language within the corporate limits of the city
that casts profane ridicule on any religion, which is calculated or where the
natural consequence is to cause a breach of the peace or an assault.  (Prior
Code, § 11-303)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.003  OBSCENITY, THREATS, OR HARASSMENT BY TELEPHONE OR ELECTRONIC
COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person who, by means of a telecommunication
or other electronic communication device, willfully either:
      (1)   Makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal which is
obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, or indecent;
      (2)   Makes a telecommunication or other electronic communication with
intent to terrify, intimidate, or harass, or threaten to inflict injury or
physical harm to any person or property of that person;
      (3)   Makes a telecommunication or other electronic communication,
whether or not conversation ensues, with intent to put the party called in fear
of physical harm or death;
      (4)   Makes a telecommunication or other electronic communication,
whether or not conversation ensues, without disclosing the identity of the
person making the call or communication and with intent to annoy, abuse,
threaten, or harass any person at the called number;
      (5)   Knowingly permits any telecommunication or other electronic
communication under the control of the person to be used for any purpose
prohibited by this section; and
      (6)   In conspiracy or concerted action with other persons, makes
repeated calls or electronic communications or simultaneous calls or electronic
communications solely to harass any person at the called number(s).
   (B)   As used in this section, TELECOMMUNICATION and ELECTRONIC
COMMUNICATION mean any type of telephonic, electronic, or radio communications,
or transmission of signs, signals, data, writings, images, and sounds, or
intelligence of any nature by telephone, including cellular telephones, wire,
cable, radio, electromagnetic, photoelectronic, or photo-optical system or the
creation, display, management, storage, processing, transmission, or
distribution of images, text, voice, video, or data by wire, cable, or wireless
means, including the Internet.  The term includes:
      (1)   A communication initiated by electronic mail, instant message,
network call, or facsimile machine; and
      (2)   A communication made to a pager.
   (C)   Use of a telephone or other electronic communications facility under
this section shall include all use made of such a facility between the points
of origin and reception.  Any offense under this section is a continuing
offense and shall be deemed to have been committed at either the place of
origin or the place of reception.
   (D)   Any person who is convicted of the provisions of division (A) of this
section shall be guilty of an offense punishable as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 11-304)  (Ord. 1522, passed 10-4-94; Am. Ord. 1854, passed 7-19-
11) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.004  STORING OR KEEPING EXPLOSIVES.
   It is unlawful for any person to store or keep within the city any
nitroglycerin, dynamite, gunpowder or any other highly explosive material or
substance, except that gunpowder may be kept in quantities of not to exceed
five pounds where the same is securely kept.
(Prior Code, § 11-305) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.005  FIREWORKS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FIREWORKS.  Firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, roman candles, toy pistols,
toy cannons, detonating cones, blank cartridges and other devices or intended
for pyrotechnic display.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, display for sale, sell
or purchase fireworks of any kind, character or description within the city
limits.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to use, fire or discharge any fireworks,
as described in division (A) above, within the limits of the city.
   (D)   The sale, purchase or firing of fireworks of any kind as provided in
this section is hereby declared to be a danger to the peace, health and safety
of the inhabitants of the city and is also hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, in addition to the penalties provided.
   (E)   This section shall not be applicable to pyrotechnical fireworks which
may be authorized by resolution of the City Council when under the control of
qualified individuals and the time, place and manner of the display is approved
by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 11-306) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Bottle rockets prohibited by state law, see      68 O.S. § 1624
   Municipal power to regulate, see 11 O.S. § 22-110
   State fireworks licenses, see 68 O.S. §§ 1621 et seq.
§ 132.006  LOW-FLYING PLANES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate, drive or propel
in any manner any kind or character of airplane over the city at an altitude
less than 1,000 feet, except that this section shall not apply where a person
is endeavoring to land or is taking the air from the landing place close to or
adjacent to the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-320) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.007  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INCITE A RIOT.  Urging or instigating other persons to riot, but shall not
be deemed to mean the mere oral or written advocacy of ideas or expression of
belief, not involving advocacy of any act or acts of violence or assertion of
the rightness of, or the right to commit, any act or acts.
   PUBLIC PLACE.
      (1)   Any place to which the general public has access and a right to
resort for business, entertainment or other purpose, but does not necessarily
mean a place devoted solely to public use.
      (2)   It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store,
shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business, and also public grounds,
areas or parks.
   RIOT.  A public disturbance involving an act or acts of violence by one or
more persons part of an assemblage of three or more persons, which act or acts
shall constitute a clear and present danger of, or shall result in, damage or
injury to the property of any other person or to the person of any other
individual or a threat or threats of the commission of an act or acts of
violence by one or more persons part of an assemblage of three or more persons
having, individually or collectively, the ability of immediate execution of the
threat or threats, where the performance of the threatened act or acts of
violence would constitute a clear and present danger of, or would result in,
damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the person or any
other individual.
(Prior Code, § 11-322)  (Ord. 1526, passed 11-1-94)
§ 132.008  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose of
causing public danger, alarm, disorder, nuisance or if the conduct is likely to
cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, he or she wilfully does any
of the following acts in a public place:
   (A)   Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another
whereby that other is placed in danger of his or her life, limb or health;
   (B)   Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another where
by the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or
damaged;
   (C)   Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so
as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another;
   (D)   Interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of
violence;
   (E)   Obstructs, either singly or together with other persons, the flow of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear the public way when
ordered to do so by the city police or other lawful authority known to be such;
   (F)   Is in a public place under the influence of an alcohol or drug in a
condition as to be unable to exercise care for his or her own safety or the
safety of others;
   (G)   Resists or obstructs the performance of duties by city police or any
other authorized official of the city, when known to be an official;
   (H)   Incites, attempts to incite, or is involved in attempting to incite a
riot;
   (I)   Addresses abusive language or threats to any member of the City Police
Department, any other authorized official of the city who is engaged in the
lawful performance of his or her duties, or any other person when the words
have a direct tendency to cause acts of violence;  (Words merely causing
displeasure, annoyance or resentment are not prohibited.)
   (J)   Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of
another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive
condition;
   (K)   Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable noise
or disturbance to the annoyance of any other persons nearby, or near to any
public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square or common, whereby the
public peace is broken or disturbed, or the traveling public annoyed;
   (L)   Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a police officer, when
known to be an official, where one or more persons are committing acts of
disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and the public health and safety
is immanently threatened;
(Prior Code, § 11-323)  (Ord. 1526, passed 11-1-94) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.009  EXEMPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not be construed to suppress the right to lawful
assembly, picketing, public speaking or other lawful means of expressing public
opinion nor in contravention of other laws.
(Prior Code, § 11-324)  (Ord. 1526, passed 11-1-94)
   DRUG-RELATED OFFENSES
§ 132.020  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE.  Any drug, substance, or immediate
precursor, other than marijuana, included in Schedule I, II, III, IV or V of
the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act (63 O.S. §§ 2-101, et seq.),
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Hallucinogenic substances, including mescaline, psilocybin, and
various types of methoxyamphetamines.
      (2)   Stimulants such as amphetamines and methamphetamines.
      (3)   Barbiturates and other depressants such as amobarbital,
secobarbital, pentobarbital, phenobarbital, methaqualone, phencyclidine, and
diazepam.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. Any equipment, product, or material of any kind which is
primarily intended or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, concealing, producing, processing, preparing, injecting, ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance,
possession of which is unlawful under this chapter. It includes, but is not
limited to, items intended or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cocaine, PCP, methamphetamine, or amphetamines into the
human body, such as:
      (1)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal
bowls;
      (2)   Water pipes;
      (3)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
      (4)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
      (5)   Roach clips;
      (6)   Miniature spoons with level capacities of one-tenth cubic
centimeter or less;
      (7)   Chamber pipes;
      (8)   Carburetor pipes;
      (9)   Electric pipes;
      (10)   Air-driven pipes;
      (11)   Chillums;
      (12)   Bongs;
      (13)   Ice pipes or chillers;
      (14)   Wired cigarette papers; or
      (15)   Cocaine freebase kits.
   MARIJUANA. All parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa L., whether growing or
not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such
plant, its seeds or resin. This definition shall not include the mature stalks
of such plant; fiber produced from such stalks; oil, cake made from the seeds
of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, sale, derivative, mixture or
preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom),
fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of
germination.
   PRACTITIONER:
      (1)   A physician, dentist, podiatrist, veterinarian, scientific
investigator, or other person who is authorized by state or federal law to
distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to, use for scientific
purposes or administer a controlled dangerous substance in the course of
professional practice or research in this state; or
      (2)   A pharmacy, hospital, laboratory, or other institution authorized
by state or federal law to distribute, dispense, or conduct research with
respect to use for scientific purposes or administer marijuana or a controlled
dangerous substance in the course of a registered professional practice or
research in this state.
   SIMULATED CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE. Any substance which is not a
controlled substance nor marijuana, but which  identifies itself by using a
common name or slang term associated with marijuana or with substances
identified as a controlled dangerous substance, or which indicates on its label
or accompanying promotional material or concerning which it is represented that
the product simulates the effect of a substance, or which by appearance, making
or packaging would lead a reasonable person to believe the substance was
marijuana or a controlled substance.
(Prior Code, § 11-423)  (Am. Ord. 1977, passed 9-3-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Controlled dangerous substances, see 63 O.S. § 2-101
§ 132.021  POSSESSION OF CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally
possess any controlled dangerous substance or simulated controlled dangerous
substance, other than marijuana, unless such substance was obtained directly,
or pursuant to a valid prescription or order, from a practitioner, while acting
in the course of his professional practice. Any person who violates this
subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $750, plus costs, or by imprisonment of not more than 60 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally
possess marijuana without an Oklahoma state issued medical marijuana license.
Any person who violates this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $400, plus costs.
(Prior Code, § 11-424)  (Am. Ord. 1977, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 132.022  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   No person shall use or possess drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest,
inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled dangerous
substance, other than medical marijuana, in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Dangerous Substances Act, 63 O.S. §§ 2-101, et seq. Any person who violates
this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $400.
   (B)   No person shall deliver, sell, possess or manufacture drug
paraphernalia knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know,
it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled dangerous substance, other than medical marijuana, in
violation of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, 63 O.S. §§ 2-101,
et seq. Any person who violates this subsection shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $400.
   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) shall not be applicable to practitioners to the
extent such paraphernalia is used as a part of their lawful practice of the
profession.
   (D)   Divisions (A) and (B) shall not be applicable to the possession of
paraphernalia by persons involved in the medical or veterinary equipment supply
business, where such possession is a necessary and appropriate part of
servicing lawful medical or veterinary practitioners.
   (E)   In determining whether an item constitutes drug paraphernalia, in
addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following may be
considered:
      (1)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the item concerning
its use;
      (2)   Descriptive materials accompanying the item which explain or depict
its use;
      (3)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      (4)   The manner in which the item is displayed for sale;
      (5)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the item, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the item
(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      (7)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the item in the
community; and
      (8)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   (F)   Any device used for the consumption of medical marijuana shall be
considered legal to be sold, manufactured, distributed, and possessed.
(Prior Code, § 11-425) (Am. Ord. 1822, passed 5-19-2009; Am. Ord. 1977, passed
9-3-2019)
§ 132.023  INHALATION OF GLUE AND OTHER SUBSTANCES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall deliberately smell, inhale, breathe, drink or
otherwise consume any compound, liquid, chemical, narcotic, drug or any other
substance or chemical containing any ketones, aldehydes, organic acetones,
ether, chlorinated hydrocarbons, such as gasoline, glue, fingernail polish,
adhesive cement, mucilage, dope or any other substance or combination thereof
containing solvents releasing toxic vapors which can cause conditions of
intoxication, inebriation, excitement, elation, stupefaction, paralysis,
irrationality, dulling of the brain or nervous system or any other changing,
distorting or disturbing of the eyesight, thinking processes, judgement,
balance or coordination of the person.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any person who inhales, breathes or
drinks or otherwise consumes any of the substances specified in division (A)
above pursuant to the direction of prescription of any licensed doctor, dentist
or podiatrist, nor to the consumption of intoxicating liquor in a place or
manner as authorized by law.
(Prior Code, § 11-426) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.024  POSSESSION AND SALE OF CERTAIN TOXINS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, distribute or for any
person to inhale or ingest, any compound, liquid or chemical commonly known as
“locker room” or “rush” which contains alkyl nitrites, isopropyl nitrite, butyl
nitrites, consisting mainly of isobutyl nitrites, and/or any of its isomer or
analogues, or any similar compound, liquid or chemical for the purpose of
inducing a condition of intoxication or of distortion or disturbance of the
auditory, visual or mental processes.
(Prior Code, § 11-427)  (Ord. 1450, passed 9-5-89) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
ALCOHOL-RELATED OFFENSES
§ 132.035  DEFINITION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.
   For purposes of §§
132.035 through
132.041 of the Bethany Code of Ordinances, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE shall be defined
as alcohol, spirits, beer and wine, and also every liquid or solid, patented or
not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as
a beverage by human beings. Alcohol, spirits, beer, and wine shall have the
definitions as set forth in §
111.01 of the Bethany Code of Ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 11-411)  (Ord. 1258, passed 10-18-83; Am. Ord. 1538, passed 9-5-
95; Am. Ord. 1572, passed 7-15-97; Am. Ord. 1975, passed 8-20-2019)  Penalty,
see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37 O.S. §§ 501 et seq.
§ 132.036  MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE.
   No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his or her age in writing
or by presenting false documentation of age for the purpose of inducing any
person to sell or serve him or her alcoholic beverages. Any person who violates
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine
of no more than $50.
(Prior Code, § 11-412)  (Ord. 1258, passed 10-18-83; Am. Ord. 1975, passed 8-
20-2019)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.037  CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   No person shall drink or otherwise consume any intoxicating liquor,
intoxicating substance, or intoxicating compound of any kind, or inhale glue,
paint or other intoxicating substance, and to disturb the peace of any person
in any public place, or in or upon any passenger coach, streetcar, or in or
upon any other vehicle commonly used for the transportation of passengers, or
in or about any depot, platform, waiting station or room unless authorized by
the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. Any person who violates this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $10 nor more than $100, or by imprisonment for not less than five
days nor more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 11-413)  (Am. Ord. 1975, passed 8-20-2019)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.038  PUBLIC INTOXICATION.
   (A)   No person shall be drunk or intoxicated and disturb the peace of any
person in any public or private road, or in any passenger coach, streetcar or
any public place or building, or at any public gathering. Any person who
violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by
a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100, or by imprisonment for not less
than five days nor more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (B)   An intoxicated person in a public place who appears to be in need of
help, if the person consents to the offered help, may be assisted to his or her
home, an alternative facility pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma
Alcohol Drug Abuse Services Act, or to an approved treatment facility by a
police officer.
   (C)   A person who appears to be intoxicated, and as a result of such
intoxication is unconscious in a public place or reasonably appears to be in
danger of harming himself or herself or others, may be taken into protective
custody by a peace officer and immediately brought to an approved treatment
facility for medical or nonmedical detoxification.
(Prior Code, § 11-414)  (Am. Ord. 1975, passed 8-20-2019)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.039  SALE, DELIVERY OR FURNISHING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO ANY PERSON WHO
IS INTOXICATED OR WHO HAS BEEN ADJUDGED INSANE OR MENTALLY DEFICIENT.
   No person shall knowingly sell, deliver or furnish alcoholic beverages to
any person who is intoxicated or who has been adjudged insane or mentally
deficient. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500, or by
imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 11-415)  (Am. Ord. 1975, passed 8-20-2019)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.040  POSSESSION/CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL BY A MINOR.
   No person under 21 years of age shall, in any public or private place
possess, consume or have control over any alcoholic beverage. Any person who
violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by
a fine of no more than $50.
(Ord. 1697, passed 6-3-03; Am. Ord. 1975, passed 8-20-2019)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.041  SALE, DELIVERY OR FURNISHING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO ANY PERSON UNDER
21 YEARS OF AGE.
   No person shall knowingly sell, deliver or furnish alcoholic beverages to
any person under 21 years of age. Any person who violates this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500,
or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(Ord. 1699, passed 7-15-03; Am. Ord. 1975, passed 8-20-2019)  Penalty, see § 
10.99
TOBACCO-RELATED OFFENSES
§ 132.050 SMOKING; PROHIBITIONS ON SMOKING; SMOKING IN CERTAIN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      INDOOR AREA. Any enclosed area used or visited by employees or the
public, at all times, regardless of whether work is being performed. INDOOR
AREA includes work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms,
classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, any other spaces used  or visited by
employees, as well as all space between a floor and ceiling that is
predominantly or totally enclosed by walls or windows, regardless of doors,
doorways, open or closed windows, stairways, or the like.
      MUNICIPAL PROPERTY. All buildings, indoor areas, and outdoor areas,
including but not limited to recreational areas, and other property, or
portions thereof, owned or operated by the City of Bethany, including but not
limited to vehicles and equipment owned by the municipality.
      OUTDOOR AREA. Any area that is not an indoor area, and includes outdoor
recreational areas.
      SMOKING. The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or
other lighted smoking device.
      TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for
human consumption. TOBACCO PRODUCT does not include any product approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation
product.
      VAPOR PRODUCT. Any noncombustible product, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that employs a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic
circuit, or other mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to
produce a vapor in a solution or other form. VAPOR PRODUCT shall include any
vapor cartridge or other container with or without nicotine or other form that
is intended to be used with an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any
vapor cartridge or other container of a solution, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette,
electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, or electronic device.
   (B)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   Smoking tobacco products is prohibited in all places in which
smoking tobacco products is prohibited by Oklahoma state law.
      (2)   Using tobacco products and vapor products is prohibited on all
municipal property, indoor and outdoor, including parks and recreational areas.
      (3)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person or entity from
prohibiting the use of tobacco products or vapor products on their property,
even if the use of tobacco products or vapor products is not otherwise
prohibited in that area.
      (4)   No person or entity shall knowingly permit the use of tobacco
products or vapor products in an area that is under the control of that person
or entity and in which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is
prohibited by law.
      (5)   No person or entity shall permit the placement of ash receptacles,
such as ash trays or ash cans, within an area under the control of that person
or entity and in which smoking is prohibited by law. However, the presence of
ash receptacles shall not be a defense to a charge of the use of tobacco
products or vapor products in violation of any provision of this chapter.
      (6)   No person shall dispose of tobacco product or vapor product waste
within an area in which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is
prohibited.
      (7)   No person or entity shall intimidate, threaten, or otherwise
retaliate against another person or entity that seeks to attain compliance with
this chapter.
   (C)   Required signs.
      (1)   The person or entity that has legal or de facto control of an area
in which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is prohibited by this
chapter shall post a clear, conspicuous, and unambiguous sign at each point of
entry to the area, and in at least one other conspicuous point within the area.
      (2)   For restrictions on the use of tobacco products or vapor products
in indoor areas, the sign or decal shall be at least four inches by two inches
in size and shall clearly state that smoking or tobacco use is prohibited or
that a tobacco-free environment is provided. For restrictions on the use of
tobacco products or vapor products in outdoor areas, signs shall be weather-
resistant, at least 15 inches by 15 inches in size, with lettering of at least
one inch, and shall clearly state that smoking or tobacco use is prohibited or
that a tobacco-free environment is provided.
      (3)   For purposes of this section, the City Manager or his/her designee
shall be responsible for the posting of signs on municipal property, both
indoor and outdoor.
      (4)   Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs
shall not be a defense to a charge of the use of tobacco products or vapor
products in violation of any other provision of this chapter.
   (D)   Penalties and enforcement.
      (1)   Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the City
of Bethany. In addition, any peace officer or code enforcement official may
enforce this chapter.
      (2)   Any person who knowingly violates this chapter shall be punished by
a citation and fine of not less than $10 and not more than $100 in accordance
with the Bethany Municipal Code.
      (3)   The possession of a lighted tobacco product in violation of this
chapter is a nuisance.
      (4)   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in
addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.
      (5)   Each instance of tobacco product or vapor product use in violation
of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
      (6)   The use of a vapor product in violation of this chapter is a
nuisance.
      (7)   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of
any provision of this chapter regarding tobacco product or vapor product use
shall also constitute a violation of this chapter.
      (8)   In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other
law, any violation of this chapter regarding tobacco product or vapor product
use may be remedied by the City Attorney, including, but not limited to,
administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, criminal code
enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief.
   (E)   Statutory construction.  It is the intent of the City Council of the
City of Bethany to supplement applicable state and federal law and not to
duplicate or contradict such law.
(Prior Code, § 11-407)  (Am. Ord. 1789, passed 8-7-07; Am. Ord. 1956, passed 4-
17-18)
Statutory reference:
   Smoking prohibited in public places; regulations, see 21 O.S. § 1247
§ 132.051  SALE TO MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Any person who shall furnish to any minor by gift, sale or otherwise
any cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, chewing tobacco or any other
form of tobacco or vapor product shall be guilty of an offense.
   (B)   Any person who shall aid or assist any minor in purchasing tobacco or
vapor products shall be guilty of an offense.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: TOBACCO
PRODUCTS AND VAPOR PRODUCTS shall have the same meaning as provided in the
Oklahoma Youth Access to Tobacco Act.
(Prior Code, § 11-407.1)  (Ord. 1506, passed 8-3-93; Am. Ord. 1892, passed 6-3-
15)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.052  PURCHASE AND POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person who is under 18 years of age to
purchase, accept receipt of or have in their possession a tobacco product or
vapor product, or to present or offer to any person any purported proof of age
which is false, fraudulent or not actually his or her own for purposes of
purchasing tobacco or vapor products.
      (2)   It shall not be a violation of this section for a persons to handle
the tobacco or vapor product when required in the performance of the person’s
duties.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND VAPOR PRODUCTS shall have the same meaning as
provided in the Oklahoma Youth Access to Tobacco Act.
(Prior Code, § 11-407.2)  (Ord. 1560, passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 1892, passed 6-
3-15)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.053  ADOPTION OF PREVENTION OF YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO ACT; PENALTIES.
   The provisions of the Oklahoma Prevention of Youth Access to Tobacco Act
(hereinafter Act), as codified at 37 O.S. §§ 600.1 – 600.12, as now existing
and as hereinafter amended are adopted by reference as if set out in full
herein. A violation of the Oklahoma Prevention of Youth Access to Tobacco Act
as adopted by this section shall be punishable as an offense with a fine not
exceeding the maximum fine imposed by the Act.
(Ord. 1705, passed 10-21-03)
   TRUANCY
§ 132.065  REFUSAL TO COMPEL CHILD TO ATTEND SCHOOL.
   It shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian or other person having custody
of a child who is over the age of six years and under the age of 18 years to
neglect or refuse to cause or compel the child to attend and comply with the
rules of some public, private or other school unless other means of education
are provided for the full term the schools of the district are in session, or
the child is excused as provided in 70 O.S. §§ 10-105 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 11-404)  (Ord. 1561, passed 11-5-96) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.066  TRUANCY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any child who is over the age of 12 years and under
the age of 18 years and who has not finished four years of high school work to
neglect or refuse to attend and comply with the rules of some public, private
or other school, or receive an education by other means for the full term the
schools of the district are in session unless the child is excused from
attendance by the provisions of 70 O.S. §§ 10-105 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 11-405)  (Ord. 1561, passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 1744, passed 3-1-
05) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.067  TEMPORARY DETENTION OF TRUANTS.
   (A)   Any officer of the Police Department may temporarily detain and assume
temporary custody of any child subject to compulsory full-time education,
during hours in which school is actually in session, who is found away from the
home of the child, and who is absent from school without lawful excuse within
the school district if the school district has previously approved the
temporary custody and detention.
   (B)   The Police Officer temporarily detaining and assuming temporary
custody of a child pursuant to this section shall immediately deliver the
child, either to the parent, guardian or other person having custody or control
of the child, or to the school from which the child is absent without valid
excuse, or to a non-secure youth service or community service approved by the
school district.
(Prior Code, § 11-406)  (Ord. 1561, passed 11-5-96)
SOLICITATION
§ 132.070  AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions.  For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      AGGRESSIVE MANNER.
         (a)   Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person
before, during, or after soliciting if that conduct is intended or is likely to
cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, or
damage to or loss of property, or otherwise be intimidated into giving money or
other thing of value.
         (b)   Continuing to solicit from a person after that person has given
a negative response to such soliciting.
         (c)   Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another
person without that person’s consent in the course of soliciting.
         (d)   Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free
passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing
a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical
contact.
         (e)   Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited.
         (f)   Following the person being solicited with the intent of asking
that person for money or other things of value.
         (g)   Speaking in a volume unreasonably loud under the circumstances.
         (h)   Soliciting money from anyone who is waiting in line for entry to
a building or for another purpose.
   AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE. A device, linked to a financial institution’s
account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including but not
limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries,
and mortgage and loan payments.
   AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY. The area comprised of one or more
automatic teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to
banking customers after regular banking hours.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any banking corporation, credit union, or similar
institution.
   PUBLIC PLACE. A place where a governmental entity has title, to which the
public or a substantial group of persons has access, including but not limited
to any street, highway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school,
place of amusement, park, or playground.
   SOLICITING. Asking for money or objects of value, with the intention that
the money or object be transferred at that time and in that place. SOLICITING
shall include using the spoken, written, or printed word, bodily gestures,
signs, or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of
money or other thing of value, or soliciting the sale of goods or services.
   (B)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   No person shall solicit in an aggressive manner in any public
place.
      (2)   No person shall solicit on private or residential property without
permission from the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such
property.
      (3)   No person shall solicit within 20 feet of public restrooms.
      (4)   No person shall solicit within 20 feet of any entrance or exit of
any financial institution or check cashing business, or within 20 feet of any
automated teller machine without the consent of the owner of the property or
another person legally in possession of such facilities. Provided, however,
that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller
machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of
the facility.
      (5)   No person shall solicit an operator or other occupant of a motor
vehicle while such vehicle is located on any street, for the purpose of
performing or offering to perform a service in connection with such vehicle or
otherwise soliciting the sale of goods or services. Provided, however, that
this division (B)(5) shall not apply to services rendered in connection with
emergency repairs requested by the operator or passenger of such vehicle.
      (6)   No person shall solicit from any operator or occupant of a motor
vehicle on a public street in exchange for blocking, occupying, or reserving a
public parking space, or directing the operator or occupant to a public parking
space.
      (7)   No person shall solicit by stating that funds are needed to meet a
specific need, when the solicitor as the funds to meet that need, does not
intend to use funds to meet that need, or does not have that need.
      (8)   No person shall solicit within six feet of an entrance to a
building.
      (9)   No person shall solicit within 20 feet of any pay telephone;
provided, that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or
other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of
the telephone booth or facility.
(Ord. 1763, passed 5-2-06)  Penalty, see §10.99
   DISORDERLY HOUSES
§ 132.075  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISORDERLY HOUSE.  Any structure or vehicle by which the peace, comfort,
health, welfare or decency of the public is disturbed by reason of the people
therein committing or resorting to any of the following acts:
      (1)   The sale, distribution, possession or use of any controlled
dangerous substance, the sale, distribution, possession or use of which is
declared unlawful by state statute;
      (2)   The violation of any of the ordinances of the city or statutes of
the state regulating the sale, distribution, possession or use of alcoholic
beverages including beer containing more than 0.5% alcohol by volume;
      (3)   The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by the state
statute or city ordinance including, but not limited to soliciting for purposes
of prostitution; or
      (4)   The violation of any state statute or city ordinance prohibiting
gambling.
(Prior Code, § 11-408)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal authority to regulate, see 11 O.S. § 22-109
§ 132.076  MAINTENANCE OR LEASE.
   (A)   No person shall keep, maintain, aid, abet or assist in keeping and
maintaining a disorderly house.
   (B)   No owner, lessee, lessor or other person, partnership or corporation
having control over any house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home
or recreational vehicle shall knowingly use, lease, sub-lease or otherwise
permit the use of same for the purpose of keeping therein any disorderly house
and knowing or ascertaining that the house, building, structure, tent, vehicle,
mobile home or recreational vehicle is so occupied as a disorderly house, no
persons, partnership or corporation shall continue to grant permission to so
use the premises as a disorderly house.
(Prior Code, § 11-409) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.077  RESIDENTS AND VISITORS TO DISORDERLY HOUSES.
   No person shall knowingly reside in, enter into or remain in a disorderly
house.  In any prosecution for violation of this section, the city shall have
the burden to prove the knowledge by direct evidence only and not by
circumstantial evidence.  This section shall not apply to physicians or
officers in the discharge of their professional or official duties.
(Prior Code, § 11-410) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
   VAGRANCY; LOITERING
§ 132.090  VAGRANCY.
   (A)   It is unlawful to be a vagrant in the limits of the city.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      VAGRANT.  Any person who loiters or remains in or wanders about a public
or private place for any of the following purposes:
         (a)   For the purpose of gambling with cards, dice or other gambling
paraphernalia;
         (b)   For the purpose of engaging in prostitution or soliciting
prostitution or soliciting for an act of lewdness;
         (c)   For the purpose of engaging in theft, or breaking and entering
any building, property or automobile of another;
         (d)   For the purpose of injuring, destroying, molesting or defacing
any property of another;
         (e)   For the purpose of assaulting any person;
         (f)   For the purpose of begging or soliciting alms, provided that
this section shall not apply to persons soliciting alms for bona fide
religious, charitable or eleemosynary organizations with the authorization of
such organizations; or
         (g)   For the purpose of selling, purchasing, trading or otherwise
exchanging, procuring or making available illegal drugs or contraband.
(Prior Code, § 11-401) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Municipal authority to  regulate vagrancy, see 11 O.S. § 22-123
§ 132.091  LOITERING AND SLEEPING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and
sunrise, to sleep on any street, in any other public place or on any property
of another without the express or tacit consent of the owner or person in
charge of the place.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to sleep in any
public park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. in the limits of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 11-402) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.092  CURFEW.
   (A)   The Council of the city hereby makes the following findings.
      (1)   The city has a compelling governmental interest in restricting
certain late-night activities of juveniles in order to protect the health,
safety and welfare of juveniles and other persons and their property.
      (2)   The occurrences of juvenile crime have continued to substantially
increase over the past several years.
      (3)   The intent of this section is to narrowly tailor the restriction of
late-night activities of juveniles to the extent juvenile crime and violence is
reduced and juveniles as well as other citizens and their property are
protected from harm.
      (4)   Juveniles are particularly vulnerable to the influence of persons
who do not have the best interest of the juveniles in mind, due to the
inability of juveniles to make important or critical decisions in an informed
and mature manner and to avoid choices that could be detrimental to their
health, safety or welfare.
      (5)   The city and many public-spirited citizens have expended a great
deal of time and energy in trying to deter criminal conduct, assist parents and
protect juveniles.
      (6)   A concern has arisen in the community that certain activities by
juveniles and adults during the night hours endanger the health, safety and
welfare of other persons and their property.
      (7)   The city does not desire to interfere with the parent-child or
parent-juvenile relationship or the parental right to raise their children or
juveniles.
      (8)   While the city recognizes parents and/or responsible adults need
wide latitude in supervising their children, the city desires to protect
juveniles from nocturnal dangers and encourage parental responsibility.
      (9)   The city desires to assist the state in the effective communication
and documentation of juvenile offenses, the prevention of juvenile crime, the
prevention of child and juvenile abduction, the adoption of programs to assist
in the welfare, development and counseling of juveniles.
   (B)   The public purpose of this section is to protect juveniles from
nocturnal dangers, enhance parental supervision and responsibility for
juveniles, and protect the public at large.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CURFEW HOURS.
         (a)   12:01    a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday or Friday; and
         (b)   1:00    a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.
      EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action.  The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, natural disaster, automobile accident or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      ESTABLISHMENT.  Any privately-owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place
of amusement or entertainment.
      GUARDIAN.
         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the GUARDIAN of the person
of a juvenile; or
         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a juvenile has been placed
by a court.
      JUVENILE.  Any person under 18 years of age.
      KNOWINGLY PERMIT.  The parent, other responsible adult and/or operator as
defined herein is aware of the fact the juvenile is in violation of the curfew
hours or that said person by exercise of reasonable care would have known that
the juvenile is in violation of the curfew hours.
      OPERATOR.  Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment.  The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
      PARENT.  A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent
of another person.
      PUBLIC PLACE.  Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to streets, highways,
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and retail establishments.
      REMAIN.
         (a)   To linger or stay; or
         (b)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police
officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
      RESPONSIBLE ADULT.  Any person having, assuming or charged with permanent
and/or temporary care and/or custody of a juvenile, including, but not limited
to:
         (a)   Any legal guardian or adult exercising legal guardianship over a
juvenile;
         (b)   An adult who stands in loco parentis to a juvenile;
         (c)   Any person to whom legal custody of a juvenile has been given by
order of a court;
         (d)   Any adult who has, assumes or is charged with the care and/or
custody of a juvenile at the request of or on behalf of a parent, guardian,
loco parentis or person to whom legal custody has been given by order of a
court;
         (e)   Any adult who has, assumes or is charged with the care and/or
custody of a juvenile at the requests of or on behalf of another parent.
   (D)   (1)   A juvenile commits an offense if he or she remains in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment within the corporate city limits
during curfew hours.
      (2)   A parent and/or other responsible adult of a juvenile commits an
offense if:
         (a)   He or she knowingly permits or allows the juvenile to remain in
any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the corporate
city limits during curfew hours; and
         (b)   The parent and/or other responsible adult of a juvenile has
twice previously acted within any consecutive six-month period so as to
knowingly permit or allow said juvenile to remain in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the corporate city limits during curfew
hours.
         (c)   Every subsequent violation thereof will constitute a separate
violation.
      (3)   The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he or she  knowingly permits or allows a juvenile to remain upon the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
   (E)   (1)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (D)(3) above that
the juvenile was at the time in question:
         (a)   Accompanied by the juvenile's parent or responsible adult;
         (b)   On an errand at the direction of the juvenile's parent or
responsible adult, without any detour or stop;
         (c)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
         (d)   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
         (e)   Involved in an emergency;
         (f)   On the sidewalk abutting the juvenile's residence or abutting
the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the juvenile's presence;
         (g)   Attending, going to or returning home, without any detour or
stop, from an official school, religious or other recreational activity
supervised by adults or an event sponsored by the city, a civic organization or
another similar entity that takes responsibility for the juvenile;
         (h)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
or the Oklahoma Constitution; or
         (i)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority
removed in accordance with state law.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (D)(3) above that the
owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police
Department that a juvenile was present on the premises of the establishment
during curfew hours and refused to leave.
   (F)   (1)   Before taking any enforcement action under this section a police
officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the
public place.
      (2)   The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this
section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and
that based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in division (E)
above is present.
      (3)   Absent an interlocal agreement with the District Court for the
Municipal Court to exercise jurisdiction over juveniles under 18 years of age
under this section, pursuant to 10 O.S. § 7303-1.2, as amended by H.B. 2640 of
the 1994 regular session of the State Legislature, the Municipal Court must
refer all alleged juvenile violations to the Juvenile Bureau of the District
Attorney's Office.
   (G)   (1)   A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued or permitted.
      (2)   Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine.
      (3)   The Court may require community service work prescribed by the
Court in lieu of a fine if the product of multiplying the number of minimum
hours of community service work by the prevailing wage does not result in a
number which exceeds the maximum fine authorized by law.
      (4)   The Municipal Court's jurisdiction over a juvenile who violates
this section shall be expressly subject to 10 O.S., as amended by H.B. 2640 of
the 1994 regular session of the State Legislature.
(Prior Code, § 11-403)  (Ord. 1530, passed 1-25-95)
   DECEPTION
§ 132.105  DEFINITION; PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether
impersonation, misrepresentation or otherwise, when the deception results in or
contributes to the loss, damage, harm or injury of the person deceived or of a
third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver.
(Prior Code, § 11-416) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.106  FRAUDULENT USE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (A)   Any person who knowingly uses or attempts to use in person or by
telephone for the purpose of obtaining credit, or for purchase of goods,
property or services, or for the purpose of obtaining cash advances in lieu of
these terms, or to deposit, obtain or transfer funds, either a credit card or a
debit card which has not been issued to the person or which is not used with
the consent of the person to whom issued, or a credit or debit card which has
been revoked or canceled by the issuer of the card and actual notice has been
given to the person, or a credit or debit card which is false, counterfeit or
non- existent is guilty of an offense, where the value of the credit, goods,
property or services is not more than $1,000.
   (B)   The terms CREDIT CARD and DEBIT CARD shall have the meanings as
defined in 21 O.S. § 1550.1.
(Prior Code, § 11-417)  (Ord. 1522, passed 10-4-95; Am. Ord. 1661, passed 10-
16-01; Am. Ord. 1946, passed 11-7-17)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.107  OBTAINING FOOD OR SERVICES BY FALSE PRETENSES.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who shall obtain food, lodging, shelter, services or
other accommodations at any hotel, inn, restaurant, apartment house, boarding
house, rooming house or motel with intent to deprive the owner or keeper
thereof, if the value of the food, lodging, services or other accommodations be
of the value of $1,000 or less, shall be guilty of an offense.
      (2)   Proof that the lodging, food, services or other accommodations were
obtained by false pretense, or that the person gave a check on which payment
was refused, or that he left the facility where the accommodations were
provided without payment or offering to pay or that he or she registered under
a fictitious name shall be prima facie proof of the intent to defraud.  This
section shall not apply where there has been an agreement in writing for delay
of payment.
(Prior Code, § 11-418)
   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall obtain transportation services in a
taxicab, bus or other public transportation with intent to deprive the owner
thereof shall be guilty of an offense.
      (2)   Proof that the transportation services were obtained by false
pretenses, that the person gave a check for the services for which payment was
refused or that the person left the transportation vehicle without payment or
offering to pay for the services shall be prima facie proof of intent to
defraud.
(Prior Code, § 11-419)
(Ord. 1523, passed 10-4-94; Am. Ord. 1661, passed 10-16-01; Am. Ord. 1949,
passed 11-7-17)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.108  FALSE OR BOGUS CHECKS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to
obtain or attempt to obtain from any person, firm or corporation, any money,
property or valuable thing of the value of $1,000 or less by means of any false
or bogus check or by any other written or printed engraved instrument or
spurious coin.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FALSE OR BOGUS CHECK.  Checks or orders given for money or property which
are not honored on account of insufficient funds of the maker to pay same, as
against the maker or drawer thereof. The making, drawing, issuing or delivering
of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, shall be
prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and the knowledge of insufficient
funds in or credit with, the bank or other depository; provided the maker or
drawer shall not have paid the drawee the amount due thereon, together with the
protest fees, and the check or order is presented for payment within 180 days
after same is delivered and accepted.
(Prior Code, § 11-420)  (Am. Ord. 1231, passed 1-4-83; Am. Ord. 1661, passed
10-16-01; Am. Ord. 1945, passed 11-7-17)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.109  MAKING FALSE DECLARATION OF OWNERSHIP TO A PAWNBROKER.
   Any person selling or pledging property to a pawnbroker who uses false or
altered identification or a false declaration of ownership as related to the
provisions of 59 O.S. § 1515 shall, if the value of the property is less than
$1,000, be guilty of an offense. However, this section shall not apply if the
property was acquired by means of robbery or burglary.
(Ord. 1948, passed 11-7-17)  Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provision, 59 O.S. § 1512
HARMFUL MATERIAL AND BEHAVIOR
§ 132.135  DISPLAYING MATERIAL HARMFUL TO MINORS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      HARMFUL TO MINORS.  The quality of any description, exhibition,
presentation or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct,
sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse when the material or performance
taken as a whole has the following characteristics:
         (a)   The average adult person applying contemporary community
standards would find that the material or performance has a predominant
tendency to appeal to a prurient interest in sex to minors;
         (b)   The average adult person applying contemporary community
standards would find that the material or performance depicts or describes
nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse in a manner
that is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community with
respect to what is suitable for minors; and
         (c)   The material or performance lacks serious literary, scientific,
artistic or political value for minors.
      KNOWINGLY.  Having general knowledge of, reason to know or a belief or
ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
         (a)   The character and content of any material or performance which
is reasonable susceptible of examination by the accused; and
         (b)   The age of the minor.  However, an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the accused made a reasonable
bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of the minor.
      MATERIAL.  Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print,
picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, record, recording
tape or video tape.
      NUDITY.  The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a full opaque covering; the showing of the female
breast with less than a full opaque covering, or any portion thereof below the
top of the nipple; or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernible
turgid state.
      PERFORMANCE.  Any motion picture, film, video tape, played record,
phonograph or tape, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance or other
exhibition performed or presented to or before an audience of one or more, with
or without consideration.
      PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or other
legal entity of any kind.
      REASONABLE BONA FIDE ATTEMPT.  An attempt to ascertain the true age of
the minor by requiring production of a driver's license, marriage license,
birth certificate or other governmental or educational identification card or
paper and not relying solely on the oral allegations or apparent age of the
minor.
      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE.  Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad
in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume or the condition of being fettered,
bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT.  Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse
or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area,
buttocks or, if the person be a female, the breasts.
      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT.  The condition of human male or female genitals when
in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (B)   No person having custody, control or supervision of any commercial
establishment shall knowingly:
      (1)   Display material which is harmful to minors in a way that minors,
as a part of the invited general public, will be exposed, to view the material,
provided, however, a person shall be deemed not to have “displayed” material
harmful to minors if the material is kept behind devices commonly known as
“blinder racks” so that the lower two-thirds of the materials is not exposed to
view;
      (2)   Sell, furnish, present, distribute, allow to view or otherwise
disseminate to a minor, with or without consideration, any material which is
harmful to minors; or
      (3)   Present to a minor or participate in presenting to a minor, with or
without consideration, any performance which is harmful to a minor.
   (C)   It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this
section that the material or performance involved was displayed, presented or
disseminated to a minor at a recognized and established school, church, museum,
medical clinic, hospital, public library, governmental agency, quasi-
governmental agency and persons acting in their capacity as employees or agents
of the persons or organizations, and which institution displays, presents or
disseminates the material or performance for a bona fide governmental,
educational or scientific purpose.
(Prior Code, § 11-430)  (Ord. 1355, passed 10-15-85) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.136  PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Solicit, entice or procure another to commit or engage in any act
of prostitution or lewdness;
      (2)   Engage in any act of prostitution or act of lewdness;
      (3)   Knowingly let premises for purposes of prostitution or lewdness;
      (4)   Conduct a business or premises for prostitution or lewdness;
      (5)   Accept or receive the proceeds of any act of lewdness or
prostitution; or
      (6)   Be a party to an act of prostitution or solicitation of
prostitution or be a party to an act of lewdness in the limits of the city.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LETTING PREMISES FOR LEWDNESS.  The granting of the right of use or the
leasing of any premises, knowing that they are to be used for the practice of
lewdness or allowing the continued use of the premises with that knowledge.
      LETTING PREMISES FOR PROSTITUTION.  The granting of the right of use or
the leasing of any premises, knowing that they are to be used for the practice
of prostitution or allowing the continued use of the premises with that
knowledge.
      LEWDNESS.  The performance of an act of sexual intercourse or other
sexual activity with another person, except a spouse, of either sex, for the
purpose of obtaining an orgasm or to offer to solicit or suggest to another
person the activity.
      PROSTITUTION.  The giving of the body for sexual intercourse or sodomy
for hire or money.
      SOLICITING.  The soliciting, inviting, inducing, directing or
transporting of a person to any place with the intention of promoting
prostitution.
(Prior Code, § 11-431) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.137  SALE OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON SUNDAY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every vehicle intended primarily for use and operation on
the public  highways, which is self-propelled, and every vehicle intended
primarily for operation on the public highways which is not driven or propelled
by its own power, but which is designed either to be attached to or become a
part of a self-propelled vehicle, but not including farm tractors and other
machines and tools used in the production, harvesting and care of farm
products.
   (B)   (1)   No person, firm or corporation, whether owner, proprietor, agent
or employee, shall keep open or assist in keeping open or operating any place
or premises or residences whether open or closed, for the purpose of selling,
bartering or exchanging, or offering for sale, barter or exchange any motor
vehicle or motor vehicles, whether new, used or secondhand, on the first day of
the week, commonly called Sunday.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to the opening of an establishment or
place of business on the first day of the week for other purposes, such as the
sale of petroleum products, tires, automobile accessories or for the purpose of
operating and conducting a motor vehicle repair shop, or for the purpose of
supplying with services as towing or wrecking.
(Prior Code, § 11-432) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.138  CONTRIBUTING TO THE DELINQUENCY OF A MINOR PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions.  For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DELINQUENT CHILD. Includes a minor, as herein defined, who shall have
been or is violating any penal statute of this state, or who shall have been or
is committing any one or more of the following acts, to-wit:
         (a)   Associating with thieves, vicious or immoral persons.
         (b)   Frequenting a house of ill repute.
         (c)   Frequenting any policy shop, or place where any gambling device
is operated.
         (d)   Frequenting any saloon, dram shop, still, or any place where
intoxicating liquors are manufactured, stored, or sold.
         (e)   Possessing, carrying, owning, or exposing any vile, obscene,
indecent, immoral, or lascivious photograph, drawing, picture, book, paper,
pamphlet, image, devise, instrument, figure or object.
         (f)   Willfully, lewdly, or lasciviously exposing his or her person or
private parts thereof, in any place, public or private, in such manner as to be
offensive to decency, or calculated to excite vicious or lewd thoughts, or for
the purpose of engaging in the preparation or manufacture of obscene, indecent
or lascivious photographs, pictures.
         (g)   Possessing, transporting, selling, or engaging in aiding or
assisting in the sale, transportation, or manufacture of intoxicating liquor,
or the frequent use of same.
         (h)   Being a runaway from his or her parent or legal guardian.
         (i)   Violating any penal provisions of the Uniform Controlled
Dangerous Substances Act.
      ENCOURAGE. In addition to the usual meaning of the word, includes a
willful and intentional neglect to do that which will directly tend to prevent
such act or acts of delinquency on part of such minor when the person accused
shall have been able to do so.
      EVERY PERSON. Human beings, without regard to their legal or natural
relationship to such minor, as well as legal or corporate entities.
      MINOR or CHILD. Male or female persons who shall not arrived at the age
of 18 years at the time of the commission of the offense.
   (B)   Contributing to delinquency. Any person who knowingly and willfully:
      (1)   Causes, aids, abets, or encourages a minor to be, to remain, or to
become delinquent in need of supervision or dependent and neglected; or
      (2)   Omits the performance of any duty, which act or omission causes or
tends to cause, aid, abet, or encourage any minor to be delinquent; upon
conviction, shall be guilty of an offense, and shall be punished by a maximum
fine of $750 plus court costs.
(Ord. 1762, passed 4-18-06)
   WEAPONS AND FIREARMS
§ 132.150  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PISTOLS.  Any firearm capable of discharging a projectile composed of any
materials which may reasonably be expected to be able to cause lethal injury,
with a barrel or barrels less than 16 inches in  length, and using either
gunpowder, gas or any means of rocket propulsion, but not to include flare
guns, underwater fishing guns or blank pistols.
   RIFLES.  Any firearm capable of discharging a projectile composed of any
material which may reasonably be expected to be able to cause lethal injury,
with a barrel or barrels more than 16 inches in length, and using either
gunpowder, gas or any means of rocket propulsion, but not to include archery
equipment, flare guns or underwater fishing guns.  In addition, any rifle
capable of firing “shot,” but primarily designed to fire single projectiles,
will be regarded as a RIFLE.
   SHOTGUNS.  Any firearm capable of discharging a series of projectiles of any
material which may reasonably be expected to be able to cause lethal injury,
with a barrel or barrels more than 18 inches in length, and using either
gunpowder, gas, or any means of rocket propulsion, but not to include any
weapon so designed with a barrel less than 18 inches in length.  In addition,
any SHOTGUN capable of firing single projectiles, but primarily designed to
fire multiple projectiles such as “shot” will be regarded as  a SHOTGUN.
(Prior Code, § 11-701)  (Ord. 1346, passed 9-17-85)
§ 132.151  CARRYING WEAPONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry upon or about his or her
person, or in a purse or other container belonging to the person, any billy,
blackjack, hard chain, metal knuckles or any other offensive weapon, whether
the weapon be concealed or unconcealed. This section shall not be construed as
the regulation of firearms or knives as preempted by  Oklahoma Statutes. This
section shall not prohibit the carrying, possession and use of any weapon by a
peace officer or other person authorized by law to carry a weapon in the
performance of their official duties and in compliance with the rules of the
employing agency.
(Prior Code, § 11-702)  (Ord. 1346, passed 9-17-85; Am. Ord. 1540, passed 9-5-
95; Am. Ord. 1869, passed 11-6-12; Am. Ord. 1898, passed 5-19-15)  Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 132.152  REPEALED.
(Prior Code, § 11-703)  (Ord. 1346, passed 9-17-85; Am. Ord. 1540, passed 9-5-
95; Am. Ord. 1869, passed 11-6-12)
§ 132.153  REPEALED.
(Prior Code, § 11-704)  (Ord. 1346, passed 9-17-85; Am. Ord. 1540, passed 9-5-
95; Am. Ord. 1869, passed 11-6-12)
§ 132.154  REPEALED.
(Prior Code, § 11-705)  (Ord. 1346, passed 9-17-85; Am. Ord. 1869, passed 11-6-
12)
§ 132.155  REPEALED.
(Prior Code, § 11-706)  (Ord. 1346, passed 9-17-85; Am. Ord. 1869, passed 11-6-
12)  Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.156  REPEALED.
(Prior Code, § 11-712)  (Ord. 1346, passed 9-17-85; Am. Ord. 1540, passed 9-5-
95; Am. Ord. 1869, passed 11-6-12)
§ 132.157  FIREARMS IN VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   A person may transport in a motor vehicle a rifle, shotgun or
pistol, open and unloaded, at any time.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         OPEN.  The firearm is transported in plain view, in a case designed
for carrying firearms, which case is wholly or partially visible, in a gun rack
mounted in the vehicle, in an exterior locked compartment or a trunk of a
vehicle.
      (3)   Any person who is the operator of a vehicle or is a passenger in
any vehicle wherein any person who is licensed pursuant to the State Self-
Defense Act to carry a concealed handgun and is carrying a concealed handgun or
has concealed the handgun in the vehicle, shall not be deemed in violation of
the provisions of this section provided the licensee is in or near the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 11-708)
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided by the provisions of the State
Self-Defense Act, or another provision of law of the state, it shall be
unlawful to transport a loaded pistol, rifle or shotgun in a land-borne motor
vehicle over a public highway or roadway.  However, a rifle or shotgun may be
transported when clip- or magazine-loaded and not chamber-loaded when
transported in an exterior locked compartment of the vehicle or trunk of the
vehicle.
      (2)   Any person who is the operator of a vehicle or is a passenger in
any vehicle wherein another person is licensed pursuant to the State Self-
Defense Act, to carry a concealed handgun and is carrying a concealed handgun
or has concealed the handgun in the vehicle, shall not be deemed in violation
of the provisions of this section provided the licensee is in or near the
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 11-709)
(Ord. 1346, passed 9-17-85) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.158  REPEALED.
(Prior Code, § 11-713)  (Ord. 1346, passed 9-17-85; Am. Ord. 1540, passed 9-5-
95; Am. Ord. 1869, passed 11-6-12)
§ 132.159  REPEALED.
(Prior Code, § 11-714)  (Ord. 1346, passed 9-17-85; Am. Ord. 1540, passed 9-5-
95; Am. Ord. 1869, passed 11-6-12)
§ 132.160  DISCHARGE.
   No person shall discharge any species of firearms, air guns or weapons,
except as follows:
   (A)   Police officers or those impressed into peace officers' duties by the
Police Department, may in the performance of their duties, discharge firearms
as the occasion warrants; or
   (B)   Firearms may be discharged in an approved shooting gallery or on an
approved shooting range, but not until the shooting gallery or shooting range
has been approved by the Chief of Police and a permit issued to the owner or
operator to conduct the shooting.  The Chief of Police shall inspect each place
for which a permit is requested for a shooting gallery or shooting range and a
permit shall be issued if the Chief finds that the gallery or range is arranged
with adequate safeguards so as not to endanger the public, and if he or she
finds that the shooting gallery or shooting range is operated and supervised in
a manner so as not to endanger the lives of persons and property including
those participating in the shooting.
(Prior Code, § 11-715)  (Ord. 1346, passed 9-17-85) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.161  REPEALED.
(Ord. 1780, passed 2-6-07; Am. Ord. 1869, passed 11-6-12)
CHAPTER 133:  OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
   
133.01   Assault and battery
   
133.02   Throwing injurious substances
§ 133.01  ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
   (A)   It is unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and battery within
the city.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ASSAULT.  Any wilful and unlawful attempt or offer with force or violence
to do a corporal hurt to another.
      BATTERY.  Any wilful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the
person of another.
(Prior Code, § 11-501) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 133.02  THROWING INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES.
   It is unlawful for any person to purposely or premeditatedly put or throw
upon the person or property of another or upon any animal, any acid, corrosive,
other irritating or harmful substance or human or animal waste or urine, with
intent to injure or harass the person, property or animal.
(Prior Code, § 11-503) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 134:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
Section
   
134.01   Interference with municipal officer
   
134.02   Temporary detention by police officer
   
134.03   Flight from an officer
   
134.04   Resisting an officer
   
134.05   Assault or battery upon police or law officers
   
134.06   False evidence, information and the like
   
134.07   Refusing or failing to assist an officer
   
134.08   Removal of barricades
   
134.09   False alarms
   
134.10   Obedience to official commands
   
134.11   Loitering in police station prohibited
   
134.12   Escape of prisoners
   
134.13   Rescuing prisoners
   
134.14   Jail loitering; articles of escape and the like
   
134.15   Impersonating an officer or employee
   
134.16   Intimidating municipal witnesses
   
134.17   Harboring a fugitive
§ 134.01  INTERFERENCE WITH MUNICIPAL OFFICER.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully oppose, delay or
obstruct any police officer or other municipal officer or employee in the
discharge or attempted discharge of his or her official duties.
   (B)   It shall also be unlawful to fail to obey a lawful order from the
officer, or to intimidate or attempt to intimidate by any means of threat or
violence any officer or employee from the discharge of his or her official
duties.
(Prior Code, § 11-601)  (Ord. 1617, passed 8-17-99) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.02  TEMPORARY DETENTION BY POLICE OFFICER.
   (A)   Any peace officer may detain any person whom the officer encounters
under circumstances which reasonably indicate the person has committed, is
committing or is about to commit a crime.
   (B)   Any peace officer may detain any person the officer encounters under
circumstances which reasonably indicate that the person has violated or is
violating the conditions of his or her parole or probation.
   (C)   The officer may detain the person pursuant to this section only to
ascertain his or her identity and the suspicious circumstances surrounding his
or her presence abroad. Any person so detained shall identify himself or
herself, but may not be compelled to answer any other inquiry of any peace
officer.
   (D)   A person must not be detained longer than is reasonably necessary to
effect the purposes of this section, and in no event longer than 60 minutes.
The detention must not extend beyond the place or the immediate vicinity of the
place where the detention was first effected, unless the person is arrested.
   (E)   Any person failing or refusing to identify himself or herself as
required in this section shall be guilty of violating §
134.01, Interference With  Municipal Officer.
(Ord. 1782, passed 2-20-07) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.03  FLIGHT FROM AN OFFICER.
   It is unlawful and an offense to flee from a police officer if a person:
   (A)   Upon stopping his or her vehicle at the signal of a law enforcement
officer, abandons the vehicle and leaves, or attempts to leave, the immediate
area without the permission of the law enforcement officer;
   (B)   Is a passenger in a vehicle and abandons the vehicle after a law
enforcement officer has signaled the vehicle to stop;
   (C)   After the vehicle has stopped, leaves the immediate area without the
permission of the law enforcement officer; or
   (D)   Is a pedestrian and leaves, or attempts to leave the immediate area
after being directed by a law enforcement officer to stop or to remain in the
area for a reasonable length of time.
(Prior Code, § 11-601.1)  (Ord. 1617, passed 8-17-99) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.04  RESISTING AN OFFICER.
   Every person who knowingly resists, by use of force or violence, any
executive officer of the city in the performance of his or her duty is guilty
of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 11-602) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.05  ASSAULT OR BATTERY UPON POLICE OR LAW OFFICERS.
   It is unlawful for any person, without justifiable or excusable cause, to
knowingly commit any assault, battery or assault and battery upon the person of
a police officer or other officer of the law while in the performance of his or
her duties.
(Prior Code, §11-603) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.06  FALSE EVIDENCE, INFORMATION AND THE LIKE.
   No person, firm or corporation, or any agent or employee thereof, shall
destroy, alter, conceal or disguise physical evidence, plant false evidence or
furnish false information which impedes a police officer or officer of the
Municipal Court in the performance of his or her duty, or which is intended to
prevent the apprehension or obstruct the prosecution or defense of any person.
(Prior Code, § 11-604)  (Ord. 1617, passed 8-17-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.07  REFUSING OR FAILING TO ASSIST AN OFFICER.
   (A)   An officer of the city making or about to make an arrest or executing
or about to execute a warrant or other process, in accordance with the
regulations of the city or with state or federal law, or suppressing or about
to suppress a riot, affray or unlawful assembly, may call upon person or
persons to assist him or her in making the arrest, executing the process or
suppressing the riot, affray or unlawful assembly.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person lawfully called upon thus to assist an
officer of the city to refuse or fail to do so.
(Prior Code, § 11-605) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.08  REMOVAL OF BARRICADES.
   It is unlawful for any person, except by proper authority, to remove any
barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off
any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area.
(Prior Code, § 11-606) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.09  FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature
or in any manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the Fire Department or Police
Department or any officer or employee thereof with reference to any fire alarm
or reported fire, accident or other emergency or knowingly to cause the Fire
Department or Police Department or its officers or employees to make a useless
run.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to interfere with
the fire alarm or cut any wires leading thereto or to in any manner render the
fire alarm out of repair or in disorder.
   (C)   No person shall call the number 911 for the purpose of making a
knowingly false alarm or complaint, or reporting knowing false information
which could result in the dispatch of emergency services from any public agency
as defined in 68O.S.§ 2813.  Nor shall any person call 911 for non-emergency or
personal use.  Any person violating the provisions of this section upon
conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not to
exceed $500, plus court costs, and by an assessment for the resulting costs of
any dispatching of emergency personnel and equipment for each such offense.
(Prior Code, §11-607)  (Am. Ord. 1796, passed 12-18-07) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.10  OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL COMMANDS.
   Every person at or near a fire who shall conduct himself or herself so as to
hinder, obstruct or delay the Fire Department or any member thereof, or who
neglects or refuses to obey promptly any order of the Fire and/or Police
Department shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 11-608)  (Ord. 1617, passed 8-17-99) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.11  LOITERING IN POLICE STATION PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person not having official
business to loiter in or about the police station of the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-609) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.12  ESCAPE OF PRISONERS.
   It is unlawful for any person confined in the City Jail or other place of
confinement by the city, or working upon the streets or other public places of
the city in pursuance of any judgment, or otherwise held in legal custody by
authority of the city, to escape or attempt to escape from any jail, prison or
custody.
(Prior Code, § 11-610) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.13  RESCUING PRISONERS.
   It is unlawful for any person, in any illegal manner, to set at liberty,
rescue or attempt to set at liberty or rescue, any prisoner or prisoners, from
any officer or employee of the city having legal custody of the same or from
the City Jail or other place of confinement by the city, or to assist the
prisoner in ny manner to escape from the prison or custody either before or
after conviction, including escape from a vehicle of confinement.
(Prior Code, § 11-611) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.14  JAIL LOITERING; ARTICLES OF ESCAPE AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to:
   (A)   Loiter around any jail or other house of detention where any prisoner
or prisoners are incarcerated;
   (B)   Attempt, without permission of the proper officer, to communicate with
or pass any article to any prisoner confined therein; or
   (C)   Convey into the jail or house of detention, in any manner, any article
useful in facilitating the escape of any prisoner.
(Prior Code, § 11-612) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.15  IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE.
   It is unlawful for any person to impersonate any officer or employee of the
city, falsely represent himself or herself to be an officer or employee of the
city, or exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers
of an officer or employee of the city without being duly authorized to do so.
(Prior Code, §11-613)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.16  INTIMIDATING MUNICIPAL WITNESSES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully prevent any person
from giving testimony who has been duly summoned or subpoenaed by the Municipal
Court of Bethany or who is a witness to any reported crime, or threatens or
procures physical or mental harm through force or fear with the intent to
prevent any witness from appearing in Municipal Court to give his testimony, or
to alter his testimony.
   (B)   Every person who threatens physical harm through force or fear or
causes or procures physical harm to be done to any person or harasses any
person or causes a person to be harassed because of testimony given by such
person in any municipal proceeding, shall also be guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, §11-614)  (Ord. 1617, passed 8-17-99; Am. Ord. 1800, passed 4-1-
08) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.17  HARBORING A FUGITIVE.
   Any person who shall knowingly feed, lodge, clothe, arm, equip in whole or
in part, harbor, aid, assist or conceal in any manner any person who has been
issued a municipal warrant for their arrest shall be guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, §11-615)  (Ord. 1617, passed 8-17-99) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 135:  STATE CRIMINAL CODE
Section
   
135.01   Adoption of state criminal code for misdemeanors; providing for
penalty
§ 135.01  ADOPTION OF STATE CRIMINAL CODE FOR MISDEMEANORS; PROVIDING FOR
PENALTY.
   (A)   Title 21 O.S. (Oklahoma Criminal Code), as it may from time to time be
amended is adopted by reference and is made a part of the ordinances of the
city, as if fully set forth in this code.  The provisions of the Oklahoma
Criminal Code shall take effect and be controlling with the city limits so that
a violation of the provisions of the Oklahoma Criminal Code will be a violation
of this Code.  Nothing in this section shall grant to the city the power or
jurisdiction to prosecute offenses that a city is not authorized to prosecute.
Copies of the Oklahoma Criminal Code are on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
   (B)   Any crimes specified in the Oklahoma Criminal Code as felonies are
specifically excluded from inclusion in this Chapter.
   (C)   The penalty for a misdemeanor violation of the Oklahoma Criminal Code
as adopted by this chapter shall be the maximum penalty allowed by state law or
$750 and 60 days imprisonment whichever is lesser.
(Ord. 1833, passed 11-3-09)
TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   DRILLING REGULATIONS
      
152.   MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOMES; TRAVEL TRAILERS
      
153.   SIGN REGULATIONS
      
154.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
155.   SITE PLANS
      
156.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
157.   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
      
158.   ZONING
         
APPENDIX A:  PERMITTED USE TABLE
      
159
.   PORTABLE TEMPORARY STORAGE UNITS
CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Building Provisions
   
150.001   Building Codes adopted
   
150.002   Safety Code; control
   
150.003   Repairs
   
150.004   License required
   
150.005   Inspection
   
150.006   Board of Appeals; member qualification
   
150.007   Structures over easements or rights- of-way
   
150.008   Storage of flammables
   
150.009   Liquified petroleum gas
   
150.010   Shelters
   
150.011   Smoke detectors in dwelling units
   
150.012   Wood shingles and substitute roof coverings
   
150.013   Building permits, fees, insurance, exemptions
   
150.014   Permit fees assessed in addition to existing inspection fees
   
150.015   Fence permits
Electricity Provisions
   
150.025   Electric Code adopted
   
150.026   Administration
   
150.027   Repairs
   
150.028   Fees
   
150.029   License required
   
150.030   Service facilities and installations
Mechanical Provisions
   
150.045   Mechanical Code adopted
   
150.046   License required
   
150.047   Inspections
   
150.048   Board of Appeals; member qualifications
   
150.049   Incinerators
Plumbing Provisions
   
150.070   Plumbing Code adopted
   
150.071   Minor repairs
   
150.072   License required
   
150.073   Board of Appeals; member qualifications
   
150.074   Septic tank regulations
   
150.075   Public systems available
   
150.076   Water service pipes
   
150.077   Materials
   
150.078   Joints under slabs
   
150.079   Certain values and preventers prohibited
   
150.080   Inspections
Building Moving
   
150.095   Scope
   
150.096   Contractor's license
   
150.097   Permit required
   
150.098   Application procedure
   
150.099   Planning Commission approval required
   
150.100   Compliance with Building Code; approval of property owners
   
150.101   Police escort
   
150.102   Time of moving; tires on transporting vehicle
   
150.103   Notification of utility company
   
150.104   Interference with traffic signals and wires prohibited
Underground Lines and Pipelines
   
150.115   Permit required
   
150.116   Pavement cuts; bonds
   
150.117   Agreement of City Council
   
150.118   Submission of as-built plans
   
150.119   Applicability of other regulations
Power and Wind Generator Towers
   
150.130   Purpose
   
150.131   Definitions
   
150.132   Power generator towers and wind generators
   
150.133   Exceptions
Swimming Pools
   
150.145   Public Bathing Code adopted
Communications Towers
   
150.155   Definitions
   
150.156   Exclusions; application process
   
150.157   Criteria for review of application
   
150.158   Site requirements
   
150.159   Restrictions and conditions
   
150.160   Height of tower
BUILDING PROVISIONS
§ 150.001  BUILDING CODES ADOPTED.
   (A)   Adoption of codes.
      (1)   (a)   There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules
and regulations for construction, alteration, removal, demolishing, equipping,
using and occupancy, location, maintenance of buildings and structures,
including permits and penalties, those certain building codes known as:
            1.   The International Building Code, the latest editions adopted
by the State of Oklahoma and its amendments OCA 748:20-1-3 to 748: 20-1-19, as
published by the International Code Council, hereinafter referred to as
"Building Code;" and
            2.   The NFPA 101: Life Safety Code, hereinafter referred to as
“Safety Code,” published by the National Fire Protection Association, being
particularly approved by the State of Oklahoma and all amendments thereof.
         (b)   Save and except the portions of each as are hereinafter deleted,
modified or amended, of which no less than one copy of each have been and now
are filed in the office of the City Clerk. The Building Code and the Life
Safety Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein.
      (2)   From the date on which this section shall take effect, the
provisions of the Building Code and the Life Safety Code as herein modified
shall be controlling in the construction, alteration, removal, demolition,
equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings and
structures within the corporate limits of the city. As the Building Code and
Life Safety Code are subsequently amended or modified, the changes shall be
incorporated herein by reference.
      (3)   The following insertions and deletions are made to the Building
Code:
         (a)   The words "the City of Bethany, Oklahoma" are inserted in the
second line of Section 101.1;
         (b)   The words "The permit fees for performing the activity described
in this chapter shall be set periodically by the City Council of the City of
Bethany, Oklahoma, by duly adopted resolution, and the fees may be amended by
resolution of the Bethany City Council." are inserted into Section 109.2.
         (c)   The words "the City of Bethany, Oklahoma, Oklahoma County,
revised May 2, 1995" are inserted in the second line of Section 1612.3.
         (d)   Chapter 34 has been deleted and is replaced by the International
Existing Building Code.
         (e)   Section 101.4.6 pertaining to the provisions of the
International Energy Conservation Code are deleted.
         (f)   The following design criteria are inserted into Table R301.2(1)
of the International Residential Code (adopted by reference in Section 101.2 of
the International Building Code):
            Column 1- Ground Snow Load: 10 psf
            Column 2- Wind Speed: 90 mph
            Column 3- Seismic Design Category: C
            Column 4- Weathering: Moderate
            Column 5- Frost Depth Line: 18 inches
            Column 6- Termite: Yes
            Column 7- Winter Design Temperature: 13 Deg F
            Column 8- Ice Barrier Underlayment Required: No
            Column 9- Flood Hazards: FIRM dated 2, July 2002
            Column 10- Air Freezing Index: 333
            Column 11- Mean Annual Temperature: 61.0 Deg F
         (g)   The words "thirty" and "twenty-four" are inserted in the third
and fifth lines respectively of Section 2603.5.1 of the International
Residential Code adopted by reference in Section 101.4 of the International
Building Code).
   (B)   Amendments to Residential Code for 1 and 2 Family Dwellings and
Townhouses. The provisions of the International Residential Building Code One-
and Two-Family Dwellings and Townhouses is hereby amended and modified as
approved by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission and as set forth in
748:20-5-5.1 to 748:20-5-24.1.
(Prior Code, § 5-201)  (Am. Ord. 1255, passed 10-4-83; Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-
26-88; Am. Ord. 1468, passed 12-18-90; Am. Ord. 1765, passed 6-20-06; Am. Ord.
1792, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1855, passed 9-20- 11; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)
Statutory reference:
   Building codes; adoption by cities, see 11 O.S. § 14-107
   Specific codes, see 74 O.S. § 324.8
§ 150.002  SAFETY CODE; CONTROL.
   Section 102.4 of the Building Code is amended to include:
   “Whenever any of the provisions of the Safety Code are in conflict with or
are more restrictive than provisions of the Building Code, the Safety Code
shall control where referenced by the Building Code.”
(Prior Code, § 5-202)  (Ord. 1298, passed 8-7-84; Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-
88; Am. Ord. 1792, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.003  REPAIRS.
   Section 105.2.2 of the Building Code is amended to include:
   “Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the owner and occupant of a
single-family residential dwelling performing alterations, modifications to the
existing dwelling shall be considered ordinary repairs; provided that ordinary
repairs shall not include any exterior additions to the existing dwelling.
Ordinary repairs shall not include the cutting away of any structural beam,
bearing support, the removal or change of any required means of egress, or
rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exit requirements; nor
shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas,
soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work
affecting public health or general safety.”
(Prior Code, § 5-203)  (Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-88; Am. Ord. 1792, passed
12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.004  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Section 105.3 of the Building Code is amended to include:
   “No person, firm or corporation shall operate a place of business, engage in
the business of contracting to do construction, repairing, remodeling, altering
of buildings or structures within the city without first obtaining a building
contractor's license and paying the tax thereon, as required.”
(Prior Code, § 5-204)  (Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-88; Am. Ord. 1792, passed
12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.005  INSPECTIONS.
   Section 110 of the Building Code is amended to include:
   “It shall be the duty of the owner, contractor or permittee to inquire with
the City Building Inspector as to the times or stages that inspection shall be
required and advise the engineering and Inspection Department when the owner,
contractor or permittee is ready for inspection.”
(Prior Code, § 5-205)  (Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-88; Am. Ord. 1792, passed
12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.006  BOARD OF APPEALS; MEMBER QUALIFICATIONS.
   Section 113.3 of the Building Code is deleted, and the following is
substituted therefor:
   “The membership of the Board of Appeals created herein shall consist of the
duly appointed members of the Bethany Board of Adjustment.”
(Prior Code, § 5-206)  (Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-88; Am. Ord. 1792, passed
12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1934, passed 6-20-17; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.007  STRUCTURES OVER EASEMENTS OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   Section 3201 of the Building Code is amended to include:
   “A.   No permanent structure shall be located, constructed, placed or
erected on a public easement or right-of-way; provided, portable buildings or
accessory building on skids or platforms, fences, driveways and other
structures not permanently affixed to the ground shall not be prohibited by
this section. For purposes of this section, "public easement or right-of-way"
means any easement or right-of-way dedicated to the public for any purpose,
whether recorded or not, "permanent structure" means anything which requires
location on the ground or which is attached to something having location on the
ground.
   B.   Non-permanent accessory buildings not exceeding 240 square feet in size
and encroaching on a public easement or right-of-way as provided in A. above
shall be constructed on skids or platforms allowing the entire structure to be
moved by connecting a towing or winching device to the platform or skids.
   C.   All accessory buildings in excess of 240 square feet in size shall be
considered permanent structures and shall be located on a permanent footing.
These accessory buildings shall not be located over utility easements or
rights-of-way.
   D.   No permanent building, portable building or non-permanent building
shall be located over any gas line, sewer main line, or electric power line of
any voltage.
   E.   Non-permanent, portable buildings may be in the side yard setback, but
no part of the building including any roof overhang shall extend beyond the
property line of the property on which the building is located.”
(Prior Code, § 5-207)  (Ord. 1410, passed 9-5-87; Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-
88; Am. Ord. 1642, passed 10-3-00; Am. Ord. 1792, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord.
1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.008  STORAGE OF FLAMMABLES.
   Section 413 of the Building Code is amended to include:
   “A.   No tank or tanks for the storage and distribution of oil, gasoline,
other inflammable, explosive liquids, and commodities shall ever be erected,
built, rebuilt, constructed, maintained or enlarged in the city limits unless
the tank or tanks be constructed and maintained at least three feet below the
natural surface of the earth;
   B.   All oil, gasoline, other inflammable, explosive liquids, where kept for
use in heavy or commercial equipment, shall be kept in an iron or steel
container, securely closed, in quantities listed in this code and referenced
materials not to exceed 300 gallons, whichever is more restrictive, and may not
be located in a highly populated area, and not closer than 100 feet or
distances listed in this code whichever is
      more restrictive from any commercial or residential building; and
   C.   This section shall not prohibit the keeping of oil, gasoline and other
flammable and explosive liquids for personal use so long as the same are kept
in an approved container securely closed, and in quantities not to exceed ten
gallons.”
(Prior Code, § 5-208)  (Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-88; Am. Ord. 1792, passed
12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.009  LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS.
   Section 415.9.2 of the Building Code is amended to include:
   “The use and installation of liquefied petroleum gas equipment, including
all devices, piping and equipment pertinent to the use of liquefied petroleum
gas, shall be subject to the orders, rules and regulations of the State
Liquefied Petroleum Gas Administrator. This section shall not be construed to
allow the use or installation of the equipment without first obtaining a permit
from the city.”
(Prior Code, § 5-209)  (Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-88; Am. Ord. 1792, passed
12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 52 O.S. §§ 420.1et seq.
§ 150.010  SHELTERS.
   Chapter 31 of the Building Code is amended to include:
   (A)   “As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context indicates otherwise:
      1.   "Blast shelter" means and includes any structure designed to protect
its occupants from a minimum peak over pressure of 35 PSI.
      2.   "Fall out survival shelter" means and includes any structure
designed to protect its occupants from residual radiation, resulting from a
nuclear detonation.
      3.   "Persons" includes any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
      4.   "Storm shelter" means and includes any underground structure, above
ground structure so designed to protect its occupants from the effect of wind
and debris resulting from a weather-related storm of hail or tornado.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct and build a
blast shelter, fall out survival shelter or a storm shelter within the city
without first obtaining a shelter contractor's license and paying the tax
thereon, as required in Chapter 109. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit a
person from erecting on his or her own premises for his or her own use and
benefit, a blast shelter, fall out survival shelter or storm shelter, after
having obtained the necessary permit therefor.
   (C)   No building permit for the construction of a fall out survival or
storm shelter shall be issued until plans and specifications for each type of
shelter have been approved by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the
State Office of Civil Defense, the County Office of Civil Defense, a licensed
professional engineer or a licensed architect, and approved by the City
Engineer as conforming to standards and specifications set forth in this
section.
   (D)   All shelters constructed in the required front-yard setback shall be
located:
      1.   Below established grade except for the air intake and exhaust pipes
and hoods, and entrance ways. Entrance ways may not extend more than one foot
above established grade; or
      2.   Above established grade provided the top of the shelter has a berm
with fill material sloping into adjacent grade with a slope of no greater than
3 to 1. The slope of the berm shall not extend into the public right-of-way or
setback line.
   (E)   No pre-shaped shelter shall be approved, unless the design is enough
to prevent flotation when shelter is empty and flotation force is 100%. Weight
of earth fill shall not be considered in reducing this flotation factor. All
shelters shall be adequately sealed to prevent liquid or gas seepage into
facility. In addition, the following specifications shall be met:
      1.   All blast shelters and fallout shelters shall contain a minimum of
75 square feet of floor area with an inside height of not less than six feet
three inches. All underground fallout shelters shall be provided with a baffle
wall affording at least one right angle turn into the living area and shall be
equipped with a ventilation system producing not less than five cubic feet per
minute, per person, of fresh air.
      2.   Concrete used in construction of underground fallout shelters or
storm; shelters shall have a design compressive strength of not less than 3,500
pounds per square inch. All blast shelters shall be constructed in a manner to
withstand a minimum peak of pressure of 35 PSI.
      3.   All fallout shelters shall have a protection factor in the range of
40 to 69 and shall be constructed of sufficient mass for its designated
category rating.
   (F)   The construction of an underground shelter in conformity with this
section shall be exempt from building setback line requirements; provided,
however, no underground shelter constructed in the front yard shall be used for
regular human occupancy. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to
permit any such underground shelter to be built in right-of-way easements.”
(Prior Code, § 5-210)  (Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-88; Am. Ord. 1724, passed 5-
18-04; Am. Ord. 1792, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.011  SMOKE DETECTORS IN DWELLING UNITS.
   Section 907 of the Building Code is amended to include:
   “1.   The owner of a building or structure of IBC Use Groups R-1, R-2, or R-
3 as defined in Section 310 of the Building Code (not zoning districts) shall
provide smoke detectors and install the same in good working order as required
herein.
   2.   All buildings and structures of IBC Use Groups R-1 and R-2 existing on
the effective date of this amendment shall, within 12 months after ORD 1792 was
originally passed (12-18-2007), be retrofitted with smoke detectors to meet the
requirements of this code for new construction.
   3.   Existing structures of IBC Use Group R-3 shall be retrofitted with
smoke detectors to meet the requirements of this code for new construction
whenever:
      a.   Additional sleeping rooms are constructed; or
      b.   A permit is issued for alterations, repairs or additions valued more
than 1,000.
   4.   Smoke detectors shall be maintained in good working order by the owner
of a building or structure of IBC Use Groups R-1 or R-2, and by the owner or
occupant of structures of IBC Use Group R-3.
   5.   Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in an amount not to exceed $100, plus court costs, and each day a
violation exists Shall be a separate offense.”
(Prior Code, § 5-211)  (Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-88; Am. Ord. 1792, passed
12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.012  WOOD SHINGLES AND SUBSTITUTE ROOF COVERINGS.
   Chapter 9 of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   “Section R-908 Covenants requiring exclusive use of wood shingles.
   1.   Declaration of policy. The Council of the City has determined that the
use of wood shingles upon a building or structure increases the hazard that the
flames of a nearby fire may spread to that building or structure. Because of
this finding the Council believes that the citizens of the city should not be
compelled by restrictive covenants to use wood shingles for their homes,
building or other structures and that the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens would be promoted by making the requirements invalid and
unenforceable. The Council is also aware, however, that developers and
residents of subdivisions presently protected by the restrictive covenants are
vitally interested in maintaining the aesthetic values of their neighborhoods
that any law declaring these covenants to be invalid and unenforceable should
also recognize the interest of these developers and residents.
   2.   Covenants requiring exclusive use of wooden roofing shingles invalid
and unenforceable. All parts of all restrictive covenants contained in any
deed, contract, plat or other instrument which require the exclusive use of
wood shingles on any building or structure located within the city are hereby
declared to be invalid and unenforceable.
   3.   Option of owner subject to such restrictive covenants: Pursuant to the
declaration set forth in Subsection R-908(2) above, the owner of any building
or structure subject to a restrictive covenant requiring the exclusive use of
wooden roofing shingles shall have the option to substitute roof covering
materials compatible in color and appearance with the existing roofs in the
same subdivision. The determination of compatibility shall be made by the
architectural committee, homeowner's association (HOA) or other similar
committee of each subdivision; provided, however, that if there is no committee
in existence for any subdivision, then the determination of compatibility shall
be made by the City Building Inspector.
   4.   Limitations. The provisions of Section R-908 shall not be construed to
abridge or abrogate the authority of the architectural committees of
subdivisions, homeowner's association (HOA), or other similar subdivision
committees in any respect other than the right to enforce restrictive covenants
requiring the exclusive use of wood shingles. All other restrictive covenants
shall remain in full force and effect unless addressed elsewhere in these
ordinances.”
(Prior Code, § 5-212)  (Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-88; Am. Ord. 1792, passed
12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.013  BUILDING PERMITS, FEES, INSURANCE, EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Before the issuance of any residential building permit, the contractor
shall furnish a certificate from an Oklahoma-licensed insurance company that
the contractor has general liability insurance in the amount required for
contractors licensed by the Construction Industries Board of the State of
Oklahoma and that the applicant has worker's compensation insurance or a
worker's compensation exemption verification document.
   (B)   For purposes of this section a RESIDENTIAL BUILDING PERMIT is defined
as any building permit for a single-family or two-family residential structure
and shall include construction of a new structure, remodel of an existing
structure, the addition to an existing structure, including roof covering
replacement and any other building improvement requiring a permit under the
international codes as adopted by the City. Not included under the definition
of RESIDENTIAL BUILDING PERMIT are a single-family or two-family carport, patio
cover, storage building, accessory building, pool or fence, these are covered
in other chapters.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to a person or persons performing the
construction or remodeling to his, her or their own existing single family or
two-family on their own property, unless the modifications are being performed
by and/or the permit acquired by a general contractor or subcontractor, in
which case the general contractor or subcontractor shall meet the requirements
of this section.
   (D)   The City Council shall establish by resolution a fee for the
administration of the provisions of this CHAPTER which fee shall be added to,
assessed and paid as part of the building permit fee.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful and an offense to perform any of the work
described in this section without first obtaining a permit and providing
insurance as required in this section. A violation of this section shall be
punishable by a fine of not to exceed $500 plus court costs, and each day a
violation exists shall be a separate offense.
(Ord. 1825, passed 8-18-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.014  PERMIT FEES ASSESSED IN ADDITION TO EXISTING INSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   The city shall charge a state-mandated fee for building permits and
renewal of such permits which authorized work governed by codes within the
purview of the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission (Commission) as
follows:
      (1)   For issuance of permit $5 (or such amount as may be authorized by
Commission).
      (2)   For renewal of permit $5 (or such amount as may be authorized by
Commission).
   (B)   Such fees shall be deposited in an account created by the city's
Finance Director for that purpose.
   (C)   The city shall remit the monies in the account on a monthly basis
directly to the State Treasury for deposit in the Oklahoma Uniform Building
Code Commission Revolving Fund. Along with the deposits required by this
division, the city shall also submit a report stating the total amount of funds
collected and the total number of fees imposed during the preceding month. The
report shall be made on computerized or manual disposition reports as provided
by rule of the Commission.
   (D)   Deposits to the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission Revolving
Fund shall be due on the twentieth day of each month for the fees collected
during the preceding calendar month.
   (E)   The city shall further levy and collect a fee of $0.50 for every
construction permit or renewal permit issued. These monies shall be deposited
into an account for the sole use of the city. The city shall state the total
amount of funds collected and the total number of fees imposed to the State
Treasury in the Report required by division (C) of this section.
   (F)   The fees levied under this section shall be in addition to all current
fees levied by the city for construction permits since all existing fees are
inspection and compliance fees to defray the costs of inspections and plan
reviews. All existing construction/building permit fees described elsewhere in
this code are hereby declared to be inspection and compliance fees regardless
of whether they may be called permit fees or inspection fees.
(Ord. 1826, passed 8-4-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.015  FENCE PERMITS.
   A permit is required for construction of new fencing as well as for
repairing, modifying or replacing existing fences, if any changes or
modifications are made such as material, location or height. Please see §
158.037.
(Ord. 1932, passed 5-16-17; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
ELECTRICITY PROVISIONS
§ 150.025  ELECTRIC CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted for establishing rules and regulations for all
electrical wiring, electrical equipment, machinery and apparatus operated by
electricity, including permits and penalties, that certain electrical code
known as NFPA 70: National Electrical Code, hereinafter referred to as
"Electric Code," recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, being
particularly the edition referenced by the Building Code and all amendments
thereof, save and except the portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or
amended, of which no less than one copy has been and now is filed in the office
of the City Clerk. The same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein.
   (B)   From the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions
of the code, as herein modified, shall be controlling in electrical wiring,
electrical equipment and machinery and apparatus operated by electricity within
the corporate limits of the city. As the Electric Code is subsequently amended
or modified, the changes shall be incorporated herein by reference.
(Prior Code, § 5-301)  (Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-88; Am. Ord. 1795, passed
12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
Statutory reference:
   State Electrical License Act, see 59 O.S. §§ 1680 to 1697
§ 150.026  ADMINISTRATION.
   Section 90.4 of the Electric Code is amended to include:
   “The City Building Inspector shall enforce this chapter in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 1 of the Building Code, as amended, adopted herein
and a Board of Appeals as provided for in this code shall consist of the duly
appointed members of the Bethany Board of Adjustment.”
(Prior Code, § 5-302)  (Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-88; Am. Ord. 1795, passed
12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1934, passed 6-20-17; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.027  REPAIRS.
   Section 90.4 of the Electric Code is amended to include:
   “Permits shall not be necessary for maintenance work, minor repair work or
installation of portable electrical fixtures, if wiring is not altered or
rearranged.”
(Prior Code, § 5-303)  (Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-88; Am. Ord. 1795, passed
12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.028  FEES.
   The permit fees for performing the activity described in this chapter shall
be set periodically by the City Council of the City of Bethany, Oklahoma, by
duly adopted resolution, and the fees may be amended by resolution of the
Bethany City Council.
(Prior Code, § 5-304)  (Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-88; Am. Ord. 1468, passed
12-18-90; Am. Ord. 1765, passed 6-20-06; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.029  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Section 90A of the Electric Code is amended to include:
   “No person, firm or corporation shall be issued an electrical permit,
operate a place of business, engage in the business of contracting to do
installation, repairing, altering of electric wiring, non-portable electric
fixtures, apparatus within the city unless the person, the agent or employee
performing electrical work for the firm, or corporation first is registered
with the city and pays the tax thereon, as prescribed.
   1.   The applicant for electrical registration must hold a license issued by
the Oklahoma Construction Industries Board 158:40-1-3 pursuant to the
Electrical License Act.
   2.   The provisions of this section shall apply to a maintenance electrician
in the employ of the owner of the building or buildings in which the electrical
work is to be performed.
   3.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      a.   Apprentices or helpers in electrical work who, always while working,
are under the direct supervision of another registered with the City of
Bethany; and
      b.   The owner and occupant of a single-family residential dwelling
making necessary repairs, additions or alterations to the electrical wiring of
the dwelling.
   4.   Registration required in this section shall be subject hereto. The
registration shall be renewed annually in accordance herewith and shall remain
in effect so long as the state license is current or until revoked by the City
of Bethany.”
(Prior Code, § 5-305)  (Ord. 1232, passed 2-13-83; Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-
88; Am. Ord. 1795, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.030  SERVICE FACILITIES AND INSTALLATIONS.
   Article 230 of the Electric Code is amended to include:
   “1.   All uses in the City of Bethany shall have a minimum service entrance
of 100 amperes.
   2.   No overhead service shall be permitted to or between public or private
school buildings.
   3.   For voltages above 600 volts, the plans for service entrance and point
of delivery must be approved by the electric service company and the City
Building Inspector before a permit is issued.
   4.   All meters and related service equipment furnished and installed by the
electric service company shall be installed subject to and in compliance with
the following conditions:
      a.   Indoor and outdoor meters shall be installed so that the top of the
meter will not be more than six feet six inches, nor less than five feet six
inches, above the floor or ground.
      b.   A meter board of soft lumber, and of suitable dimensions for
mounting the meter, its cabinet, and fault interruption devices shall be
provided as part of the rough-in or temporary construction power job. It shall
be located near the service entrance on a wall or structure free of excessive
vibration and readily accessible at all reasonable hours.”
(Prior Code, § 5-306)  (Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-88; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)
   MECHANICAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.045  MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and
inspection of mechanical systems in buildings and structures, including permits
and penalties, that certain mechanical code known as the International
Mechanical Code, hereinafter referred to as the "Mechanical Code," the latest
edition as recommended by the International Code Council as adopted by the
State of Oklahoma and its amendments OAC 748:20-13-9 to 748:20-13-11, portions
as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which no less than one copy
has been and now is filed in the office of the City of Bethany Clerk. The same
is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
   (B)   From the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions
of the code as herein modified shall be controlling in the design,
installations, maintenance, alteration and inspection of mechanical systems in
buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the city. As the
Mechanical Code is subsequently amended or modified, the changes shall be
incorporated herein by reference.
   (C)   The following insertions and deletions are made to the Mechanical
Code:
      (1)   The words "the City of Bethany, Oklahoma," are inserted in the
second line of Section 101.1;
      (2)   The following fee schedule is inserted in Section 106.5.2:
      “The permit fees for performing the activity described in this chapter
shall be set periodically by the City Council of the City of Bethany, Oklahoma,
by duly adopted resolution, and the fees may be amended by resolution of the
Bethany City Council;”
      (3)   The words "zero" and "zero" are inserted in the fifth and eighth
lines respectively of Section 106.5.3;
      (4)   The words "offense" and "$500," are inserted in the seventh and
eighth lines respectively of Section 108.4 and all references to imprisonment
in the section are deleted;
      (5)   The words "$100" and "$500" are inserted in the thirteenth and
fourteenth lines respectively of Section 108.5.
(Prior Code, § 5-401)  (Ord. 1223, passed 10-11-82; Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-
88; Am. Ord. 1468, passed 12-18-90; Am. Ord. 1765, passed 6-20-06; Am. Ord.
1793, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.046  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Section 106.1 of the Mechanical Code is amended to include:
   “No person, firm or corporation shall be issued a mechanical permit, operate
a place of business, engage in the business of contracting, to do installation,
maintenance, alteration of mechanical systems in buildings and structures
within the city, including, but not limited to forced air heating-refrigeration
and gas fitting unless the person, the agent or employee performing mechanical
work for the firm or corporation first obtains a license and pays the tax
thereon as prescribed.
   1.   The applicant for a forced air heating-refrigeration license must show
and maintain a license issued by the Oklahoma Construction Industries Board
158:50-1-3 pursuant to the Mechanical Licensing Act.
   2.   The applicant for a gas fitting license must hold an appropriate
certificate from the Board of Examiners of Gas Fitters, as a master or
journeyman, whichever the case may be.
   3.   The provisions of this section shall apply to a mechanical maintenance
person in the employ of the owner of the building or buildings in which the
mechanical work is to be performed.
   4.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      a.   Apprentices or helpers in mechanical work who, always while working,
are under the direct supervision of another having a license from the city;
      b.   The owner and occupant of a single-family residential dwelling
performing necessary repairs, additions or alterations to heat and air or gas
service to the dwelling, excluding any work on connections to meters or mains
or work within a public easement or right-of-way.”
(Prior Code, § 5-403)  (Am. Ord. 1793, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 150.047 INSPECTIONS.
   Section 107.1 of the Mechanical Code is amended to include:
   “It shall be the duty of the owner, contractor, or permittee to inquire of
the City Building Inspector as to the times or stages that inspection shall be
required and advise the engineering and Inspection Department when the owner,
contractor or permittee is ready for inspection.”
(Prior Code, § 5-404)  (Am. Ord. 1793, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 150.048  BOARD OF APPEALS; MEMBER QUALIFICATIONS.
   Section 109.2 of the Mechanical Code is deleted, and the following is
substituted therefor:
   “The members of the Board of Appeals shall consist of the duly appointed
members of the Bethany Board of Adjustment.”
(Prior Code, § 5-405)  (Am. Ord. 1793, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1934, passed
6-20-17; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.049  INCINERATORS.
   Section 907.1 of the Mechanical Code is deleted, and the following is
substituted therefor:
   “1.   No incinerator shall be constructed, erected or replaced in the city
after April 4, 1978. Any incinerator lawfully existing as of the date may
continue to operate so long as it is operated in compliance with this section.
   2.   No person, firm, or corporation shall use, operate or burn any matter
in any incinerator until a license has been issued therefor and a tax paid as
provided.
   3.   Nothing contained in this section shall authorize or permit any person,
firm or corporation to maintain and use an incinerator in a manner as to become
a nuisance or annoyance to the neighborhood.”
(Prior Code, § 5-416)  (Am. Ord. 1793, passed 12-18-07)
   PLUMBING PROVISIONS
§ 150.070  PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for the design, installations, alteration and inspection of
plumbing systems in buildings and structures, including permits and penalties,
that certain plumbing code known as the International Plumbing Code,
hereinafter called "Plumbing Code," published by the International Code
Council, Inc., being particularly the latest editions adopted by the State of
Oklahoma and its amendments OAC 748:20-15-16 to 748:20-15-17 and all amendments
thereof, save and except the portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or
amended, of which no less than one copy has been and now is filed in the office
of the City Clerk. The same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein.
   (B)   From the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions
of the code as herein modified shall be controlling in the design,
installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of plumbing systems in
buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the city connected to
any water or sewer system owned or operated by the city inside or outside its
corporate limits. As the Plumbing Code is subsequently amended or modified, the
changes shall be incorporated by reference.
   (C)   The following insertions and deletions are made to the Plumbing Code:
      (1)   The words "the City of Bethany, Oklahoma," are inserted in the
second line of Section 101.1.
      (2)   The words "zero" and "zero" are inserted in the fifth and eighth
lines of Section 106.6.3.
      (3)   The words "The permit fees for performing the activity described in
this chapter shall be set periodically by the City Council of the City of
Bethany, Oklahoma, by duly adopted resolution, and the fees may be amended by
resolution of the Bethany City Council" are inserted in the third line of
section 106.6.2.
      (4)   The words "offense" and "$500" are inserted in the seventh and
eighth lines respectively of Section 108.4 and all references to imprisonment
in the section are deleted.
      (5)   The words "$100" and "$500" are inserted in the thirteenth and
fourteenth lines respectively of Section 108.5.
      (6)   The words "thirty" and "twenty-four" are inserted in the second and
fifth lines respectively of Section 305.6.1.
      (7)   The word "twelve" is inserted in the second line of Section 903.1.
(Prior Code, § 3-501)  (Am. Ord. 1223, passed 10-11-82; Am. Ord. 1468, passed
12-18-90; Am. Ord. 1765, passed 6-20-06; Am. Ord. 1794, passed 12-18-07; Am.
Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
Statutory reference:
   General supervisory powers; plumbing regulations, see 59 O.S. §§ 1015 and
1020
§ 150.071  MINOR REPAIRS.
   Section 106.2 of the Plumbing Code is amended to include:
   “Plumbing work shall not be commenced until a permit for the work has been
issued by the City Building Inspector. A permit shall not be required for
making minor repairs in existing plumbing within any building. The making of
minor repairs shall consist of repairing or replacing parts of water systems or
the replacing, repairing of all trimmings, or parts of water fixtures. The
making of minor repairs shall not be construed to mean replacement of complete
water systems, making connections to the sewer or water supply mains, nor the
replacement or repair of water heaters.”
(Prior Code, § 3-502)  (Am. Ord. 1794, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 150.072  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Section 106.4 of the Plumbing Code is amended to include:
   “No person, firm, or corporation shall be issued a plumbing permit, operate
a place of business or engage in the business of contracting, to do
installation, maintenance, alteration of plumbing systems or equipment within
the city, unless the person or the agent or employee performing plumbing work
for the firm, or corporation first obtains a license and pays the tax thereon.
   1.   The applicant for a plumbing license must show and maintain a license
issued by the Oklahoma Construction Industries Board 158:30-1-3 pursuant to the
Plumbing Licensing Act.
   2.   The provisions of this section shall apply to a maintenance plumber in
the employ of the owner of the building or buildings in which the plumbing work
is to be performed.
   3.   The provision of this section shall not apply to:
      a.   Apprentices or helpers in plumbing work who, always while working,
are under the direct supervision of another having a license from the city; and
      b.   The owner and occupant of a single-family residential dwelling
performing necessary repairs, additions or alterations to plumbing to each
dwelling, excluding any work on connections to meters or mains or work within a
public easement or right-of-way.”
(Prior Code, § 3-503)  (Am. Ord. 1420, passed 2-26-88; Am. Ord. 1794, passed
12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
Statutory reference:
   State licenses required, see 59 O.S. §§ 1006 et seq.
§ 150.073  BOARD OF APPEALS; MEMBER QUALIFICATIONS.
   Section 109.2 of the Plumbing Code is deleted, and the following is
substituted therefor:
   “The members of the Board of Appeals shall consist of the duly appointed
members of the Bethany Board of Adjustment.”
(Prior Code, § 3-504)  (Am. Ord. 1794, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1934, passed
6-20-17)
§ 150.074  SEPTIC TANK REGULATIONS.
   Section 701.2 of the Plumbing Code is amended to include:
   “Whenever an individual sewage disposal system is permitted in this code,
the design, installation, maintenance and replacement of the system shall be
controlled by the latest standards and regulations of the Oklahoma Department
of Environmental Quality.”
(Prior Code, § 3-505) (Am. Ord. 1794, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)
§ 150.075  PUBLIC SYSTEMS AVAILABLE.
   Section 608.1 and 701.2 of the Plumbing Code is amended to include:
   “The availability of a public water or public sewer system shall be governed
by the policies set forth in Sections 52.01 and 53.001 of the City of Bethany
Code of Ordinances.”
(Prior Code, § 3-506)  (Am. Ord. 1794, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 150.076  WATER SERVICE PIPES.
   Section 605.3 of the Plumbing Code is amended to include:
   “All water service piping shall terminate no less than 18 inches outside the
building.”
(Prior Code, § 3-507)  (Am. Ord. 1794, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 150.077  MATERIALS.
   (A)   Table 605.3 of the Plumbing Code is amended to delete:
      “1. Galvanized steel pipe.”
 
   (B)   Table 605.4 of the Plumbing Code is amended to delete:
      “1. Galvanized steel pipe.”
   (C)   Table 702.3 of the Plumbing Code is amended to delete:
      “1. Concrete pipe.”
(Prior Code, § 3-508)  (Am. Ord. 1794, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 150.078  JOINTS UNDER SLABS.
   Section 605 of the Plumbing Code is amended to include:
   “No joints shall be made in water piping under slabs.”
(Prior Code, § 3-509)  (Am. Ord. 1794, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 150.079  CERTAIN VALVES AND PREVENTERS PROHIBITED.
   Section 504 of the Plumbing Code is amended to include:
   “Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this code, no check valve or
backflow preventer shall be installed on the cold-water supply side of hot
water tanks or boilers.”
(Prior Code, § 3-511)  (Am. Ord. 1794, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 150.080  INSPECTIONS.
   Section 107.1 of the Plumbing Code is amended to include:
   “It shall be the duty of the owner, contractor, or permittee to inquire with
the City Building Inspector as to the times or stages that inspection shall be
required and advise the engineering and Inspection Department when the owner,
contractor, or permittee is ready for inspection.”
(Prior Code, § 3-513)  (Am. Ord. 1794, passed 12-18-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
   BUILDING MOVING
§ 150.095  SCOPE.
   The provisions of this subchapter, except §§
150.101,
150.103 and
150.104, shall not apply to any building which is portable, uninhabitable, and
which is 240 square feet or less in size.
(Prior Code, § 5-601)  (Ord. 1477, passed 9-3-91; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.096  CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   Application for a license of a building mover required shall be
made in writing to the City Clerk. Upon the payment of the required tax and the
furnishing of the bond as provided in this section, the City Clerk or other
duly authorized person shall issue to the applicant a license to be known and
designated as a building moving contractor's license.
      (2)   The license shall entitle the holder thereof to engage in the
business of moving houses, buildings and other structures in the city.
   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who engages in the business of
building moving shall first execute and deliver to the City Clerk a surety bond
in the penal sum of $5,000.
      (2)   The bond shall run in favor of the city for the benefit of the city
and any person, or corporation sustaining injuries, or damages under the
conditions thereof shall be entitled to sue thereon.
      (3)   The bond shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney. The
bond shall be conditioned, among other things, that if the license be granted,
the licensee will pay any and all damages that may be caused to any person,
property, either public or private, within the city, when the injuries or
damages shall be inflicted by the licensee, his or her agents, employees,
workers, contractors or subcontractors.
      (4)   The bond shall also be conditioned that the licensee shall save,
indemnify and protect the city from all liability which may arise, either
directly or indirectly, from the moving of any houses, buildings or structures,
and that the licenses will, in all respects, comply with the ordinances of the
city which govern the moving of houses, buildings, or structures and the use or
obstruction of the streets or public places.
   (C)   (1)   In addition to the bond required herein, the applicant shall
file with the application for license a certificate of liability insurance
policy by an insurance company authorized to do business within the state,
providing general liability and auto liability coverage for the applicant's
operations in amounts not less than $100,000,000 each person, $100,000,000 each
occurrence for bodily injury and $100,000,000 for property damage liability.
      (2)   The certificate shall contain a provision that the policy shall not
be canceled until ten days' written notice of the cancellation has been given
to the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 5-602)  (Ord. 1251, passed 9-6-83; Am. Ord. 1359, passed 1-7-86;
Am. Ord. 1432, passed 11-18-88; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.097  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No house, building or other structure now or hereinafter erected shall be
moved from, through or relocated within the corporate limits of the city until
a permit therefor has been issued in accordance with this subchapter and a fee
paid as provided.
(Prior Code, § 5-603)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.098  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applications for permits shall be made in writing to the City
Building Inspector. The application shall accurately state the following:
      (1)   The location and description of the proposed building or structure
to be moved;
      (2)   The principal condition and the materials of its sills, walls and
roof;
      (3)   The route over which it is proposed to be moved;
      (4)   The new location thereof; (If it is to be relocated within the
city, the application shall give the lot, block and addition of the proposed
relocation; plus, new street address, and the legal description of the new
location.);
      (5)   The proposed date or dates for the moving of the building or
structure;
      (6)   Whether it shall be necessary to raise, lower or cut any wires or
cables belonging to a public service;
      (7)   Whether or not there remain any taxes assessed, due, delinquent or
unpaid of any nature upon the property, building, house or structure proposed
to be moved, and the premises upon which the same is located at the time of
making the application.
   (B)   No building which has deteriorated, burned or been damaged more than
50% of its original structural strength, as determined by the Inspector may be
moved.
   (C)   If the building is to be relocated within the corporate limits of the
city, the applicant must comply with the provisions of §§
150.099 and
150.100.
   (D)   No permit for the moving of any building, house, or structure shall be
issued until the route, time of the removal, and movement has been approved by
the City Manager or his or her designee and the Chief of Police in the city.
   (E)   The City Building Inspector, upon satisfying himself or herself that
the building, house or structure can be moved with safety and the other
conditions follow this subchapter, he or she may then issue a permit.
(Prior Code, § 5-604)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.099  PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   No permit shall be issued for the moving of any house, building or other
structure to be relocated in the corporate limits of the city until the same
has been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 5-605)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.100  COMPLIANCE WITH BUILDING CODE; APPROVAL OF PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   (1)   Any house, building or other structure to be relocated in the
corporate limits of the city must conform to the requirements of the Building
Code.
      (2)   When the building or other structure has been located and made
ready for occupancy, it shall conform to the general type of other buildings in
the vicinity. There shall be attached to the application the written consent of
the record owners of most of the property abutting on either side of any street
or streets which abut the property upon which the building is to be located
upon within 150 feet from the nearest part thereof.
      (3)   If any portion of a lot, tract or parcel of land is within the
distance, all the lot, tract or parcel of land shall be considered in
determining the sufficiency of the consent.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall relieve the obligation of the owner
of the building which is to be relocated in the city to obtain a building
permit, to comply with the Building Code, or to pay the required fees for the
building and moving permit in accordance with the ordinances of the city.
   (C)   The provisions of divisions (A)(2) and (A)(3) shall not apply to
temporary, portable classrooms to be located on property owned by a public-
school district. Such classrooms shall be certified as meeting Building Code
standards applicable to construction of manufactured buildings designed or used
for assembly uses. Classrooms shall be affixed to the ground in compliance with
applicable building codes. The Bethany Fire Chief or his or her designee shall
inspect and approve the buildings for fire safety compliance before any
certificate of occupancy occurs. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
establish a period for the temporary occupancy not to exceed one year, and
unless the time period is extended by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
temporary building or buildings shall be removed on or before the expiration of
the time period established by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 5-606)  (Am. Ord. 1781, passed 2-6-07; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)
§ 150.101  POLICE ESCORT.
   If, in the judgment of the City Manager or his or her designee, the moving
of any building may create a traffic hazard, the City Manager may require the
person moving the building to provide a police escort for the purpose of
regulating traffic along the route the building is being removed. Any police
escort shall be at the expense of the building mover and paid to the City of
Bethany, Oklahoma, Director of Finance before movement is approved.
(Prior Code, § 5-607)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.102  TIME OF MOVING; TIRES ON TRANSPORTING VEHICLE.
   (A)   No building shall be moved within the city between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 9:00 a.m. or between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:30 p.m. on any day.
   (B)   All moving shall be upon pneumatic tires inflated to an appropriate
pressure to carry house, building, or structure weight.
(Prior Code, § 5-608)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.103  NOTIFICATION OF UTILITY COMPANY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the building mover, at the time of filing his
or her application, to notify all public utility companies affected by the
move, in writing, by mailing to the utility company a copy of the application
for a moving permit, showing the route to be taken and the estimated time of
the movement or removal. Copies of such notice shall be sent to the City Clerk
before movement is approved.
   (B)   The receipt of the notice shall not place any duty upon the utility
company, except as provided in §
150.104.
(Prior Code, § 5-609)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.104  INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND WIRES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any moving permit that may be issued, it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation engaged in moving any building
within the limits of the city to touch, move, cut, molest, or in any way
interfere with any traffic-control devices, signal wires, or any telephone,
telegraph, electric line, facility located on any street, alley way, easement,
or to move any building along any street when the building is of a height that
will not adequately clear all traffic-control devices, signal wires, telephone,
telegraph, electric lines, or utility facilities located on any street, alley,
or easement.
   (B)   The person having control of or owning any devices, signal wires,
telephone, telegraph, electric lines, or facility shall, after reasonable
notice and upon prepayment of the cost, remove, raise or rearrange the utility
facility to provide clearance for the house, building, or structure provided
that the removal, raising, rearranging, or arranging can be accomplished
without materially interfering with the public utility service supplied by that
facility.
(Prior Code, § 5-610)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
   UNDERGROUND LINES AND PIPELINES
§ 150.115  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   No person, firm or corporation shall lay lines, cables,
pipelines, appurtenances of any type, excavate for the purpose of laying lines,
or pipelines of any type, in easements or rights-of-way of the city, until a
permit therefore has been issued in accordance with this subchapter and a fee
paid as provided.
      (2)   No fee shall be charged to applicants holding a valid franchise in
the city.
   (B)   In addition to the other requirements of this subchapter, applicants
for a permit shall submit:
      (1)   A description of the easements or rights-of-way where the applicant
proposes to lay line or pipeline;
      (2)   Three sets of plans for the installation of the lines or pipelines,
subject to the approval of the City Engineer;
      (3)   The names of all contractors and subcontractors engaged by the
applicant to install the line or pipeline;
      (4)   The proposed pressure of the pipeline and a description of the
substance to be transmitted; and
      (5)   The approximate dates for both the commencement and the completion
of its installation.
(Prior Code, § 5-901)  (Ord. 1249, passed 9-6-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.116  PAVEMENT CUTS; BONDS.
   (A)   Paving cuts shall not be permitted or made, except in accordance
herewith.
   (B)   (1)   When paving cuts are to be allowed, the City Engineer shall
estimate the total cost to repair all paving cuts.
      (2)   Prior to the issuance of the permit required in this subchapter,
the applicant shall submit a bond, with corporate surety licensed to do
business in the state, in order to guarantee the proper restoration and
maintenance of paving cuts.
   (C)   (1)   The bond shall be for a period of five years from the estimated
date of completion.
      (2)   The bond shall be in a sum equal to 100% of the estimated cost for
the first year and 15% of the estimated cost for each subsequent year.
   (D)   The bond required in this section shall not apply to franchise holders
or utility companies paying a gross receipts tax or franchise tax to the city
but shall apply to its subcontractors.
(Prior Code, § 5-902)  (Ord. 1249, passed 9-6-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.117  AGREEMENT OF CITY COUNCIL.
   Prior to issuance of any permit to any person, firm or corporation, except
the holder of a valid franchise in the city, the City Council shall approve a
written agreement between the applicant and the city which includes, but is not
limited to the following terms:
   (A)   The lines or pipelines shall be constructed, repaired, renewed and
maintained by the applicant, at the applicant's own cost and expense, in a
safe, proper and workmanlike manner, and at the times and in the manner as not
to prevent or interfere with the safe, proper and convenient movement of
traffic along, over and across the easements, alleys, and rights-of-way
described in the application.
   (B)   The applicant shall agree to fully defend, protect, indemnify and hold
harmless the city, its employees and agents, from and against each and every
claim, demand or cause of action and any liability cost, expense including, but
not limited to reasonable attorney's fees and expenses incurred in defense of
the city, damage or loss in connection therewith, which may be asserted by the
applicant, applicant's employees or agents, subcontractors or any third party
including, but not limited to the city's agents, or employees, on account of
personal injury or death, or property damage caused by, arising out of, or in
any way incidental to, or in connection with the construction, maintenance,
operation, altering, repairing or renewing of lines or pipelines, except as may
result solely from the city's negligence.
   (C)   (1)   The applicant shall backfill, and power tamp all trenches, fill
all holes caused by shrinkage, remove all excess dirt and leave the easements
and rights-of-way described in the application in a solid and safe condition,
and subject to the inspection and approval of the City Engineer.
      (2)   If applicant shall fail to make any repairs or do any work required
of the applicant within ten days after receipt of written notice from the city
calling attention thereto and requesting the repair or work to be done, then
the city shall have the right to make the repairs or do the work at the expense
of the applicant and the applicant shall reimburse the city for the cost and
expense of the repairs or work promptly upon bill rendered therefore by the
city to the applicant.
   (D)   The applicant shall agree that, in the event the city makes a request
to relocate or adjust the applicant's lines, pipelines or appurtenances thereto
where the same are situated in easements or rights-of-way, the applicant will
comply therewith or bear the entire cost of the relocation or adjustment.
   (E)   Other terms and conditions as the City Council may require shall be
followed.
(Prior Code, § 5-903)  (Ord. 1249, passed 9-6-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.118  SUBMISSION OF AS-BUILT PLANS.
   Upon completion of the installation of the line or pipelines authorized in
the permit, the applicant shall submit to the city one set of as-built plans
for future reference and locating of the lines or pipelines and shall install
the above-ground markers or warnings as may be required by the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 5-904)  (Ord. 1249, passed 9-6-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.119  APPLICABILITY OF OTHER REGULATIONS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to exempt the applicant, its
agents, employees or subcontractors from the provisions hereof.
(Prior Code, § 5-905)  (Ord. 1249, passed 9-6-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
   POWER AND WIND GENERATOR TOWERS
§ 150.130  PURPOSE.
   The City Council hereby determines that by reason of the density of
development in the city that for the protection of the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city wind generators and towers should be
prohibited in the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-1001)  (Ord. 1351, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 150.131  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   POWER GENERATOR TOWER or TOWER. Any structure attached to the ground,
designed or used to support a device driven by wind energy which is used for
the generation of electric energy or power.
   WIND GENERATOR or GENERATOR. Any device which is designed or used to
transform wind energy to electrical energy or power, and which is located above
grade level on any property within the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-1002)  (Ord. 1351, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 150.132  POWER GENERATOR TOWERS AND WIND GENERATORS.
   The erection, construction and installation of power generator towers and
wind generators in the city is hereby prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 5-1003)  (Ord. 1351, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.133  EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Wind generators and towers existing on the effective date of this
subchapter may be continued, maintained and repaired.
   (B)   If the operation of any existing generator is discontinued for more
than one year, or if any existing generator or tower should by reason of
disrepair, damage or destruction require replacement or removal of the tower,
the tower shall be removed and not replaced.
(Prior Code, § 5-1004)  (Ord. 1351, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
   SWIMMING POOLS
§ 150.145  PUBLIC BATHING CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for the construction, installation of equipment, water quality,
maintenance and safety practices for swimming pools, that certain code known as
the State Public Bathing Place Interpretive Code and the International Pool and
Spa Code, hereinafter referred to as "Bathing Code," recommended by the State
Department of Health, being particularly the latest edition, and all amendments
thereof; save and except the portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or
amended, of which no less than three copies have been and now are filed in the
office of the City Clerk. The same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully
as if set out at length herein.
   (B)   From the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions
of the Code, as herein modified, shall be controlling in the construction,
installation of equipment, water quality, maintenance and safety practices for
swimming pools within the corporate limits of the city. As the Bathing Code is
subsequently amended or modified, the changes shall be incorporated herein by
reference.
(Prior Code, § 9-901)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
Statutory reference:
   Public bathing places, see 63 O.S. §§ 1-1013 et seq.
   COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
§ 150.155  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTENNA. The arrangement of wires or metal rods used in transmission,
retransmission and/or receptions of radio, television, electromagnetic, or
microwave and other wavelength signals, or includes microwave and other
wavelength reflectors/antennas regardless of mode or method of signal
transmission.
   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE or TOWER. Any tower, mast pole, tripod, lattice,
box frame or other structure utilized for the purpose of transmission,
retransmission and/or reception of electromagnetic radio, television or
microwave and other wavelength signals regardless of mode or method of signal
transmission.
   APPLICANT. Any person, corporation, club, group, or other establishment
seeking an approved location and design for a communications tower and
subsequent site.
   COMMUNICATIONS OPERATIONS, AMATEUR. The transmission, retransmission and/or
reception of radio, television, electromagnetic or microwave and other
wavelength signals regardless of mode or method of signal transmission for
private or personal use and not for the purpose of operating a business and/or
for financial gain.
   COMMUNICATIONS OPERATIONS, COMMERCIAL. The transmission, retransmission and/
or reception of radio, television, electromagnetic or microwave and other
wavelength signals regardless of mode or method of signal transmission
primarily for operating a business and/or financial gain.
   HEIGHT. The total elevation of the antenna, including the base pad,
building, tower or other structure to which it is mounted.
   MICROWAVE REFLECTOR/ANTENNA.
      (1)   An apparatus constructed of solid, mesh or perforated materials of
any configuration that is used to receive and/or transmit microwave signals
from a terrestrial or orbital located transmitter or transmitter relay.
      (2)   This definition is meant to include but is not limited to what are
commonly referred to as satellite receive only earth stations or satellite
dishes.
   MONOPOLE. A structure composed of a single spire used to support
telecommunications and other electronic communications equipment.
(Ord. 1646, passed 11-7-00; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.156  EXCLUSIONS; APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   Exclusions.
      (1)   Any tower installed by a government entity that is for emergency
communications systems is exempt from these standards.
      (2)   Any antenna of less than 35 feet in total height is exempt from
this subchapter, but all installations must comply with all rules and
regulations of applicable state and local building codes and the standards
published by the Electronic Industries Association. All support structures and
antennas must be constructed and operated in a manner that does not create
electromagnetic or other interference with the city's radio frequencies and
public safety operations as required by the FCC.
      (3)   All existing structures established prior to this subchapter are
permitted as they were previously.
      (4)   All antennas used exclusively for amateur communications are exempt
from this subchapter.
   (B)   Application for communication tower permit.
      (1)   All new communication antennas and towers require a permit if they
exceed 35 feet in height.
      (2)   Applications must be made at least 30 days prior to the following
Planning and Zoning Commission meeting to be heard. All applications must be
reviewed by the City Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City
Council.
      (3)   Plans certified by a licensed engineer must be on file with the
City Building Inspector and City Engineer at the time when application is made.
These plans must contain the following:
         (a)   A site plan, three copies, drawn to scale specifying the
location of tower(s), guying, and anchors, if any, transmission or support
building(s) and other accessory uses, parking areas, access roads and detailed
landscaped areas. The site plan shall be designed in accordance with
Chapter 155 of this code of ordinances. The plan must also include provisions
for proper drainage.
         (b)   A report from a registered structural or civil engineer
indicating the tower height and design, structure, installation and total
anticipated capacity of the structure, including the number and types of
antennas which could be accommodated. This data shall satisfactorily
demonstrate that the proposed tower conforms to all applicable requirements of
the International Codes Council Section 3108 and American National Standards
Institute Standards (TIA-22).
   (C)   Fee for application and permit.
      (1)   Permit fees.
         (a)   For towers over 35 feet, but less than 100 feet, in height, the
application fee shall be $100.
         (b)   For towers exceeding 100 feet in height, the application fee
shall be 100, plus an additional $2 for every foot of height the antenna is
over 100 feet tall.
         (c)   All towers must obtain a business license from the city; except
for amateur radio operations.
      (2)   Sales tax. All commercial tower permits must reflect the city as
the point of sale regarding communications using the tower. The city's sales
tax shall be collected as required by applicable sales tax ordinances.
   (D)   Leasing public properties. The cost of erecting a new antenna or
replacing an existing antenna on support structure on public properties shall
be evaluated on a case by case basis, based upon consideration of previous
agreements and current market values in surrounding areas at the time of new or
replacement proposal.
   (E)   Hearings. All antenna applications will be heard by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and its recommendation shall be forwarded to the City Council
for final approval or disapproval of antenna applications.
   (F)   Ownership list required.
      (1)   The applicant shall submit a current list of names and addresses of
all record property owners within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundaries
of the proposed site of the antenna, certified by a bonded abstractor or the
County Assessor of Oklahoma County. Regardless of the distance requirement, the
list shall include the names and addresses of all property owners who own
property abutting the parcel on which the tower is located.
      (2)   Where the antenna is located on leased property, then the list
shall include those persons abutting the entire tract owned by the lessor. For
example, if the antenna site is leased from a quarter section of land, then the
owners abutting the quarter section would be notified.
      (3)   Where the proposed antenna support exceeds 100 feet in height, then
the list of surrounding property owners shall be extended to include those
property owners within a radius of the site equal to three times the height of
the proposed tower, plus all abutting landowners.
   (G)   Notice of hearing.
      (1)   At least 20 days prior to hearing before the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the Community Development Department shall mail a notice of public
hearing to all persons within the areas described above.
      (2)   The notice shall include the following:
         (a)   Legal description and approximate street address of area for
location of the tower;
         (b)   A brief description of the proposed tower; and
         (c)   Date, time and place of public hearing.
(Ord. 1646, passed 11-7-00; Am. Ord. 1880, passed 6-17-14; Am. Ord. 1974,
passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.157  CRITERIA FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   All new antennas must be erected on an existing communications tower
already located in the city unless it is proven by the applicant that this
requirement is ineffective, nonfeasible or impossible.
   (B)   If there are not existing towers that are suitable for co-location,
then an alternative is to erect a tower on public land unless it is proven by
the applicant that this requirement is ineffective or not feasible.
   (C)   If co-location on an existing tower or location on public land is not
effective, feasible or possible, then the Planning and Zoning Commission and
City Council may consider approval of an antenna support structure in the A, C-
G, C-H or I-L zoning districts, providing the applicant accurately addresses
the following issues:
      (1)   Whether the applicant proves the tower, site will be designated, or
laid out to accommodate future multiple users; and
      (2)   Whether the proposed tower is to be in an area where it would be
unobtrusive and would not substantially detract from the aesthetics or
neighborhood character due to either location, natural setting of the area,
lack of visibility caused by natural growth or other factors.
(Ord. 1646, passed 11-7-00; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 150.158  SITE REQUIREMENTS.
   All tower sites must adhere to the following requirements:
   (A)   All commercial antenna tower sites must be enclosed by a fence at
least six feet in height, the nature and type to be determined by the Planning
and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission may require evergreen
screening where necessary to improve view for adjacent property owners.
   (B)   The proposed site must have an approved, all-weather, ingress/egress
road. The road shall meet the design specifications as determined by the City
Engineer.
   (C)   No on-site advertising will be permitted; ownership signage is
permitted provided no larger than 12" wide by 24" long.
   (D)   The site must be continually maintained in accordance with city
ordinances and permit requirements.
   (E)   Hazard warning and no trespassing signs must be posted on all sides of
the fence.
   (F)   Noise levels for any combustion-fired generators or other apparatus
must be less than 100 Dba as registered from the property immediately adjoining
the site of generator on the nearest side.
   (G)   A set back of at least the height of the proposed tower is required.
(Ord. 1646, passed 11-7-00; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.159  RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   All structures must be able to withstand a minimum wind load of 90
mph.
   (B)   All antennas that are mounted on an existing building or structure
shall be aesthetically pleasing with the surrounding areas as approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (C)   All antenna support structures must be of monopole design unless it is
proven by the applicant that this type of structure cannot be utilized without
undue hardship.
   (D)   No advertisement shall be allowed on any tower; ownership signage is
permitted provided no larger than 24" long by 12" wide.
   (E)   Lighting shall be as required by the Federal Communications Commission
and/or by the Federal Aviation Administration. No other lighting shall be
incorporated if not required by either agency or specified by the city's
Planning and Zoning Commission as a condition of the use permit.
(Ord. 1646, passed 11-7-00; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.160  HEIGHT OF TOWER.
   (A)   Communication towers may exceed the height limitations of the zoning
district in which it is located, as provided in this subchapter, provided no
tower may exceed 200 feet in height.
   (B)   All communication towers shall comply with airport height regulations
in accordance herewith by the Federal Aviation Administration.
(Ord. 1646, passed 11-7-00; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 151:  DRILLING REGULATIONS
Section
Oil and Gas Drilling
   
151.01   Definitions
   
151.02   Permit required
   
151.02.01   Application and filing fee
   
151.02.02   Issuance or refusal of permit
   
151.02.03   Termination point
   
151.02.04   Renewal of permit; fee
   
151.03   Production prohibitions
   
151.04   Bonds and insurance
   
151.05   Earthen emergency pits
   
151.06   Earthen retaining walls
   
151.07   Earthen slush pits
   
151.08   Maintenance of premises
   
151.09   Safety devices and practices
   
151.10   Casing
   
151.11   Tubing
   
151.12   Storage tanks
   
151.13   Rules and regulations
Water Well Drilling
   
151.25   Licensing and tax required; application
   
151.26   Permit required
   
151.27   Regulations; drilling case; capping and plugging
   
151.28   Inspection
   
151.29   Connection to public supply prohibited
   
151.30   Sale of impure water prohibited
OIL AND GAS DRILLING
§ 151.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED WELL. Any natural production well in which production casing has
been run but which has not been operated for six months; and shall also mean
any artificial production well in which production casing has been run but
which has not been operated for a period of nine months; and shall also mean
any well in which no production casing has been run, and for which drilling
operations have ceased for 30 consecutive days, or which has otherwise not been
developed or operated with due diligence.
   ARTIFICIAL PRODUCTION. The raising of petroleum and/or natural gas to the
surface of the earth by means other than the natural flow of such substances.
   CITY. The City of Bethany, Oklahoma.
   CORPORATION COMMISSION. The Oklahoma Corporation Commission.
   DELETERIOUS SUBSTANCE. Any chemical, saltwater, oil field brine, waste oil,
waste emulsified oil, basic sediment, mud, injurious substances produced, used
in the drilling, development, production, transportation, refining or
processing of oil, gas or condensate.
   DEVELOPED AREA. Any area within 500 feet of an occupied residential,
commercial, or office structure which is itself within 300 feet of an occupied
residential, commercial or office structure; or any area within 500 feet of a
public or private park, forest preserve, wildlife preserve not operated for
profit, municipal or community recreation center, or community play field.
   DISPOSAL WELL. Any well drilled or used for the injection of saltwater or
other substances into the earth at a point other or different than the point of
extraction or production thereof from the earth.
   ENHANCED PRODUCTION. Any operation by which fluid or energy is introduced
into a source of supply for the purpose of stimulating recovery therefrom.
   INSPECTOR. Any person designated by the Bethany, Oklahoma City Manager, or
the head of any department of the city, to make inspections provided for in
this chapter, whether other duties are additionally assigned.
   LEASE. Any tract of land subject to an oil, gas or mineral lease or other
oil and gas development contract, any unit composed of several tracts and
leases but operated as a single lease; and any tract of land in which the
minerals are owned by an operator, someone holding under him or her, or which
due to the royalty ownership, is developed as a separate tract.
   MUD. The drilling fluid used and recirculated through the drilling hole as a
lubricant to reduce torque, drag, heat, friction, differential sticking, and to
flush drill bit cuttings from the hole during the drilling process.
   MUD PROGRAM. The planned usage of drilling fluid lubricants, specifying with
particularity the type, name and physical and chemical composition and
characteristics of all ingredients thereof, together with the laboratory and
other technical data as may be necessary or required by the Engineering
Department to evaluate the same as pollutive, deleterious, detrimental, or
otherwise.
   NATURAL PRODUCTION. The raising of petroleum and/or natural gas to the
surface of the earth by natural flow; i.e. without supplemental pumping
efforts.
   OIL OR GAS WELL. Any well drilled, operated or maintained to produce oil,
gas, casing head gas or any of them or their byproducts or derivatives.
   PERMITTEE. The person to whom is issued a permit or permits under the terms
of this chapter.
   PERSON. Include both the singular and plural; and shall also mean and
include any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, club,
society, cooperative, trust, municipal corporation or political subdivision,
regardless of form. When and after activity or omission is forbidden to a
person, that activity or omission is forbidden whether the person is acting for
himself, herself, or for another, and whether the activity or omission is
performed directly or through an agent, servant, employee, subcontractor or
independent contractor.
   POLLUTION. The contamination, other alteration of the physical, chemical,
biological properties of any natural waters of the city or lands within the
city, or such discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid substance into any water
of the city, upon any lands within the city as will, is likely to create a
nuisance, render such waters or such lands harmful, detrimental to public
health, safety, welfare; which will render such waters or such lands harmful or
detrimental to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or
other beneficial uses; or which will render such waters or such lands harmful
or detrimental to livestock, animals or aquatic life.
   RESERVE PIT. Any excavation, pit, or receptacle designed or used to receive,
store, hold rocks, drill bit cuttings, shale, sand, freshwater, drilling mud
that contains no saltwater, oil, oil derivatives, caustics, acids or other
deleterious substances harmful to soil, vegetation, injurious to animal or
human life.
   SLUSH PIT. Any excavation, pit, receptacle designed or used to receive,
store, hold waste oil, oil derivatives, sand, saltwater, other waste products
or deleterious substances produced or used in the drilling, swabbing, cleaning,
reworking of any oil, gas or disposal well.
   WATER, OR WATER OF THE CITY. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, and all other
bodies or accumulations of water, whether on the surface, underground, whether
natural or artificial, whether public or privately owned or  maintained, and
which are either contained within, flow through, or border upon the city or any
portion thereof.
   WELL. Include and mean any hole or holes, bore, bores, to any sand,
formation, strata or depth for the purpose of producing and recovering any
petroleum, oil, gaseous liquid hydro-carbon, or for the injection or disposal
of any of them or any other liquefied matter or gaseous matter.
   TECHNICAL TERMS. All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used
herein and not specifically defined in this chapter shall have that meaning
customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators of the oil and gas
industry.
(Prior Code, § 5-701)  (Am. Ord. 1426, passed 8-16-88; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)
§ 151.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in or authorize any work or erect any
structure, tanks, machinery, pipelines, or other appurtenances incident to the
drilling of a disposal well or drilling for or production of petroleum, natural
gas, or their products; nor operate, maintain or permit any equipment,
structures, or appurtenances incident to such production to exist or be
maintained; nor allow any flow therefrom, without having previously obtained a
special exception from the Board of Adjustment and a permit as prescribed.
   (B)   In addition to the information required in this subchapter, all
applicants desiring a permit to drill, maintain or operate an oil, gas or
disposal well shall submit:
      (1)   A description of the location of the well, specifying and
identifying the well location within a ten-acre tract within a specific
quarter, section, township and range; i.e., a legal description for the ten-
acre plus an approximate street address;
      (2)   A list of all equipment that will be utilized in the drilling,
operation or maintenance of the specific well or wells; and
      (3)   The mud program to be utilized on that specific well or wells.
(Prior Code, § 5-702)  (Am. Ord. 1426, passed 8-16-88; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.02.01  APPLICATION AND FILING FEE.
   Every application for a permit to drill and operate a well or wells,
including a re-entry to an abandoned well, shall be verified under oath and in
writing, and signed by the applicant or some duly authorized person who may
sign on the applicant's behalf; it shall be filed with the City Finance
Department and be accompanied with a filing fee as set forth in the Manual of
Fees adopted by the Bethany City Council. A separate application shall be
required for each well. The application(s) shall include the following:
   (A)   The name and address of applicant.
   (B)   The name and address of operator.
   (C)   The date of application.
   (D)   A legal description of the land.
   (E)   Approximate street address of any proposed drill site entrance road.
   (F)   A block map of the 40 acres surrounding the drill site, showing
thereon the location of the proposed well in the 40 acres and the location of
all abandoned wells, all structures designed for the occupancy of human beings,
animals, all easements, property boundaries, lease boundaries, private roads to
the well, all fresh water wells within the 40 acres, all oil and gas facilities
proposed to be used with the well site. The map shall show the distances
between the drill site and these items and show a north arrow pointing to
drawing top.
   (G)   The name and address of the surface owner(s) as shown by the tax rolls
maintained in the county where the land is located, and of the mineral owner(s)
if different from the applicant or surface owner(s).
   (H)   A copy of the approved drilling permit from the Corporation Commission
and a copy of the staking plat.
   (I)   The drilling prognosis, to specify in detail the amount, weight, size
of conductor pipe and surface pipe, the procedures to be used for cementing
such. Plugging procedures to be used in the event the production is not
established shall also be specified.
   (J)   A statement of provisions for water for the drilling rig, and the mud
program to be utilized.
   (K)   The name and address of the service agent within the State of Oklahoma
upon whom service of process on behalf of the applicant may be made. In the
case of any nonresident person, there shall be attached to the application a
designation of such a service agent, resident in the county where the land is
located, and a consent that service of summons may be made upon such a person
in any action to enforce any of the obligations hereunder.
   (L)   Plans and engineering specifications of structures, drilling derricks,
drilling masts, tanks and high-pressure systems to be used; standard plans and
specifications already on file and approved by the city at the time of
application may be incorporated by reference.
   (M)   The proposed depth of the well.
   (N)   Certified, photostatic, or electronic (PDF-preferred) copies of all
leases or contracts with the owners.
   (O)   The location of mud pits, pollution prevention equipment, and fire
suppression equipment, together with a list to this equipment.
   (P)   A certificate from a licensed, bonded abstracting company, certifying
the names and addresses of all property owners within a radius of 300 feet of
the exterior boundary of the lease, as shown by the Oklahoma County tax rolls
in the affected areas.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 151.02.02  ISSUANCE OR REFUSAL OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Content of permit. The city staff, within 30 days after the filing of
application for a permit to drill and operate a well, shall determine whether
said application complies in all respects with the provisions of this chapter.
If it does, the city staff shall then make recommendations on any item which
may be varied or waived and shall immediately schedule the application for
permit for public hearing, including a recommendation to the city council that
the permit be issued. If the council grants the permit, the city shall issue
such permit in writing within one week of council approval action or the
posting of the required bond (whichever occurs later). Each permit issued under
this chapter shall:
      (1)   By reference, have incorporated therein all the provisions of this
chapter with the same force and effect as if this chapter were copied verbatim
therein.
      (2)   By reference, have incorporated therein all the provisions of
applicable federal law, state law, all rules, regulations, and standards
adopted in accordance therewith relating to the protection of human beings,
animals and natural resources.
      (3)   Specify the well location with clarity as to available correct
legal description according to the U. S. Government Survey (USGS).
      (4)   Specify that the term of such permit shall be for a period of one
year from the date of the permit, for as long thereafter as the permittee is
engaged in drilling operations with no ceasing of such drilling operations for
more than 30 days, oil or gas is produced in commercial quantities from the
well drilled pursuant to such permit; provided, that if at any time after
discovery of oil or gas and the production thereof in commercial quantities,
such production shall cease, the term shall not terminate if the permittee
commences additional reworking operations within 90 days thereafter; if the
reworking operations result in the production of oil or gas, the permit shall
continue so long thereafter as oil or gas is produced in commercial quantities
from said well. Continuation beyond one year from the date of issuance is
contingent on annual renewal of the permit as set forth hereafter.
      (5)   Specify such conditions imposed by the city as are authorized by
this chapter.
      (6)   Specify that no actual operations shall be commenced until the
permittee shall file and have approved the required bonds and certificate of
insurance in the appropriate amounts as provided herein, and that operators
shall immediately cease should coverage of the bonds or the insurance be
suspended or reduced below the required levels.
      (7)   Specify the total depth to which the well may be drilled, not
exceeding the proposed depth.
   (B)   Signed copies. The permit, in duplicate originals, shall be signed by
the city manager or his designate, and shall be signed by the permittee prior
to delivery. One original shall be retained by the city and one original shall
be retained by the permittee. When so signed, the permit shall constitute the
permittee's drilling and operation license and contractual obligation of the
permittee to comply with the terms of such permit, the bonds required by the
ordinances, and this chapter. The copy of the permit retained by the permittee
shall be kept immediately available for inspection by any city or state law
enforcement official or inspector who demands to see the same. Grant of the
permit by the city is not a guarantee of the permittee, nor is it an expression
of the feasibility of the operations.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 151.02.03  TERMINATION POINT.
   When a permit has been issued, the same shall terminate and become
inoperative without any action on the part of the city unless, within 90 days
of the date of issuance, actual drilling of the well commences. If drilling
operations or production cease for a period sufficient to make the well an
abandoned well as defined herein, this abandonment shall operate to terminate
and cancel the permit without any action on the part of the city, and it shall
be unlawful thereafter to continue the operation of or drilling of such a well
without the issuance of a new permit.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 151.02.04  RENEWAL OF PERMIT; FEE.
   (A)   On or before the anniversary date of the issuance of the permit each
year, permittee shall file an application for renewal of the base permit
previously granted. Such application shall include the following:
      (1)   A renewal fee in an amount set forth in the Manual of Fees.
      (2)   A statement of amendments as to any factual issues which have been
changed from the facts set forth in the initial application.
      (3)   As to wells which were drilled during the previous year, a
statement as to whether the well has been converted to production, and if so,
identifying the strata and depth of production.
      (4)   Evidence that all bonds and insurance remain in force or have been
replaced with equivalent new bonds and insurance.
      (5)   A statement of the safety history of the well during the past year,
which must include a summary of each type of claim submitted, name of the
claimant(s), the amount of the claim(s), and the amount(s) of settlement (if
any). Provided that claims, as used in this section, shall not include claims
involving worker's compensation, but shall include spills on the land,
contamination of subsurface strata, spills of oil, gas, or deleterious
substances which occurred within the city limits in route to or from the well
in question.
      (6)   The application for renewal may be submitted through the mail or in
person. Failure to make the required application for renewal shall suspend all
rights to drill, produce, inject or dispose, but shall not be construed to
terminate the base permit until after the time required to make the well an
abandoned well. Any operation conducted while the permit rights are suspended
shall not prevent the well from becoming an abandoned well, all such operations
are offenses and forbidden until the renewal is issued.
      (7)   The city shall notify permittee by letter within 30 days thereafter
that the base permit has been extended, or that the base permit has not been
extended, for a period of one year. This notice of extension shall be
maintained by the permittee with the permit and used as a supplement thereto
for all purposes. In the event the permit is not renewed and expired, the
permittee shall immediately cease all drilling, production operations and
diligently proceed to plug the well.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 151.03  PRODUCTION PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall drill, mine, produce, cause to be drilled, mined,
produced, any gas, oil, or other minerals in zoning districts, other than I-R,
I-L or A, and only property located in those districts shall be eligible for
granting of special exception.
   (B)   An internal combustion engine of any kind operated in conjunction with
the production of an oil or gas well within the city shall be equipped with a
"hospital quiet" muffler.
   (C)   No oil or gas well shall be drilled, operated, or maintained, nor
shall any operation in connection therewith be carried, conducted within 300
feet of any church, school, business, dwelling unless the Board of Adjustment
grants a special exception allowing the well at a closer distance from the uses
with special conditions. The distance shall be measured from the wellhead to
the property line of the tract which is being used for dwelling, church,
school, or business.
   (D)   No disposal well shall be drilled or operated in the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-703)  (Am. Ord. 1426, passed 8-16-88; Am. Ord. 1700, passed 7-
15-03; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.04  BONDS AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of any permit, the applicant shall deposit with
the City Clerk a cash amount of $2,000 as a security for the compliance with
all requirements of this subchapter by the owner, his driller, or her driller,
agents, and employees during the drilling operation.
   (B)   When the drilling operation has been completed in compliance with all
requirements of this subchapter, the $2,000 cash amount shall be refunded upon
the deposit with the City Clerk of surety bond or cash deposit in the form of a
cashier's check or certificate of deposit in the amount of $25,000 conditioned
upon plugging of the well and/or the restoration of the land's surface, the
plugging and restoration to be performed within 90 days of the abandonment, in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Corporation Commission.
   (C)   Upon non-compliance of the above-listed conditions, the cash amount or
the surety bond shall be forfeited and shall provide reimbursement for the
plugging of the well and restoration of the land's surface.
   (D)   Prior to issuance of any permit, applicants shall enter into an
agreement with the city as follows:
      (1)   The applicant shall agree to fully defend, protect, indemnify and
hold harmless the city, its employees and agents, from and against each and
every claim, demand or cause of action, and any liability cost, expense,
including but not limited to reasonable attorney's fees and expenses incurred
in defense of the city, damage or loss in connection therewith, which may be
made or asserted by applicant, applicant's employees or agents, subcontractors
or any third party, including but not limited to the city's agents, or
employees, on account of personal injury or death or property damage caused by,
arising out of or, in any way incidental to, or in connection with the
performance of the work hereunder, except such as may result solely from the
city's negligence.
      (2)   The applicant shall agree to fully defend, protect, indemnify and
hold harmless the city, its employees and agents, from and against each and
every claim, demand or cause of action and any liability, cost, expense,
including, but not limited to reasonable attorney's fees and expenses incurred
in defense of the city, damage or loss in connection therewith, which may be
based upon the infringement of any patent in or in connection with the
performance of the work or the use of the materials or equipment furnished for
or in connection with the work.
      (3)   Prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant shall maintain, at his
or her sole cost, and will require any subcontractors he or she may engage to
maintain, at all times while performing work hereunder the insurance coverage
set forth below with companies satisfactory to the city with full policy
limits, applying but not less than as stated.
      (4)   A certificate evidencing the required insurance and specifically
quoting the indemnification provisions set forth in this agreement shall be
delivered to the city prior to commencement of the work and shall provide that
any change restricting or reducing coverage or the cancellation of any policies
under which certificates are issued shall not be valid as respects the city's
interest therein until the city has received 30 day notice in writing of the
change or cancellation:
         (a)   Worker's compensation insurance, as required by laws and
regulations applicable to and covering employees of contractor or his/her
subcontractor(s) engaged in the performance of the work under this agreement;
         (b)   Employer's liability insurance, protecting contractor or his/her
subcontractor(s) against common law liability, in the absence of statutory
liability, for employee bodily injury arising out of master-servant
relationship with a limit of not less than $500,000;
         (c)   Comprehensive general liability insurance, including products
completed operations; (This policy shall cover, among other risks, the
contractual liability assumed under the indemnification provision set forth in
this agreement and it shall have limits of liability in amounts not less than
the limits provided in the State Political Subdivision Tort Claims Act.)
         (d)   Automobile liability insurance, including non-owned, or hired
vehicles coverage with limits of liability in amounts not less than the limits
provided in the State Political Subdivision Tort Claims Act; and
         (e)   Excess liability insurance, including comprehensive general
liability, comprehensive automobile liability and coverages afforded by the
policies described above, with minimum limits of $5,000,000 excess of the
specified limits.
      (5)   The insurance policies shall not include any exclusion for
collapse, underground resources and equipment exclusion, blowout or cratering,
underground property damage exclusion, explosion, contamination, cost of
control and exclusion within city limits.
      (6)   All insurance policies shall be endorsed to show the city as an
additional insured, except the worker's compensation.
      (7)   Each policy shall be endorsed to provide waiver of subrogation
rights in favor of the city, its subsidiaries and affiliates, and all other
parties owning an interest in the property on which work covered by this
agreement is to be performed.
      (8)   Failure of the applicant to keep the insurance policies as required
by this section in full force and effect during the work covered by this
agreement and during any extensions, extra or additional work agreed to by the
applicant and the city hereunder shall constitute a breach of this agreement,
and the city shall have the right, in addition to any other rights, to
immediately cancel and terminate the permit without further cost to the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-704)  (Am. Ord. 1426, passed 8-16-88; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.05  EARTHEN EMERGENCY PITS.
   (A)   (1)   Earthen pits lined with impermeable material may be constructed
only as temporary emergency pits.
      (2)   All earthen pits shall be emptied as soon as the emergency ceases.
      (3)   Mud or circulating tanks shall be steel.
   (B)   The emergency pits shall be leveled, and the surface of the ground
restored as nearly as possible to its original condition within 30 days after
production causing a run, leak, or discharge.
   (C)   No earthen reserve pit will be allowed in conjunction with the
completion of the well.
(Prior Code, § 5-705)  (Am. Ord. 1426, passed 8-16-88; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.06  EARTHEN RETAINING WALLS.
   (A)   An earthen retaining wall of adequate size for the terrain shall be
constructed on the low side of all well sites on sloping or unleveled ground.
   (B)   The top of the retaining wall shall be at least as high as the top of
the Christmas tree or other wellhead connections of any completed well or at
least as high as the ground at the point where surface casing is set in the
well when drilling.
(Prior Code, § 5-706)  (Am. Ord. 1426, passed 8-16-88; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)
§ 151.07  EARTHEN SLUSH PITS.
   (A)   No earthen slush pit shall be constructed, built, maintained, or used
by any person, corporation, or firm.
   (B)   All waste oil, saltwater, liquid with oil content, gasoline or other
oil derivatives, or byproducts, sand sludge, or other waste produced in
connection with the drilling, testing, cleaning, swabbing, reworking, or
operating, of any oil, gas or disposal well shall be captured and retained in
steel tanks or vessels and transported from the premises to a disposal
facility.
   (C)   No person shall permit the substances to escape from the premises
owned, leased, or controlled by the persons conducting the operations by
seepage, overflow, or otherwise, nor flow across the surface of the ground or
upon any public way, into any storm or sanitary sewer, drainage ditch, upon any
gutter, paving, or into any gully, stream or tributary.
(Prior Code, § 5-707)  (Am. Ord. 1426, passed 8-16-88; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.08  MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES.
   The premises upon which any oil, gas or disposal well is drilled, operated
or maintained shall be kept free of all accumulations of rubbish, litter,
unused equipment or materials, excess rotary mud, saltwater, waste oil, oil
byproducts and other waste, as the same may be reasonably done in the conduct
of operations.
(Prior Code, § 5-708)  (Am. Ord. 1426, passed 8-16-88; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.09  SAFETY DEVICES AND PRACTICES.
   Approved equipment, standard devices and all ordinary methods commonly known
and used in the oil and gas drilling and provisions hereof and the regulations
when reduced to writing and approved by the City Council shall have the same
force and effect as if same were set out in full in this subchapter. A
violation of any rule or regulation so adopted shall constitute a violation of
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-709)  (Am. Ord. 1426, passed 8-16-88; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.10  CASING.
   At least 200 feet below freshwater sands a surface casing shall be set in
each well after notification of intention to do so has been given to the
Conservation Department of the State Corporation Commission whose
representatives shall be entitled to inspect the installation thereof and
direct the type and amount of cement to be used in cementing the hole. The
cement shall be poured to the surface until it circulates out and tested to the
maximum necessary.
(Prior Code, § 5-710)  (Am. Ord. 1426, passed 8-16-88; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)
§ 151.11  TUBING.
   (A)   Upon completion of any flowing well, the wellhead equipment shall
have, on the tubing, at least one master valve plus a flow valve, and a valve
on the casing annulus.
   (B)   All wells shall be equipped with flow tubing of a size at least two
inches inside diameter extending from not less than 50 feet from the top of the
lowest producing formation.
(Prior Code, § 5-711)  (Am. Ord. 1426, passed 8-16-88; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)
§ 151.12  STORAGE TANKS.
   No storage tank shall be located closer than 300 feet to a house, dwelling,
or business unless a location exception is granted by the Board of Adjustment.
(Prior Code, § 5-712)  (Am. Ord. 1426, passed 8-16-88; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.13  RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to promulgate the rules and
regulations as are necessary to enforce and implement the provisions hereof and
the regulations when reduced to writing and approved by the City Council shall
have the same force and
effect as if same were set out in full in this subchapter.
   (B)   A violation of any rule or regulation so adopted shall constitute a
violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-713)  (Am. Ord. 1426, passed 8-16-88; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)
   WATER WELL DRILLING
§ 151.25  LICENSING AND TAX REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall drill, dig, put down, install or
construct any water well or water wells for any other person or persons without
obtaining a license and paying the tax, as prescribed.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to become a water well
driller in the city shall apply to the City Clerk for a license to operate as a
water well driller and shall register his or her name and place of business.
   (C)   (1)   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall prohibit an
individual from drilling one well on premises owned by him or her, after
obtaining a well drilling permit, without being licensed as a water well
driller.
      (2)   However, all persons shall comply with all other provisions of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-801)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.26  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall drill, sink, put down or construct any
water well in the city without obtaining a permit therefor, giving the location
of the proposed well, by street address or lot, block, and addition, the name
of the owner of the premises, the intended use for the well and paying the fee
prescribed.
(Prior Code, § 5-802)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.27  REGULATIONS; DRILLING CASE; CAPPING AND PLUGGING.
   (A)   In all water wells drilled in the city, the driller shall fix, install
or set a minimum of ten feet down hole of surface pipe or casing and shall use
throughout, standard metal casing and pipe, either black or galvanized, plastic
P.V.C. or A.B.S. pipe. In all other respects, the water well drillers shall
meet the minimum requirements established and published by the Environmental
Health Service or the State Department of Health. No mud shall be permitted to
escape on any street or public way but shall be hauled away and disposed of so
as not to injure the streets, drainage systems, other public, or private
property.
   (B)   While conducting drilling operations of water wells, the driller shall
have posted on his or her drilling rig in a prominent place the license number
assigned him or her by the City Clerk.
   (C)   Should a well be non-productive of water, the driller shall
satisfactorily cap and plug the well so that the same will not be dangerous to
persons or animals. If the well is productive of water, but is later abandoned,
the owner shall plug and cap the same.
(Prior Code, § 5-803)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.28  INSPECTION.
   All water wells which are now in use or which may hereafter be drilled
within the city shall be made accessible within 30 days' notice to well owner
to the inspection of the City-County Health Department and the Water Department
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-804)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 151.29  CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SUPPLY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any private water well
to the city’s public water system so that the water may commingle. Cross
connections shall not be permitted between a private water supply and the city
water supply. No physical connection will be permitted between a line carrying
the city's water supply and a line carrying water from a private source.
   (B)   No water connection shall be made from the city water supply to any
water using mechanical device or system unless it is designed to insure against
backflow or siphonage of contaminated water into the city's water supply.
(Prior Code, § 5-805)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.30  SALE OF IMPURE WATER PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm, or corporation to sell,
offer to sell, give away or deliver for potable purposes, any water from any
well in the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-806)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 152:  MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOMES; TRAVEL TRAILERS
Section
Mobile and Manufactured Home Parks
   
152.01   Definitions
   
152.02   Temporary parking
   
152.03   Application of regulations to existing and new parks
   
152.04   Building permit required
   
152.05   Location and layout requirements
   
152.06   Regulations
   
152.07   Revocation permit
   
152.08   Recreational service facilities and buildings
   
152.09   Recreation vehicle water supply, sewer facilities and the like
   
152.10   Health and safety
   
152.11   Mixed parks
Mobile/Manufactured Home Subdivisions
   
152.20   Applicability
   
152.21   Lot requirements
   
152.22   Side lot lines
   
152.23   Public streets
   
152.24   Greenbelt
MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
§ 152.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DILAPIDATED. A state of disrepair or ruin as a result of age or neglect.
   DIRECTOR. The director of Oklahoma Used Motor Vehicle and Parks Commission.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Director of the Oklahoma City/County Health Department.
   INSTALLER. A person, including a retailer or manufacturer, who contracts to
perform or performs an installation function on manufactured housing.
   LABEL. Device or insignia.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. Factory-built, single-family structures that meet the
National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act (42 U.S.C. §
5401, 1978 as amended) commonly known as HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development Code) and which meets the city's Residential Design
Standards.
   MOBILE HOME. A single-family dwelling, factory-built and factory assembled
residence which does not comply with the National Manufactured Homes
Construction Safety and Standards Act. The term " manufactured homes" is used
for mobile homes constructed after 1978 when nationwide construction standards
were adopted. The only “mobile homes” in existence are those still in use that
were constructed before 1978.
   MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Any plot of ground upon which two or more
mobile/manufactured homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are
located, regardless of whether a charge is made for the accommodations.
   MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. A plot of ground indicated on an approved
site plan park designed for the accommodation of one mobile/manufactured home
and not located on a mobile/manufactured home sale lot.
   MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A subdivision designed and intended
for residential use where residence is in a mobile/manufactured home
exclusively and mobile home lots are sold for occupancy.
   PERSON. Natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation.
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM OF THE CITY or PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM OF THE CITY. Any
systems built and owned by or dedicated to and accepted by the city. All other
utility systems are private.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicular-type unit designed for recreational,
camping or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on
or drawn by another vehicle, but excluding mobile homes.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. Any plot of ground upon which two or more travel
trailers are occupied for dwelling regardless of whether a charge is made for
the accommodations.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SPACE. A plot of ground indicated on an approved site
plan within a recreational vehicle park designed for accommodation of one
recreational vehicle.
   SKIRTING. A manufactured material intended for skirting a manufactured home
or mobile home to conceal the foundation system and piping systems. The skirt
shall be constructed of manufactured skirting material intended for skirting a
manufactured home, a vinyl siding material with a rigid backing, a material
matching and equivalent to the manufactured home or mobile home, siding,
pressure-treated wood or a commercial masonry fencing system which shall be
adequately framed.
   SUBDIVISION. Mobile home or manufactured home subdivision unless otherwise
indicated.
(Prior Code, § 13-301)  (Ord. 1234, passed 4-19-83; Am. Ord. 1511, passed 4-5-
94; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 152.02  TEMPORARY PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and an offense to park any recreational vehicle
or mobile/manufactured home on any street, alley, highway or other public place
or on any tract of land occupied or unoccupied, except when located in approved
recreational vehicle parks or mobile/manufactured home parks; provided the
temporary parking of recreational vehicles is authorized under the following
conditions:
      (1)   An occupied recreational vehicle may be temporarily parked for a
period of not more than forty-eight (48) hours in any 12-month period in the
residential and institutional zoning districts of the city.
      (2)   Temporary parking of a recreational vehicle shall not be on a
street, alley, public right-of-way, parks or other public property, but the
vehicle shall be parked entirely on private property with the consent of the
owner thereof.
      (3)   No liquid waste shall be disposed of or dumped into or on any
public property, private property, storm sewers, or sanitary sewers, but rather
all waste shall be held in holding tanks completely within or upon the vehicle.
Solid waste shall be disposed of in accordance with the ordinances and
regulations of the city.
   (B)   Emergency or temporary stopping is permitted in any street, alley or
highway for not longer than one-hour subject to any other or further
prohibition, regulations or limitations imposed upon the traffic and parking
regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or highway.
   (C)   Any owner of a recreational vehicle may park or store the equipment on
private residential property, provided that no person shall occupy the
recreational vehicle while so parked, except as provided in division (A) above
for temporary parking.
(Prior Code, § 13-302)  (Ord. 1234, passed 4-19-83; Am. Ord. 1511, passed 4-5-
94; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.03  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS TO EXISTING AND NEW PARKS.
   (A)   Those parks lawfully in existence before the initial date of passage
of this subchapter shall not be governed by the regulations and standards of
this subchapter unless specifically stated herein. However, no existing park
shall be permitted to expand or have placed a greater number of mobile/
manufactured homes or travel trailers within its existing boundaries unlss
these additional units conform to all the regulations and standards of this
subchapter. Any existing park shall not be expanded beyond its existing
boundaries unless the newly expanded area conforms to all the regulations and
standards of this subchapter.
   (B)   All new parks planned for development after the date of initial
passage of this subchapter shall conform to the regulations and standards
established herein.
(Prior Code, § 13-303)  (Ord. 1234, passed 4-19-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 152.04  BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person desiring to construct, erect, alter or repair a park or any
addition thereto shall, before commencing work thereon, secure a building
permit from the City Building Inspector to do so. No permit shall be required
for the addition of steps, window or door awnings, skirting or porches. The
addition of an antenna is subject to inspection by building inspector.
   (B)   All construction, plumbing, and electrical alterations or repairs
shall be made in accordance with the regulations of both city and state
statutes.
   (C)   Building permits may be issued only in accordance with an approved
site plan, as required in Chapter
155 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 13-304)  (Ord. 1234, passed 4-19-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.05  LOCATION AND LAYOUT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Intensity of development for a new mobile/manufactured home park shall
be limited to no more than ten mobile/manufactured homes per gross acres.
Recreational vehicle parks shall be limited to 20 recreational vehicles per
gross acre.
   (B)   Every mobile/manufactured home or recreational vehicle space shall be
clearly defined in a new park. Mobile/manufactured home spaces shall be at
least 30 feet wide, and recreational vehicle spaces shall be no less than 20
feet wide. Mobile/manufactured homes shall be parked in the spaces that, at the
nearest point, they shall be ten feet from the service road, ten feet from all
property lines and at least 15 feet from any other mobile/manufactured home or
recreational vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   The space or pad on which a mobile/manufactured home or
recreational vehicle is parked shall be constructed of asphaltic or 3500 psi
Portland cement concrete.
      (2)   This requirement may be satisfied with two asphaltic or 3500 psi
Portland cement concrete driveway ribbons, separated by more than four feet
with an area which shall be treated to kill all vegetation and filled with
crushed rock to a depth of not less than four inches.
   (D)   Recreational vehicle parks shall make provisions for tent camping. Ten
percent of the spaces, in a recreational vehicle park may be assigned to tent
camping only, and the space shall be constructed of sandy soil.
   (E)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to permit a mobile/manufactured home or
recreational vehicle to be in a park unless it is placed in a designated
mobile/manufactured home or recreational vehicle space as indicated on an
approved site plan.
      (2)   No structure other than a mobile/manufactured home shall be
permitted on a mobile/manufactured home space, except that one structure an
accessory building of not to exceed 100 square feet may be used for storage on
each space, and the park owners' home and/or park office may be permitted. No
storage buildings or accessory buildings are permitted on a recreational
vehicle space.
   (F)   At least two clearly defined parking spaces will be provided for each
mobile/manufactured home entirely on the mobile/manufactured home space. At
least one parking space shall be provided for each recreational vehicle space
either on or adjacent to the recreational vehicle space.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful to locate a mobile/manufactured home or
recreational vehicle less than 25 feet from any public street or highway right-
of-way or so that any part of the mobile/manufactured home or recreational
vehicle will obstruct any roadway or walkway of a new park.
   (H)   All mobile/manufactured home spaces shall abut upon a drive of not
less than 30 feet in width. All recreational vehicle spaces shall abut upon a
drive of not less than 20 feet in width. All driveways within a park shall be
constructed with a minimum of 2-1/2 inches of asphaltic concrete on a six-inch
compacted subbase or four inches of 3500 psi Portland concrete on a four-inch
sand cushion base. Driveways must have unobstructed access to a public street
or highway. Recreational vehicle parks shall have major means of access from at
least a major thoroughfare as designated on the comprehensive plan.
   (I)   All parks shall have and maintain a buffer strip at least ten feet
wide, along all park boundaries not bordering a street. The strip shall be
bordered by a six-foot, sight-proof fence.
(Prior Code, § 13-305)  (Ord. 1234, passed 4-19-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.06  REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A City of Bethany permit is required prior to moving a manufactured
home into the City of Bethany.
   (B)   The manufactured home shall be constructed according to the rules of
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   (C)   The manufactured home shall have a label issued by the Director to
indicate compliance with the standards, rules, and regulations established by
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; and the label is
permanently attached to each transportable section of each HUD-code
manufactured home.
   (D)   The Manufactured home shall have a construction date of no older than
five years. Proof of construction date shall be provided to the City of Bethany
Inspector during the permit process and before entrance into the City of
Bethany.
   (E)   The manufactured home shall be built on a permanent chassis.
   (F)   The manufactured home shall be installed by a professional installer
of manufactured homes.
   (G)   The manufactured home shall be installed on a temporary or permanent
foundation system and the home shall be properly connected to the foundation by
an anchoring system.
   (H)   Installation of the manufactured home shall include skirting at the
bottom of the home to conceal the foundation system and piping system. The
skirting shall conform to the definition referenced in §
152.01.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 152.07  RENOVATION PERMIT.
   Any renovation to an existing mobile home or manufactured home will require
a renovation permit from the City Building Inspector.
   (A)   The renovation permit will require the mobile home or manufactured
home to conform to the above regulations set forth in §
152.06.
   (B)   The manufactured home shall include the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems required by the City of Bethany.
   (C)   The manufactured home shall be installed on a temporary or permanent
foundation system and the home shall be properly connected to the foundation by
an anchoring system.
   (D)   The manufactured home shall provide skirting at the bottom of the home
to conceal the foundation system and piping systems.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 152.08  RECREATIONAL SERVICE FACILITIES AND BUILDINGS.
   (A)   (1)   At least one service building shall be provided in each travel
trailer park to house sanitation facilities.
      (2)   Service buildings shall be constructed to conform to the following
provisions in addition to this subchapter and the Building Code of the city.
   (B)   A service building shall:
      (1)   Be located no less than 25 feet and no more than 200 feet from any
travel trailer space;
      (2)   Be of permanent construction and be adequately lighted;
      (3)   Be of moisture-resistant material, to permit frequent washing and
cleaning;
      (4)   Have adequate heating facilities to maintain a temperature of 70° F
during cold weather and to supply adequate hot water during peak demands; and
      (5)   Have all rooms well ventilated, with all openings effectively
screened.
(Prior Code, § 13-306)  (Ord. 1234, passed 4-19-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 152.09  RECREATION VEHICLE WATER SUPPLY, SEWER FACILITIES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Provisions shall be made within 150 feet of each travel trailer space
to supply water for recreational vehicle reservoirs.
   (B)   Where drinking fountains are provided for public use, they shall be of
a type and in location approved by the City, County Health Officer.
   (C)   Sanitary dump stations approved by the health officer shall be
provided to adequately serve the recreational vehicle park at times of maximum
usage. The facility is to be connected to the city sanitary sewer system.
   (D)   Restroom facilities for males shall consist of not less than one
toilet and one urinal for the first ten recreational vehicles or fraction
thereof and for recreational vehicles in excess of ten not less than one
additional urinal for every ten additional recreational vehicles or fractional
number thereof.
   (E)   Restroom facilities for females shall consist of not less than two
flush toilets for the first six recreational vehicle spaces or any less number
thereof and for recreational vehicle spaces in excess of six not less than one
additional flush toilet for every ten additional recreational vehicle spaces in
excess of six or fractional number thereof.
   (F)   Toilet facilities for males and females shall not have less than two
lavatories and two showers with individual dressing accommodations for the
first ten recreational vehicles or fractional number thereof, and for
recreational vehicle spaces in excess of ten, not less than one additional
lavatory and one additional shower with individual dressing accommodations for
every ten additional recreational vehicle spaces or fractional number thereof.
   (G)   Each toilet for females or males and each shower or bathtub with
individual dressing accommodations for females or males shall be in a private
compartment or stall.
   (H)   The toilet and other sanitation facilities for males and females shall
either be separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same building, by
a soundproof wall or operational space for servicing plumbing to such
facilities.
(Prior Code, § 13-307)  (Ord. 1234, passed 4-19-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.10  HEALTH AND SAFETY.
   (A)   Wrecked, damaged or dilapidated mobile homes and recreational vehicles
shall not be kept or stored in a park. The City/County Health Officer shall
determine if a mobile home, recreational vehicles, or travel trailer is unfit
for human occupancy on either a temporary or permanent basis. Whenever a
determination is made, the mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be removed
from the premises forthwith in less than ten days.
   (B)   All mobile/manufactured homes in mobile/manufactured home parks shall
be tied down in accordance with the requirements of the BOCA Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 13-308)  (Ord. 1234, passed 4-19-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 152.11  MIXED PARKS.
   (A)   Mixed parks shall have certain areas specifically reserved for mobile/
manufactured homes and other areas specifically reserved for recreational
vehicles. This distinction is to be clearly indicated on the site plan. The
mobile/manufactured home portion of the park shall comply with all sections of
this code concerning mobile/manufactured homes. The recreational vehicle
portion of the park shall comply with all sections of this code concerning
recreational vehicles.
   (B)   Although each section of the park may share a common point of access
to a public street, mobile/manufactured home traffic and recreational vehicle
traffic is to be segregated.
(Prior Code, § 13-309)  (Ord. 1234, passed 4-19-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISIONS
§ 152.20  APPLICABILITY.
   Mobile/manufactured home subdivisions shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter
154 and §§
150.001 through
150.104 of this code of ordinances, except as otherwise provided for in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-310)  (Ord. 1234, passed 4-19-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 152.21  LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   Minimum effective lot widths in a mobile/manufactured home subdivision shall
be 40 feet measured at the front building line and minimum lot areas shall be
4,000 square feet, provided that at least a five-foot side yard shall be
provided on each lot beyond any mobile/manufactured home and addition thereto.
The effective lot width of a mobile/manufactured home shall be determined, for
interior lots, by measuring at right angles across the lot from one diagonal
side line to the other and for corner lots, the measurement shall be made at
right angles from on diagonal having the greatest divergence from perpendicular
to the street, through the midpoint of the rear line of the required front
yard, to the opposite lot line or an extension thereof.
(Prior Code, § 13-311)  (Ord. 1234, passed 4-19-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 152.22  SIDE LOT LINES.
   Side lines of lots in a mobile/manufactured home subdivision need not be at
right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
(Prior Code, § 13-312)  (Ord. 1234, passed 4-19-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 152.23  PUBLIC STREETS.
   Regardless of the effective lot width, mobile/manufactured home subdivision
lots must abut a public street for at least 25 feet.
(Prior Code, § 13-313)  (Ord. 1234, passed 4-19-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 152.24  GREENBELT.
   All mobile manufactured home subdivisions shall have a green belt planting
strip not less than 20 feet in width, along all subdivision boundaries.
(Prior Code, § 13-314)  (Ord. 1234, passed 4-19-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
CHAPTER 153:  SIGN REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Definitions
   
153.02   Purposed, intent and legislative intent
   
153.03   Scope and application
   
153.04   Conflicts
   
153.05   Enforcement and administration
   
153.06   Inspections
   
153.07   Violation
Location and Construction
   
153.15   General sign construction and location regulations
   
153.16   District regulations
   
153.17   Compliance with codes
   
153.18   Auxiliary specifications
   
153.19   Prohibited signs
   
153.20   Maintenance and repair
   
153.21   Nonconforming signs
   
153.22   Removal of signs
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A-FRAME SIGN. A ground sign which resembles the shape of a letter "A" in
profile view. Sometimes designated as "sandwich board", "sidewalk board" or
"curb sign".
   ABANDONED/OBSOLETE SIGN. Any sign or sign structure, whether permitted or
not or required to  be permitted or not under this chapter, which advertises or
pertains to a business, product, service, event, activity, purpose which is no
longer conducted or that has not been in use for 180 days. Any sign structure
that no longer displays any sign copy or wording shall be deemed to be an
obsolete or abandoned sign.
   ANIMATION. Any visible mechanical or electronic movement in any sign or
apparent movement achieved by electrical pulsations or by other means, such as
sequential light phasing and include the following types:
      (1)   Electrically activated: Animated sign producing the illusion of
movement by means of electronic, electrical, or electromechanical input and/or
illumination capable of simulating movement through employment of the
characteristics of one or both classifications noted below:
         (a)   Flashing: Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period of
illumination is either the same as or less than the period of no illumination.
For the purposes of this ordinance, flashing will not be defined as occurring
if the cyclical period between on/off phases of illumination exceeds seven
seconds.
         (b)   Patterned illusionary movement: Animated signs or animated
portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by simulated movement
through alternate or sequential activation of various illuminated elements for
the purpose of producing repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some
form of constant motion.
   ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTIONS. Any projection, excluding signs, which is not
intended for  occupancy and which extends beyond the face of an exterior wall
of a building, including, but not limited to, roof overhangs, wing walls,
mansards, unenclosed exterior balconies, marquees, canopies, pilasters, fascia
boards, and awnings.
   AREA. The surface space of a sign, measured by its maximum projection or
angle of interference with sight within a single continuous perimeter
containing the sign message together with any frame, material, or color forming
an integral part of the display, not including support structures.
   BANNER, FLAG, OR PENNANT. Any nonrigid material used for advertising
purposes attached to any structure, pole, staff, wire or rope line, or framing
(not including official flags of officially recognized governments or religious
organizations).
   CABINET SIGN. A sign structure comprised of a frame and face or faces.
   CANOPY. A permanently roofed shelter covering a sidewalk, driveway or other
similar area, which is supported by the building to which it is attached.
   CITY BUILDING INSPECTOR. The city manager is the person charged with the
administration  and enforcement of this chapter and he/she may designate
certain persons as city inspection officials to carry out such duties.
   COPY. The wording or message of a sign, including the surface upon which the
wording or message is attached.
   DAYS. Consecutive calendar days including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
   DIGITAL. Digital shall mean and include any electronic, pixel based, or
similar technology used to display and/or change the image and/or copy on a
sign by electronic, digital, LED, video or similar technology.
   DISPLAY FACE. See "Sign Side."
   DISTRICT. A zoning district established in Chapter
158 of this code of ordinances, the boundaries  of which are determined by
reference to the zoning map.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER AND DISPLAY SCREEN. Any on premises sign or
portion of a sign that uses changing lights to display an electronic image,
video, or text messages. The rate of change of the messages or images is
electronically programmed and can be modified by an electronic process. This
definition includes television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, flat
screens, LED screens, LCD screens, video boards and holographic displays.
   ERECT. To build, construct, alter, repair, display, relocate, attach, hang,
place, suspend, affix or maintain any sign, and shall also include the painting
of exterior wall signs.
   EXPRESSWAY. N.W. 39th Street Expressway.
   FACADE. The side of a building below the eaves.
   FLASHING. Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is always not
maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color when such sign is in
use. For the purpose of this Code any moving illuminated sign, except digital
billboards, must be considered a flashing sign.
   FREESTANDING. A sign erected and maintained on a freestanding frame, mast or
pole not attached to any building, and not including ground mounted signs.
   FRONTAGE, BUILDING. The horizontal, linear dimension of that side of a
building which abuts a street, a parking area, mall, other circulation area
open to the general public and having either a main window display of the
enterprise, or a public entrance to the building.
   FRONTAGE, STREET. The lineal frontage or frontages of a lot or parcel
abutting on a private or public street which provides principal access to, or
visibility of, the premises.
   GOVERNMENT SIGN. A government sign is a sign that is constructed, placed, or
maintained by the federal, state or local government, or a sign that is
required to be constructed, placed or maintained by the federal, state or local
government either directly or to enforce a property owner's rights.
   GROUND MOUNTED. A sign which extends from the ground or has support which
places the bottom edge of the sign less than two feet from the ground.
   HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the ground level to the top of a
sign, inclusive of berms and embankments.
   HISTORIC WORDS OR SYMBOLS. Any sign painted, engraved or carved into a
building and that no longer relates to the use or occupant of the building and
has been in place for greater than 50 years.
   INTEGRAL. A sign that is embedded, extruded or carved into the material of a
building façade. A sign made of bronze, brushed stainless steel or aluminum, or
similar material attached to the building facade.
   LARGE-SCALE TENANT. Large-scale tenant means any commercial or industrial
use that exceeds 50,000 square feet of gross leasable area (GLA).
   LOT. A portion or parcel of land, whether part of a platted subdivision or
otherwise, occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or use and its
accessories, together with such yards as are required under the provisions of
the zoning ordinance.
   LOT STREET FRONTAGE. The length of the property line(s) or lot line(s)
bordering a public road. For corner lots, each street side property line shall
be a separate street frontage.
   MARQUEE. A canopy or covering structure bearing a signboard or copy
projecting from and attached to a building.
   MAINTENANCE. The replacing, repairing or repainting of a sign structure made
necessary by ordinary wear and tear, weather or accident. All such work shall
be performed to conform to all applicable Code provisions.
   MAJOR TENANT. A tenant that's use (1) exceeds 4,000 square feet of gross
leasable area (GLA) and (2) if part of a multiple tenant building, the use is
the largest tenant, in terms of GLA, in the building that it occupies.
   MINOR TENANT. A tenant that's use (1) contains gross leasable area (GLA)
equal to or less than four thousand (4,000) square feet and (2) if part of a
multiple tenant building, the use is not the largest tenant, in terms of GLA,
in the building that it occupies.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign in noncompliance with applicable number, area,
height, setback, code or specification regulations but which lawfully existed
on August 6, 2019.
   OWNER. That person who owns a sign and who either owns the property on which
the sign is located or is the owner of the business being conducted on the
premises to which the sign pertains.
   ORIGINAL ART DISPLAY. A hand-painted work of visual art that is either
affixed to or painted directly on the exterior wall of a structure with the
permission of the property owner. An original art display does not include
mechanically produced or computer-generated prints or images, including but not
limited to digitally printed vinyl; electrical or mechanical components; or
changing image art display.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING. A sign which advertises goods, products or services
which are not sold, manufactured or distributed on or from the premises or
facilities on which the sign is located.
   PERSON. Any person, tenant, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, institution or organization of any kind public or private.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Any structure without a permanent foundation or otherwise
permanently attached to a fixed location, which can be carried, towed, hauled
or driven and is primarily designed to be moved rather than be limited to a
fixed location regardless of modifications that limit its movability.
   PROPERTY LINE. The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots
or property abutting thereon as determined by the legal description of the
property and the records of the Oklahoma County Clerk.
   PROJECTING. A sign, other than a wall sign, which projects from and is
supported by a wall of a building or structure.
   PUBLIC ENTRANCE. An entrance to a building or premises which is customarily
used or intended for use by the general public. Fire exits, special employee
entrances, loading dock entrances not generally used by the public, and the
like shall not be considered as public entrances.
   ROOF. The cover of any building, including the eaves and similar
projections. The term "roof line" shall also include the highest point on any
parapet wall, providing said parapet wall extends around the entire perimeter
of the building.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign located on or above the roof of any building, not
including false mansard roof, canopy, or other fascia.
   SETBACK. The minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point of
line of reference, such as a street right-of-way, to the nearest vertical wall
or other element of a building or structure.
   SHOPPING CENTER OR SHOPPING MALLS. A concentration of three or more
primarily retail stores and service establishments under one ownership or
management, including, but not limited to, retail shops, department stores,
restaurants, and other related or similar business establishments. The term
"shopping center" also includes shopping malls.
   SIGHT TRIANGLE. The area designated as corner visibility. (See exhibit
below)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2f5f654b77a08c2ced7ef9b0c338a4ac40e3eb8e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6419.png]
 
   SIGN. A name, identification, description, display or illustration, which is
affixed to, painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, or
other outdoor surface which directs attention to or is designed or intended to
direct attention to the sign face or to an object, product, place, activity,
person, institution, organization or business. Signs located completely within
an enclosed building, and not exposed to view from a street, must not be
considered a sign. Each display surface of a sign or sign face must be defined
as a sign.
   TYPES OF SIGNS:
      BENCH SIGNS, COURTESY. Any bench or seat placed for the convenience of
the public and containing advertising matter.
      BILLBOARD OR OFF PREMISE SIGN. A sign or advertising device which directs
attention to or advertises products, services or activities unrelated to where
the sign is located.
      CANOPY SIGN. Sign attached to or constructed in or on a canopy.
      CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (MANUAL). A sign on which copy, or sign panels may
be changed manually in the field, such as boards with changeable letters or
changeable pictorial panels.
      DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign guiding or directing vehicular or pedestrian
traffic within a development. Directory signs shall not be deemed to be
freestanding, ground or wall signs.
      FREESTANDING/GROUND SIGN. A sign not attached to buildings on the lot.
         (a)   Monument: Any sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or
supported by the ground independent of any other structure. Monument signs are
typically mounted on a masonry base. As distinguished from a pole sign, the
sign base of any monument sign must be a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%)
or more of the width of the sign face that is to be situated on the base. If
less than seventy-five percent (75%), it is considered a pole sign.
         (b)   Pole: A sign erected and maintained on one or more freestanding
mast(s) or pole(s) and not attached to any building or to any public sidewalk.
      GRAND OPENING SIGN. Any temporary sign which calls attention to a new
business and shall be removed within 90 days.
      ILLUMINATED AWNING SIGN. A frame structure with translucent, flexible,
reinforced vinyl covering designed in awning form, but whose principal purpose
and use is signage. Such signs are internally illuminated by LED, fluorescent,
LCD, or other light sources in fixtures approved under national and local
electrical codes.
      INSTITUTIONAL SIGN. A sign placed on premises of an institution
containing the name of and/or information relating to such uses. Uses allowed:
public facilities, schools, religious assembly, hospitals or government owned
facilities.
      JOINT IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign which serves as common or collective
identification for two or more commercial or industrial uses on the same lot.
      MARQUEE SIGN. A sign depicted upon, attached to or supported by a marquee
A permanently roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and
projecting from the building).
      MESSAGE CENTER SIGN. Any electronic communication display device
utilizing lights, light emitting diodes, or similar illumination to create
letters, numerals or graphic presentations, capable of one or more of such
various functions or operating modes as steady, scrolling, travelling,
alternating or flashing copy.
      MENU BOARD SIGN. A sign which is designed and utilized for the purpose of
disclosing the availability and cost of products sold on the premises on which
it is situated, which products are delivered directly to the stall or place
where the menu board is installed or which are delivered at some point in a
lane of travel in which the menu board sign is part.
      MULTIPLE-TENANT SIGN. An on premises sign identifying individual
businesses within a commercial building or buildings where the uses share the
same lot, access and/or parking facilities or a coordinated site plan.
      MURAL. A work of graphic art painted or applied to building wall(s) which
contains no advertising or logos and may contain the artist identification or
logo.
      OFF-PREMISE SIGN. Any sign, including a billboard or general outdoor
advertising device, which advertises or directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or activity conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the
same lot or within the same building upon which such sign is located.
      OPEN HOUSE SIGN. Any temporary sign that calls attention to a home for
sale or rent, which is temporarily open to the public and shall be removed
within ten days of sale or rent.
      POLITICAL SIGN. A sign concerning candidate for any political office or
involving any ballot issue.
      PORTABLE SIGN. A sign designed to be transported from one location to
another and is not permanently mounted.
      PROJECTING SIGN. A sign attached to a building or extending in whole or
in part 15 inches or more horizontally beyond the surface of the building to
which the sign is attached and where the face of the sign is not in a plane
parallel to the wall to which it is attached, but not including a "marquee
sign," as herein defined.
      REAL ESTATE SIGN. A sign indicating the availability for sale, rent or
lease of the specific lot, building or portion of a building upon which the
sign is erected or displayed and shall be removed within ten days of sale,
rent, or lease.
      RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT ENTRANCE SIGN. A sign on a gateway at the
entrance of a residential complex or development denoting the name and/or
address of the complex or development. See SIGHT TRIANGLE.
      ROOF SIGN. A sign erected upon or over the roof or parapet of any
building and supported in whole or in part by the building.
      SUBDIVISION ENTRY SIGN. A sign integrated into the entrance treatment
(i.e., entrance wall) with the name of the subdivision or planned unit
development on one or both sides of each principal entrance. Subdivision entry
signs shall not obstruct any public right-of-way or easement.
      SUSPENDED SIGN. A sign suspended from the ceiling of an arcade, marquee,
canopy or other architectural projection, as herein defined.
      TEMPORARY SIGN. A banner, pennant, poster or advertising display
constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, plastic sheet, cardboard, wallboard,
plywood or other like materials and that appears to be intended or is
determined by the code inspection official to be displayed for a limited period
of time.
      TIME-TEMPERATURE-DATE SIGN. A sign which displays the time, outdoor
temperature and/or date of the month.
      V-TYPE SIGN. A sign consisting of multiple sign facings placed at angles
to each other, oriented in different directions and not exceeding ten feet
apart at any point.
      VEHICLE-MOUNTED SIGN. A sign mounted or displayed upon a trailer, van,
truck, automobile, bus, railroad car, tractor, semitrailer or other vehicle,
whether or not such vehicle is in operating condition and is not currently
registered and licensed to operate on public streets and not actively used as a
vehicle.
      WALL/BUILDING MOUNTED SIGN. A sign attached flat to any wall of an
enclosed building, where the exposed face of the sign is in a plane parallel to
the plane of said wall and extends not more than 15 inches horizontally from
the face of said wall. A sign erected upon or against the side of a roof having
an angle of 45 degrees or less from the vertical shall be considered to be a
wall sign and shall be regulated as such. Also, a sign painted directly on the
surface of the building.
      WINDOW SIGN. A sign which is painted on, applied or attached to, or
located within one foot of the interior of a window, which sign can be seen
through the window from the exterior of the structure. Merchandise which is
included in a window display shall not be included.
   SIGN AREA. The space enclosed within the extreme edges of the sign for each
sign face, not including the supporting structure or where attached directly to
a building wall or surface, the space within the outline enclosing all the
characters of the words, numbers or design.
   SIGN COPY. The wording and/or logo on a sign surface.
   SIGN FACE. The entire display surface area of a sign upon, against or
through which copy is placed.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any part of a sign, including the base, supporting columns
or braces, display surface or any appendage thereto.
   SITE PLAN. An accurately scaled development plan that illustrates the
existing conditions on a land parcel as well as depicting details of a proposed
development. Among the features generally required on a site plan are the
property boundaries and lot lines, existing streets and impervious surfaces,
existing buildings and other structures, major features of the landscape,
proposed street and utility networks and planned access points.
   WIND SIGN. Wind sign means a sign consisting of one or more banners, flags,
pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers or captive balloons, or other objects or
material fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure
by wind or breeze.
(Prior Code, § 13-401)  (Ord. 1473, passed 8-6-91; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 153.02  PURPOSE, INTENT AND LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish effective sign
regulations, which recognize public as well as private interest and investment
in our environment, and which regulate the number, size and location of signs;
to enable the public to locate goods, service and facilities without difficulty
and confusion, to prevent wasteful use of natural resources in competition
among businesses for attention, and to protect the health, safety, welfare,
enjoyment and continued attractiveness of the community.
   (B)   Intent. The regulations contained in this chapter are intended to
protect property values, create a more attractive business climate, enhance and
protect the physical appearance of commercial and industrial areas, prevent the
deterioration of areas of scenic and natural beauty and, in general, promote a
desirable community environment through the regulation of existing and proposed
outdoor signs. These regulations are further intended to reduce potential
traffic hazards from distracting and obstructing signs and to reduce hazards
that may be caused by signs projecting over public rights-of-way. It is further
determined that signs which may lawfully be erected and maintained under the
provisions of this chapter are consistent with ordinary usage, and that signs
which may not lawfully be erected or maintained under the provisions hereof are
not consistent with customary usage, are an abuse thereof and are an
unwarranted invasion of the right of legitimate business interests and of the
public. Additionally, these regulations are designed to define and prohibit
unsafe signage; as well cause the removal of abandoned and nonconforming signs
while promoting and protecting the health, safety and welfare of the community.
(Prior Code, § 13-402)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 153.03  SCOPE AND APPLICATION.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the display,
construction, erection, alteration, use, location and maintenance of all signs
within the city. It shall be unlawful hereafter to display, construct, erect,
alter, use or maintain any sign, except in conformance with provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   The changing of the copy on a legal sign;
      (2)   Painting, repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance and
repair of a sign or a sign structure unless a structural change is made;
      (3)   Historic words or symbols;
      (4)   Any noncommercial holiday signs and decorations; or
      (5)   Signs erected by a governmental body, such as a federal, state,
county or municipality.
(Prior Code, § 13-403)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 153.04  CONFLICTS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter, in their interpretation and
application, shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted to ensure the
public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter conflict with the requirements of any lawfully adopted rules,
regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive
or that imposing the higher standard shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 13-404)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 153.05  ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION.
   All provisions of this chapter shall be enforced and administered by the
City Building Inspector or other personnel designated by the City Manager.
   (A)   Applicability. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall
be unlawful for anyone to erect, construct, enlarge, move, convert or place any
sign in the city without first obtaining a sign permit for each such sign from
the City Building Inspector. This chapter shall not be construed to require a
permit for a change to the copy on any sign.
      (1)   The application for a permit shall be in writing and accompanied by
the following information:
         (a)   A site plan and elevation drawing of the proposed sign;
         (b)   Type and size of sign, including wind-load specifications and
calculations;
         (c)   The material with which the sign is to be constructed;
         (d)   The height of the sign; and
         (e)   The information to be contained on the sign.
      (2)   The City Building Inspector shall approve sign permits in writing.
Approval shall be entered upon the original permit application and maintained
in the files of the City Building Inspector.
      (3)   Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall pay to the City
Clerk a fee as prescribed.
      (4)   The fee shall not be refunded upon the revocation of a permit
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
      (5)   Unless otherwise specified by the City Building Inspector approved
sign permits shall expire 180 days after the date issued.
   (B)   The following signs shall not require the issuance of a sign permit.
The signs must comply with all other building, structural and electrical codes
of the city and with the requirements contained herein:
      (1)   One construction sign per construction project not exceeding 32
square feet in area in residential districts or 64 square feet in area in
commercial or industrial districts; (The signs shall not be erected more than
five days prior to the beginning of construction for which a building permit
has been issued, shall be located on the site of construction, and shall be
removed prior to the City Building Inspector issuing a certificate of
occupancy.);
      (2)   Signs providing direction or instruction, which are located
entirely on the lot which they serve, do not in any way advertise a business,
and do not exceed four square feet in area;
      (3)   The flags, emblems, of insignia or any government;
      (4)   Signs of a non-commercial nature and in the public interest, which
are required by law, or which are erected by or on the order of a public
officer in the performance of his or her public duty, including but not limited
to safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, memorial plaques, signs of
historical interest;
      (5)   Memorial signs or tablets which are made an integral part of
building names of buildings, or dates of erection, when cut into any masonry
surface, inlaid to be part of the building or when cast in bronze or other
metal;
      (6)   Political signs, provided:
         (a)   The signs shall not be erected more than 45 days prior to the
election; and
         (b)   The signs shall be removed within 15 days following the
election.
      (7)   One real estate sign on any lot frontage provided the sign is
located on the lot to which the sign applies, is not illuminated and does not
exceed six square feet in area; (Signs up to 64 square feet may be erected on
lots abutting major thoroughfares or expressways.) Real estate signs for sale,
rent, or lease are to be removed within ten days of sale, rented, or leased.
      (8)   Signs not exceeding three square feet in area advertising garage
sales, provided:
         (a)   The garage sale permit number is displayed on the sign face;
         (b)   The signs are not posted more than four days before the sale and
are removed no more than two days after the sale; and
         (c)   The signs are not posted on any curb, sidewalk, utility post or
pole, hydrant, bridge, tree or other surface located on public property or any
public right-of-way.
         (d)   Verbal permission to place sign in any lot or yard is to be
granted before placing the sign.
      (9)   Community promotional banners erected on street light standards
within the public right-of-way pursuant to specific authorization issued by the
City Manager, meeting the following criteria:
         (a)   All banners shall be of uniform size and shape to install on
standard brackets owned, located, and installed by the city.
         (b)   The maximum time any banner may be displayed shall be specified
in the authorization granted by the City Manager.
         (c)   The wording of the banners must be specified in the
authorization granted by the City Manager, and such wording shall be messages
of general public benefit to the city and its citizens, including but not
limited to advertisement of special public events or promotions of the
community.
         (d)   Any commercial sponsorship of the banners may be indicated
thereon, provided all commercial logos or wording shall not exceed 25% of the
total surface area per side of the banners.
         (e)   The banners shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner of
materials capable of withstanding wind and to resist deterioration from natural
elements.
         (f)   The city shall have the right to prohibit or restrict the
location of banners on utility poles and the right-of-way where necessary to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
         (g)   The signs shall be maintained in good condition by the applicant
and the city reserves the right to withdraw the limited license upon notice to
applicant if the banner is not maintained.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 153.06  INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   All signs shall be subject to inspection by the City Building
Inspector. Footing inspections shall be required on the day of excavation for
all free-standing signs. The City Building Inspector may, within 48 hours after
being notified that the sign is ready for inspection, also require inspection
of electrical signs before erection. It shall be the duty of the owner,
contractor or permittee to inquire with the City Building Inspector as to the
times or stages that inspection shall be required and advise the engineering
and inspection department when the owner, contractor or permittee is ready for
inspection.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter or otherwise deviate
from the terms or conditions of a sign permit without prior approval of the
City Building Inspector.
   (C)   If the City Building Inspector finds that work under any permit is not
in accordance with the information supplied in the permit application or is in
violation of this or any other pertinent ordinance or should he or she find
that there has been any misrepresentation in connection with the application
for the permit, he or she shall notify the sign owner or erector of the
findings and that violation must be corrected without delay. If the correction
is not made, the City Building Inspector shall revoke the permit and serve
notice thereof upon the sign owner or erector. No person shall proceed with any
part of the work after the notice is received.
(Prior Code, § 13-414)
(Am. Ord. 1229, passed 12-7-82; Am. Ord. 1933, passed 5-16-17; Am. Ord. 1974,
passed 8-6-19)
§ 153.07  VIOLATION.
   In addition to all other remedies for the enforcement of this chapter and
its provisions, the city may institute any proper action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to prevent, enjoin, restrain, abate, or otherwise to
correct any violation.
(Prior Code, § 13-433)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
   LOCATION AND CONSTRUCTION
§ 153.15  GENERAL SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND LOCATION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Sign area.
      (1)   The sign and the area of any sign, including building-mounted and
freestanding signs, shall be the entire advertising area of the sign containing
text, decorative artwork, logos or other displayed information. Only the
visible side(s) of freestanding signs with back-to-back sign areas shall be
considered in calculating the sign area, with such signs being limited to a
maximum of two sides per any one sign. The sign area of building mounted signs
shall not include structural elements used to attach or support the sign that
do not contribute to the display. The sign area of freestanding signs shall not
include the support, pole, or monument base.
      (2)   Calculation of sign area. The following methods shall be used to
calculate the total square footage of the sign area of any sign:
         (a)   Cabinet signs and signs other than individual letter signs. Sign
area shall be determined by the outer edge of the sign background, frame or
cabinet that encompasses all text, decorative artwork, logos or other
information displayed. In instances where the background, frame or cabinet is
an irregular shape, the sign area shall be calculated as the entire area within
a continuous rectangular box drawn with straight lines at perpendicular angles
to encompass the entire perimeter of the extreme limits of the background,
frame or cabinet encompassing the background material.
         (b)   Individual letter signs. Signs which consist of individual
letters that are mounted to a wall, or "raceway-type" signs that consist of
individual letters that are mounted to a base that is mounted to a wall, which
utilize the building wall as the background, and freestanding individual
letters that are mounted to a monument base shall be considered individual
letter signs. The sign area of such signs shall be calculated as the entire
area contained within a continuous rectangular box drawn with straight lines at
perpendicular angles to encompass the entire perimeter of the extreme limits of
each line of text, decorative artwork, logos or other displayed information,
calculated cumulatively as the total square footage of all of the
aforementioned elements, including the space within and between letters, text
and other displayed information in each respective line.
   (B)   Sign height.
      (1)   Calculation of sign height. The methods in this section shall be
used to calculate the height of any sign.
      (2)   Freestanding signs. The height of a freestanding sign shall be
measured as the vertical distance from the average finished grade of the ground
below the sign excluding any filling, berming, mounding or excavating solely
for the purposes of increasing the height of the sign, to the top edge of the
highest portion of the sign. For the purposes of this section, average finished
grade shall be considered the lower of the following measurements:
         (a)   The lowest elevation where the base of the sign meets ground
level; or
         (b)   The top of the curb of the nearest public street adjoining the
property upon which the sign is erected or the grade of the land at the
principal entrance to the lot on which the sign is located.
         (c)   The height of freestanding signs shall include the monument base
bottom to top.
      (3)   Building-mounted signs. The height of any sign attached to or
painted on a wall or parapet of a building that is mounted flush or parallel to
the building wall shall be measured as the lowest point at the bottom, the sign
background, frame or cabinet that encompasses all text, decorative artwork,
logos or other information displayed to the top of the highest point on the
sign. In cases involving multiple sign elements on any one building elevation,
the cumulative height of all sign elements located directly above or vertically
below any portion of another sign element on the same building elevation shall
be used to calculate the total sign height. Sign elements not located directly
above or below any portion of another sign element shall be calculated
individually. The height of the building elevation shall be measured as the
vertical distance between the finished floor elevation of the building and the
predominant roofline of the building elevation upon which the sign is mounted,
not including the architectural elements or appurtenances such as clock towers
or cupolas.
   (C)   Sign setbacks and offsets.
      (1)   Any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to an arterial
street shall be set back a minimum distance of 15 feet from the property line
measured to the street side of its leading edge of the sign.
      (2)   Any freestanding sign that is located adjacent to a collector or
local street shall be set back a minimum distance of ten feet from the property
line measured to the street side of its leading edge of the sign.
      (3)   Freestanding signs within the CBD or MUD Districts shall maintain a
minimum setback distance of two feet from the back of the sidewalk, or one foot
from the property line (whichever may be applicable) which, for the purposes of
this section, shall be defined as the edge of the sidewalk that is farthest
away from the curb, gutter and street. In no event shall any sign be located
within the public right-of-way or outside of the property boundary.
      (4)   Commercial and industrial freestanding directional signs as allowed
by this section shall be set back and offset a minimum distance of five feet
from all property lines measured to the leading edge of the sign.
      (5)   Distance separation. Distance separation between freestanding signs
shall be measured along the street frontages adjacent to the subject monument
signs. Distance between freestanding monument signs located on different street
frontages shall be measured along the street frontage to the point of
intersection of both street frontages. Freestanding signs shall be separated by
at least 100 feet from all other freestanding signs.
      (6)   All freestanding signs shall be in accordance with the sight
triangle and visibility requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Design criteria.
      (1)   Freestanding, ground-mounted signs shall be constructed with a
monumenttype base consisting of materials that are complementary and compatible
with the architectural elements of the project building, business, and adjacent
businesses. The height of the monument base of any sign shall not exceed 50% of
the overall height of the sign. The width and length of such base shall be at
least as wide and long as the bottom edge of the sign area.
      (2)   Freestanding signs shall be incorporated into a landscape plant bed
with low landscape elements placed in front of signage to soften the sign and
taller landscape placed behind single-sided signs to offer a backdrop.
      (3)   All freestanding signs which incorporate lighting shall be served
by underground utility service; above ground utilities are not acceptable.
      (4)   Vertical clearance. Any projecting sign or awning mounted sign
which projects over the public right-of-way, sidewalk or pedestrian area shall
maintain a minimum of eight feet of unobstructed vertical clearance.
      (5)   Building-mounted signs shall be sensitively designed to be
integrated with the architecture and scale of the building on which they are
mounted.
      (6)   Electronic message centers. The provisions and limitations of this
subsection are adopted to minimize driver distraction, protect corridor,
community aesthetics, and protect the public health, safety and welfare. For
the purposes of this section, electronic message center shall mean the portion
of an on premise freestanding sign capable of displaying words or images that
can be electronically changed by remote or automatic means. Electronic message
center shall not include temporary city-owned messaging facilities. Permanent
city-owned messaging facilities shall be subject to the limitations set forth
herein. Signs containing an electronic message center shall be subject to the
following limitations:
         (a)   Electronic message center signs shall be permitted in the
following zoning districts only: commercial, industrial, educational, and the
commercial portions of mixed-use.
         (b)   The maximum allowed size of an electronic message center in a
freestanding sign shall be no greater than 50% of the total allowed sign area.
         (c)   The electronic message center must be programmed so that the
displayed message does not change more frequently than once every ten seconds
from one static display to another instantaneously and without the use of
scrolling, flashing, fading or other similar effects. The message or image
displayed must be complete without continuation in content to the next message.
         (d)   The electronic message center:
            1.   Shall not produce glare, the effect of which constitutes a
traffic hazard or is otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety or
welfare;
            2.   Shall not have moving text, images or varying light intensity;
            3.   Shall not exceed 600 candelas per square meter between dusk to
dawn and 800 candelas per square meter during all other times, as measured at
the sign's face;
               A.   Sign applicants may be required to submit a photometric
plan to show the amount of candelas per square meter emitted at time of
application; this plan must be signed and sealed by an Oklahoma licensed
engineer.
            4.   Shall contain a mechanism for the sign to revert to a black
screen if the sign malfunctions;
            5.   Shall be integrated harmoniously into the design of the larger
sign face and structure;
            6.   Shall not be the predominant element of the sign and, if
located at the top of a sign, must include a substantial cap feature above the
electronic message center consisting of the same material, form, color and
texture as is found on the sign face or structure.
         (f)   No temporary signs as provided in §
153.16(E) shall be permitted for any business for which a freestanding
electronic message center has been approved by the city.
         (f)   The electronic message center must be provided with automatic
dimming software, solar sensors or a comparable method as approved by the city
to control brightness for nighttime viewing and variations in daytime light
conditions. Each application for electronic message center approval shall
include the manufacturer's specifications programmed to meet this requirement,
along with a description of the proposed dimming method.
         (g)   In no event shall a freestanding electronic message center sign
be allowed within 150 feet of the nearest residential district or development,
with this distance being measured from the nearest portion of the sign to the
nearest property line contained within any such residential district or
development.
         (h)   Building-mounted electronic message centers shall only be
permitted when displaying time and temperature or when displaying fuel pricing
on a fueling station canopy, and shall remain subject to the size limitations
of §
153.16(B)(2) for building-mounted signs, or not to exceed 20 square feet,
whichever is less.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 153.16  DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Residential district signs. No sign shall be erected or maintained in
any category of residential zoning district or a residential component of a
mixed-use zoning district as approved by the city shall comply with the
applicable commercial and industrial district sign regulations), except in
conformity with the following regulations:
      (1)   A sign identifying the property or the name of the owner or
occupant of property, provided that such sign is not in excess of two square
feet in area and provided further that not more than one such sign is erected
on any single lot or parcel.
      (2)   Signs identifying any of the following uses in a residential
district shall be allowed, subject to a maximum sign area of 24 square feet,
and, further, not more than one such sign per street frontage shall be erected
on any single lot or parcel, not to exceed a total of two such signs. Such
freestanding signs identifying the following uses shall not exceed six feet in
height and shall be in accordance with the offset and setback requirements of
this section:
         (a)   Public or private school;
         (b)   Places of assembly (small), including but not limited to
churches;
         (c)   Nursing or rest home;
         (d)   Public park or recreation area;
         (e)   Conditional use grants and home occupations which have obtained
all appropriate approvals from the city; and
         (f)   Any entry feature signage identifying a platted residential
subdivision or a multi-family residential complex. All such developments shall
be allowed to erect such entry feature signs at separate entrances to the
development. If such signs are proposed for both sides of the street at any one
entrance, this "set" of signs shall be considered as one development entrance
sign.
   (B)   Commercial and industrial district signs.
      (1)   No sign shall be erected or maintained in any category of
commercial neighborhood or highway or industrial zoning districts, except to
identify only the name of the owner, trade name, trademark or product symbol,
products sold and/or the business activity conducted on the premises upon which
the sign is located, in conformity with the following general regulations,
unless otherwise specified in the subarea requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Building-mounted/wall signs.
         (a)   Maximum number of building-mounted signs allowable.
            1.   Minor tenant. One building-mounted sign per building elevation
shall be allowed for any one minor tenant in a multiple tenant building, not to
exceed a maximum of two building elevations. Freestanding minor tenants shall
be allowed to erect multiple building-mounted signs, subject to the cumulative
maximum sign area limitation contained in this section.
            2.   Major tenant. Major tenants shall be allowed to erect multiple
building-mounted signs, subject to the cumulative maximum sign area limitation
contained in this section.
            3.   Large-scale tenants. Large-scale tenants shall be allowed to
erect multiple building-mounted signs, subject to the cumulative maximum sign
area limitation contained in this section.
            4.   In no event shall any illuminated building-mounted sign be
allowed within 150 feet of the nearest residential district or development,
with this distance being measured from the nearest portion of the sign to the
nearest property line contained within any such residential district or
development.
            5.   Support structure for commercial or industrial area shall not
infringe on or obscure the sight triangle of any street corner or intersection.
         (b)   Maximum sign area. Building-mounted signs shall not exceed 20%
of the total area of the building elevation on which they are mounted. In cases
of multiple signs on a single building elevation, the cumulative total of all
signs on any one building elevation shall not exceed 20% of the total area of
the building elevation on which the signs are mounted.
         (c)   Maximum sign height.
            1.   Minor tenant. The height of building-mounted signs for minor
tenants shall not exceed either 25% of the height of the building elevation
upon which the sign is mounted or five feet in height, whichever is less.
            2.   Major tenant. The height of building-mounted signs for major
tenants shall not exceed 25% of the height of the building elevation upon which
the sign is mounted. However, in no event shall such sign exceed eight feet in
height.
            3.   Large-scale tenant. The height of building-mounted signs for
large-scale tenants shall not exceed 25% of the height of the building
elevation upon which the sign is mounted. However, in no event shall such sign
exceed 20 feet in height.
         (d)   Awning-mounted signs.
            1.   Sign bands shall be allowed on a free-hanging valance attached
to canvas or soft vinyl awnings. Such signs shall be limited to a sign area no
greater than six inches in height and not to exceed 12 square feet in area.
            2.   Additional advertising shall be permitted on each canvas or
soft vinyl awning elevation not to exceed 10% of the area of the respective
awning elevation.
            3.   Awning signs that meet the criteria outlined in this
subsection shall be permitted to have interior illumination, provided that said
lighting source is:
               (i)   Mounted parallel to the elevation of the building upon
which the awning is located;
               (ii)   Concealed within the interior portion of the awning so as
not be seen except from directly below the awning; and
               (iii)   Directed downward so as much as practical to prevent the
emitted light from spilling beyond the extended planes of the sides of the
awning.
            4.   Acrylic, vinyl and plastic awning signs are prohibited.
         (e)   No building-mounted sign shall project higher than the eave or
parapet line of the wall upon which the sign is mounted without approval of the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
         (f)   Adhesive window advertising shall not require sign permit
approval. Adhesive window advertising may be adhered to the inside or outside
surface of the window glass or door glass. Adhesive window advertising shall
not be applied to any window trim, walls or other surfaces beyond the window
glass or door glass surfaces.
   (C)   Freestanding signs.
      (1)   Shopping center or shopping mall development identification signs.
Shopping centers, typically containing multiple tenants such as retail or other
commercial centers which meet the following square footage requirements, shall
be eligible for one freestanding development identification sign per street
frontage classified as an arterial or collector adjacent to the property upon
which the shopping center or mall development is located. The street frontage
for a shopping center or mall development which is designed to have individual
freestanding tenants on platted lots or tracts that are included within the
shopping center shall be calculated based upon the cumulative arterial or
collector street frontage of such lots or tracts which are part of the
respective shopping center or mall development. Multiple buildings planned as
part of the same shopping center or mall development may use the cumulative
total square footage of such buildings; however, any building used in such
total shall then be ineligible for any additional freestanding signage.
         (a)   Maximum sign area.
            1.   Shopping center or mall developments exceeding a total of
75,000 square feet of total gross leasable area shall be eligible for a
development identification sign. Such sign shall not
exceed fifty square feet in area per side of sign for each 100 feet of street
frontage of the lot upon which the development is located, not to exceed 100
square feet per side of sign.
            2.   Shopping center or mall developments exceeding a total of
50,000 square feet of total gross leasable area shall be eligible for a
development identification sign. Such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in
area per side of sign for each 100 feet of street frontage of the lot upon
which the development is located, not to exceed 72 square feet per side of
sign.
         (b)   Maximum sign height.
            1.   A shopping center or mall development identification sign for
multiple tenant developments less than a total of 75,000 square feet of total
gross leasable area shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
            2.   A shopping center or mall development identification sign for
multiple tenant developments exceeding a total of 75,000 square feet of total
gross leasable area shall not exceed 16 feet in mounting height.
            3.   Support structure for shopping center or mall shall not
infringe on or obscure the sight triangle of any street corner or intersection.
         (c)   Identification signs for shopping center or mall developments
containing multiple tenants shall be required to be designed to accommodate
space for a minimum of two secondary tenants plus other secondary tenants
should the development have more and in addition to the primary major tenant in
the development.
      (2)   Large-scale tenants. Large-scale tenants shall be eligible for one
freestanding sign per street frontage adjacent to the lot upon which the use is
located, up to a maximum number of two freestanding signs for any single
commercial or industrial use.
         (a)   Maximum sign area.
            1.   The maximum sign area of any freestanding sign that is located
adjacent to an arterial street shall be 72 square feet per side of sign if the
street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located does not exceed 100
feet. If the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located
exceeds 100 feet, the maximum advertising area of any such sign shall be 84
square feet per side of sign.
            2.   The maximum sign area of any freestanding sign that is located
adjacent to a collector street shall be 60 square feet per side of sign if the
street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located does not exceed 100
feet. If the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located
exceeds 100 feet, the maximum advertising area of any such sign shall be 72
square feet per side of sign.
            3.   The maximum sign area of any freestanding sign that is located
adjacent to a local street shall be 48 square feet per side of sign if the
street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located does not exceed 100
feet. If the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located
exceeds 100 feet, the maximum advertising area of any such sign shall be 60
square feet per side of sign.
         (b)   Maximum sign mounting height.
            1.   The maximum mounting height of any freestanding sign that is
located adjacent to an arterial street shall be 14 feet.
            2.   The maximum mounting height of any freestanding sign that is
located adjacent to a collector or local street shall be 12 feet.
            3.   In any multiple tenant development, a large-scale tenant sign
shall be required to be designed to accommodate space for a minimum of two
minor tenants in addition to the large-scale commercial or industrial tenant.
            4.   Support structure for commercial or industrial development
shall not infringe on or obscure the sight triangle of any street corner or
intersection.
      (3)   Major tenants shall be eligible for one freestanding sign per
street frontage adjacent to the lot upon which the use is located, up to a
maximum number of two freestanding signs for any single commercial or
industrial use. If a major tenant is included on a shopping center or mall
development identification sign, such sign shall count towards the total number
of major tenant freestanding signs allowed.
         (a)   Maximum sign area.
            1.   The maximum sign area of any freestanding sign that is located
adjacent to an arterial street shall be 48 square feet per side of sign if the
street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located does not exceed 100
feet. If the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located
exceeds 100 feet, the maximum advertising area of any such sign shall be 60
square feet per side of sign.
            2.   The maximum sign area of any freestanding sign that is located
adjacent to a collector street shall be 36 square feet per side of sign if the
street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located does not exceed 100
feet. If the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located
exceeds 100 feet, the maximum advertising area of any such sign shall be 48
square feet per side of sign.
            3.   The maximum sign area of any freestanding sign that is located
adjacent to a local street shall be 24 square feet per side of sign if the
street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located does not exceed 100
feet. If the street frontage along the lot upon which the use is located
exceeds 100 feet, the maximum advertising area of any such sign shall be 36
square feet per side of sign.
         (b)   Maximum sign mounting height.
            1.   The maximum mounting height of any freestanding sign that is
located adjacent to an arterial street shall be eight feet.
            2.   The maximum mounting height of any freestanding sign that is
located adjacent to a collector or local street shall be six feet.
            3.   In any multiple tenant development, a major tenant sign shall
be required to be designed to accommodate space for a minimum of two minor
tenants in addition to the major tenant.
            4.   In addition to the major tenant freestanding sign criteria,
industrial major tenants which exceed 20,000 square feet in GLA shall be
allowed to erect a freestanding major tenant sign in accordance with the
requirements of this section, even if the industrial major tenant is not the
largest tenant, in terms of GLA, in the multiple tenant building that it
occupies.
      (4)   Minor tenant freestanding signs.
         (a)   Minor tenants in multiple tenant shopping center or mall
developments shall be limited to a portion of the shopping center or mall
development identification sign, not to exceed 50% of the total sign area.
         (b)   Minor tenants, including individual single-use minor tenant
buildings and multiple tenant buildings which are freestanding on their own
lot, shall be allowed to erect one freestanding monument sign to accommodate
all tenants subject to the following limitations, unless otherwise specified in
the subarea standards contained in this section.
            1.   No such sign shall exceed six feet in mounting height.
            2.   No such sign shall exceed 24 square feet in sign area per side
of sign, exclusive of monument base.
      (5)   Development entrance signs shall be considered to be any
freestanding, wallmounted sign or sign which is constructed on a monument base
intended to identify a large-scale residential subdivision or a large-scale
commercial or industrial corporate campus-type development, not to be confused
with shopping development identification signs for retail or other commercial
shopping centers. For the purposes of this section, large-scale residential
subdivisions or developments shall be defined as any subdivision which contains
at least 50 lots or contains a land mass of at least 25 acres, and large-scale
industrial subdivisions or developments shall be defined as any industrial
development which contains at least two lots and five acres. Such development
entrance signs shall be subject to the following criteria:
         (a)   Maximum number of development entrance signs. All large-scale
developments shall be allowed to erect development entrance signs at separate
entrances to the development. In the event that development entrance signs are
proposed for both sides of the street at any one entrance, this "set" of signs
shall be considered as one development entrance sign.
         (b)   Maximum heights of walls and monument bases. The height of any
wall or monument base upon which a development entrance sign is mounted shall
not exceed six feet in height.
         (c)   Maximum heights of signs, letters, numerals and characters. The
height of any development entrance sign shall not exceed ten feet.
Additionally, this maximum height shall include the wall or the monument base
upon which the sign is mounted and shall also include any logos associated with
the development entrance sign. The maximum heights of letters, numerals and
characters contained within the sign area of development entrance signs shall
not exceed 12 inches in height.
         (d)   Maximum sign area. The maximum sign area of development entrance
signs which are located adjacent to arterial or major collector streets shall
not exceed 50 square feet in area for each 100 feet of street frontage of the
development, but in no event shall the total sign area of any development
entrance sign exceed 200 square feet in area. Development entrance signs shall
not be permitted along minor collector or local streets.
         (e)   Construction materials. All walls or monument bases shall be
constructed of masonry or similar materials, and all sign components shall be
constructed of steel, aluminum, Alucabond or similar materials.
         (f)   Setbacks and visibility restrictions. Development entrance signs
shall be in accordance with the sign setback and offset requirements and sight
visibility at intersections requirements contained in this section.
      (6)   Directional signs. Directional signs shall be allowed as necessary.
Such signs shall be constructed of materials and colors that are consistent
with the materials, colors and architectural elements of the project. The sign
area of such signs shall not exceed four square feet in area per side of sign,
not to exceed two sides per any one sign and shall not exceed four feet in
height. Such signs shall be set back and offset a minimum distance of five feet
from all property lines.
   (D)   Mixed use subarea requirements.
      (1)   In addition to the general sign requirements for commercial signs
which apply to all commercial signs, any sign located within one of the
following subareas shall be subject to the following subarea requirements. In
cases where a subarea requirement conflicts with a general requirement, the
subarea requirement shall control.
      (2)   CBD and MUD zone district requirements. In addition to all other
sign criteria contained in this section, signs within the CDB and MUD zone
districts shall also be subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   Building-mounted signs.
            1.   Each tenant shall be allowed one building-mounted sign for
each building elevation (not including window signs). Building signs shall be
subordinate in size to the other elements of the building elevation and shall
be positioned so as not to obscure existing architectural details. Signs
mounted to building elevations shall fit within existing features of the
building elevation and shall be designed to integrate with the building
architecture.
            2.   A building-mounted projecting sign. In addition to the
building-mounted signs, each business shall also be allowed one building-
mounted projecting sign. Such signs shall not exceed four feet in height and 12
square feet in sign area per side of sign, not to exceed two sides. In the
downtown area where buildings are constructed on the property line, such
projecting signs may extend above the sidewalk, provided that a minimum of
eight feet of unobstructed vertical clearance is maintained in accordance with
the requirements of this section.
         (b)   Freestanding signs.
            1.   Multiple tenant development identification signs. Each
multiple tenant development or complex of multiple buildings shall be permitted
to have one freestanding project identification sign. Such sign shall primarily
identify the name of the development. Secondarily, such sign shall contain
smaller signage for individual tenants which are located within the development
or complex.
            2.   Individual tenants shall be allowed one  individual tenant
freestanding sign, or one freestanding hanging sign constructed of a single
post and perpendicular bracket design.
         (c)   General criteria. In addition to all other sign criteria
contained in this section, the following criteria shall apply to the entire CBD
and MUD zone districts:
            1.   Lettering shall be legible and well-proportioned for clear
communication.
            2.   Sign colors shall be compatible with the colors of the
building.
            3.   Illumination. In the event illumination is proposed, the level
of illumination of a sign shall not overpower other signs on the street or the
facades of nearby buildings. Signs shall be illuminated with discreetly placed
spotlights from the front, top or sides or internally illuminated. The
following sign lighting types are allowed:
               (i)   Internal illumination of signs if letters are individually
illuminated using routed or push-through type letters.
               (ii)   Ground-mounted lighting if the light source is concealed
through planting, screening or a light shield.
               (iii)   Indirect lighting if the light source is concealed or is
compatible with the building architecture.
               (iv)   Neon lighting.
         (d)   Freestanding sign criteria. In addition to all the freestanding
monument sign criteria contained in this section, the following criteria shall
apply to the entire CBD and MUD zone districts:
            1.   Sign height. Multiple tenant development identification signs
shall not exceed ten feet in height, including the monument base. Individual
tenant freestanding signs shall not exceed six feet in height including the
monument base.
            2.   Sign area. The maximum sign area of a multiple tenant
development identification sign shall be 48 square feet per side. The maximum
sign area of an individual tenant freestanding sign shall be 24 square feet per
side. Such area is exclusive of the sign base.
            3.   Freestanding hanging signs. Such signs shall be constructed of
a single post and perpendicular bracket design. The height of the sign post
shall not exceed six feet. The sign area of such signs shall not exceed three
feet in height and six square feet in sign area per side of sign, not to exceed
two sides. All such hanging signs shall incorporate a landscape planting bed
with low landscape elements placed in front of signage to soften the sign and
taller landscape placed behind single-sided signs to offer a backdrop.
            4.   Setbacks. Freestanding signs shall be located in accordance
with the setback and "sight triangle" requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Temporary signs.
      (1)   Temporary signs shall include banners, H-frame real estate-type
signs that advertise special
events and any other signs that are not of a permanent nature, not including
those signs advertising the sale or lease of the property. The use of temporary
signs shall be limited to the promotion of special events associated with
specific periods or points in time, including but not limited to meetings,
sales, exhibitions and vacancy announcements. Such temporary signs shall
require permit approval to be obtained from the Planning and Community
Development Department. Temporary signs shall be subject to the following
minimum requirements:
         (a)   Sixty- day limit. Except as provided in division (E)(3) below,
with respect to signs for daily specials, no temporary sign shall be erected or
displayed for longer than 60 days per calendar year. Such 60 days may be
utilized consecutively or on intermittent dates as specified in the approved
sign permit. The applicant shall remove any temporary signs on or before the
expiration date specified in the approved permit.
         (b)   Temporary signs shall be directly related to the use of the lot
on which the sign is located.
         (c)   Signs constructed of nondurable materials such as cardboard,
paper or the like are prohibited. Furthermore, all signs shall be maintained so
as not to deteriorate in any wind and bad weather conditions.
         (d)   Temporary signs shall not be mounted to trees or other
landscaping, regulatory traffic signage, utility or light poles, fences or
other similar structures and shall not be located within road rights-of-way or
easements.
         (e)   Except as provided within this chapter, each freestanding
business shall be limited to the following types of temporary signs per
business:
            1.   Temporary banner-type signs:
               (i)   No more than two banner-type signs mounted flush to either
a building wall or the building facade. In the case of a banner being mounted
flush to a building facade, no portion of any such banner shall extend beyond
the leading edge of the building facade.
               (ii)   Banner-type signs shall not be mounted between building
columns, latticework or other architectural features of the building.
               (iii)   Banner-type signs shall be limited to a maximum of 45
square feet and shall not exceed three feet tall by 15 feet wide. If the
building elevation on which the sign is mounted is less than 15 feet wide, the
sign shall not exceed the width of such elevation.
               (iv)   Banner-type signs shall be made of high-quality material.
               (v)   Freestanding banner signs tied between stakes, trees,
regulatory traffic signage, utility or light poles or other structures in
landscape areas or elsewhere on the property are prohibited.
            2.   Temporary freestanding H-frame real estate-type signs that
advertise special events, not including those signs advertising the sale or
lease of the property.
               (i)   Freestanding real estate-type signs shall be limited to a
maximum of six square feet in area per side, up to a maximum of two sides per
any one sign.
               (ii)   Freestanding real estate-type signs shall be constructed
of high-quality materials.
            3.   Temporary signs for daily specials.
               (i)   Signs for daily specials, such as menu boards, sandwich
boards or A-frame-type signs, shall be allowed for the purpose of advertising
nonrecurring daily specials.
               (ii)   Signs for daily specials shall not be limited to any
fixed number of days per calendar year, nor shall signs for daily specials
require a temporary sign permit. However, such signs for daily specials shall
be removed from display each day at the close of business.
               (iii)   Signs for daily specials shall be limited to a maximum
of six square feet in area per side, up to a maximum of two sides per any one
sign.
               (iv)   Signs for daily specials shall be limited to an area
within 15 feet of the entrance to the subject business and shall not impede
pedestrian sidewalk circulation. Such signs are prohibited from being located
within landscape buffer areas.
            4.   Multiple tenants on a single property.
               (i)   Except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, each tenant
or business located within a building containing multiple tenants on a single
property shall be allowed to display one of the following types of temporary
signs in accordance with the advertising periods set forth in this chapter for
the respective type of temporary signs: a banner-type sign; a freestanding H-
frame real-estate type sign; or a temporary sign for daily specials.
               (ii)   All such temporary signs shall be made of high-quality
materials and shall meet all size, location and display criteria set forth in
this chapter for each respective type of temporary sign.
      (2)   Real estate signs that advertise the sale, rent, or lease of the
commercial or industrial property upon which the sign is located. Subject to
all the temporary sign requirements regarding required sign materials, mounting
and location contained in this section, such real estate signs shall adhere to
the following requirements:
         (a)   Notwithstanding any other requirements of this section, no sign
pertaining to the sale, rent, or lease of any commercial or industrial property
or building shall exceed 32 square feet in sign area and a maximum of six feet
in height.
         (b)   CDB or MUD zone districts requirements. Each property or
building shall be allowed one of the following options:
            1.   One building-mounted sign per building elevation, not to
exceed 12 square feet in sign area.
            2.   One freestanding sign per street frontage, not to exceed 12
square feet in sign area and a maximum of six feet in height, provided that no
such sign shall be located on any sidewalk or other pedestrian way.
      (3)   Temporary signs advertising a construction company utilized during
construction of a new business shall be exempt from divisions (A) and (E) above
of the temporary sign requirements. Such signs shall be limited to a maximum of
32 square feet; four feet high by eight feet wide and shall include a lattice
or similar base material to give the appearance of a monument base. Such signs
shall be limited to one sign per street frontage, not to exceed two such signs,
for the general contractor, including all subcontractors. Such signs shall be
removed immediately upon the receipt of any certificate of occupancy for the
new business.
      (4)   Temporary signs advertising a new business "coming soon" utilized
during construction of the new business shall be exempt from divisions (A) and
(E) above of the temporary sign requirements. Such signs shall be limited to a
maximum of 32 square feet (four feet high by eight feet wide) and shall include
a lattice or similar base material to give the appearance of a monument base.
Such signs shall be limited to one sign per street frontage, not to exceed two
such signs, for the new business, including all tenants. Such signs shall be
removed immediately upon the receipt of any certificate of occupancy for the
new business.
      (5)   Temporary signs exempt from this section. The provisions of this
division shall not apply to the following signs, provided that such signs
conform to all other sign regulations contained in this section:
         (a)   Traffic control and informational signs erected by national,
tribal, state, county or municipal government agencies, specifically including
school districts and fire protection districts.
         (b)   Community event signs as authorized by the city.
         (c)   Window signs and other signs erected within the interior of the
business.
         (d)   Open house signs, subject to the requirements of division (6)
below.
      (6)   Open house signs shall be allowed to be located off-premises
subject to the following minimum requirements:
         (a)   Open house signs shall be limited to a maximum of six square
feet in area per side, up to a maximum of two sides per any one sign.
         (b)   Open house signs shall not be erected any sooner than the day
before the event and shall be completely removed no later than two hours after
the end of the open house. For the purposes of this section, open houses shall
be considered a temporary event, for example during a weekend, rather than
taking place for an extended, continuous time period.
         (c)   Open house signs shall be either freestanding A-frame type signs
or mounted in a freestanding manner on either a single stake or on two stakes,
with the top of such sign not exceeding four  feet in height and placed so as
not to obstruct traffic or create an impediment to visibility at street
intersections; see sight triangle. Such signs shall not be mounted to trees or
other landscaping, regulatory traffic signage, utility or light poles or other
similar structures.
      (7)   Real estate signage. Real estate signage is for the advertisement
of the sale, rent, or lease of a property upon which the sign is located. Such
real estate signage does not require a permit but must adhere to the
regulations set forth in this chapter.
         (a)   Commercial and industrial real estate signage. Commercial and
industrial real estate signage is for the advertisement of the sale, rent, or
lease of a commercial or industrial property upon which the sign is located.
Commercial and industrial real estate signage is subject to all the temporary
sign requirements regarding sign materials, mounting and location contained in
temporary sign section above and shall in addition adhere to the following
requirements:
            1.   Notwithstanding any other requirements of this section, no
sign pertaining to the sale or lease of any commercial or industrial property
or building shall exceed 64 square feet in sign area and ten feet in height.
            2.   Temporary signs advertising a construction company or a new
business "coming soon" utilized during construction of a new business shall be
exempt from temporary signs divisions (A) and (E) of this section. Such signs
shall be limited to a maximum of 64 square feet in sign area and a maximum of
ten feet in height. Such signs shall be mounted on durable posts that are
secured in the ground. Such signs shall be limited to one sign per street
frontage, not to exceed two such signs, for the general contractor, including
all subcontractors. Such signs shall be removed immediately upon the receipt of
any certificate of occupancy for the new business.
         (b)   CDB and MUD zone districts requirements. Each property or
building shall be allowed one of the following options:
            1.   One building-mounted sign per building elevation, not to
exceed 12 square feet in sign area.
            2.   One freestanding sign per street frontage, not to exceed 12
square feet in sign area and a maximum of six feet in height, provided that no
such sign shall be located on any sidewalk or other pedestrian way.
         (c)   Residential real estate signage.
            1.   Signs pertaining to the lease or sale of the property on which
they are located or any building thereon shall be permitted, provided that such
signs do not exceed six square feet in area per side, and further provided that
no more than two such signs are located on any single lot or parcel.
            2.   Open house signs shall be allowed to be located off-premises
subject to the following minimum requirements:
               A.   Open house signs shall be limited to a maximum of six
square feet in area per side, up to a maximum of two sides per any one sign.
               B.   Open house signs shall not be erected any sooner than the
day before the event and shall be completely removed no later than two  hours
after the end of the open house. For the purposes of this section, open houses
shall be considered a temporary event, for example during a weekend, rather
than taking place for an extended, continuous time period.
               C.   Open house signs shall be either freestanding A-frame type
signs or mounted in a freestanding manner on either a single stake or on two
stakes, with the top of such sign not exceeding four  feet in height and placed
so as not to obstruct traffic or create an impediment to visibility at street
intersections. Such signs shall not be mounted to trees or other landscaping,
regulatory traffic signage, utility or light poles or other similar structures.
         (d)   Subdivision-wide real estate promotional signage. Subdivision-
wide real estate promotional signage is for the advertisement of a subdivision
under construction. Subdivision-wide real estate promotional signage is subject
to all the temporary sign requirements regarding sign materials, mounting and
location contained in temporary sign section above and shall adhere to the
following requirements:
            1.   Notwithstanding any other requirements of this section, no
sign pertaining to subdivision-wide real estate promotional signage shall
exceed 64 square feet in sign area and a maximum of ten feet in height and
shall be mounted on durable posts that are secured in the ground. Such signs
shall be limited to one sign per street frontage. Such signs shall be removed
immediately at the time the last available home is sold.
            2.   Subdivision-wide real estate promotional signage shall be
allowed to locate only on land within the boundaries of said subdivision.
      (8)   Grand opening signs.
         (a)   Upon receipt of either a temporary certificate of occupancy or a
permanent certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first, temporary signs
shall be allowed for grand openings, subject to all the following criteria:
            1.   The business owner has satisfied all requirements for sales
tax licensing from the city (if applicable); and
            2.   The business owner has received a temporary sign permit.
         (b)   Upon satisfaction of the criteria set forth in division (a)
above, the business owner may use, install and display any two of the following
types of temporary signs to advertise a grand opening:
            1.   Two building-mounted banner signs, each of which must meet all
the criteria for temporary banner-type signs set forth in temporary sign
section division (E)(1)(e)1. above.
   (F)   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the type,
number, location, area, height and use of signs in the city shall conform to
the requirements set forth below.
   (G)   All lots zoned C-N, commercial neighborhood, on November 1, 1985,
shall be governed by the sign regulations for the C-O, commercial office,
district after the date.
   (H)   All lots zoned C-S, commercial shopping center, on November 1, 1985,
may continue to be governed by the sign regulations in that district as of the
date.
(Prior Code, § 13-420)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 153.17  COMPLIANCE WITH CODES.
   All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the Building Code and
Electrical Code of the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-421)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 153.18  AUXILIARY SPECIFICATIONS.
   In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, the following
specifications shall apply:
   (A)   No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained to obstruct any
fire escape, required exits, window or door opening used as a means of egress.
   (B)   No sign shall be attached in any form, shape or manner which will
interfere with any opening required for ventilation.
   (C)   All illuminative elements of electric signs shall be kept in
satisfactory working condition or immediately repaired or replaced.
   (D)   Lighting fixtures for externally lighted wall signs may extend up to
seven feet beyond the sign face. The fixtures shall not be less than 15 feet
above any public right-of-way.
   (E)   No sign, nor more than two structural supports with a combined width
or diameter exceeding 12 inches shall be located within, project into or
overhang the sight triangle at a corner between the heights of two feet and
eight feet above the crown of the street, measured at the center of the
intersection.
   (F)   All signs, except those attached flat against the wall of a building,
shall be construction to withstand wind loads of not less than 40 pounds per
square foot of area.
(Prior Code, § 13-422)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 153.19  PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs shall be prohibited:
   (A)   "A" frame, or sandwich board, or sidewalk, except within the CDB or
MUD zoning districts. These signs maybe used on the sidewalk within these zone
district as long as temporary, removed at the close of business daily and do
not obstruct pedestrian/vehicular circulation or constitute a pedestrian/
vehicular traffic hazard or nuisance;
   (B)   Wind signs as herein defined, except for temporary business promotion
signs;
   (C)   Inflatable devices;
   (D)   Flashing signs. No sign shall display lights resembling the flashing
lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or
rescue vehicles; nor shall any signs use the words, slogans, dimensional shape
and size, or colors of governmental traffic signs;
   (E)   Illegally affixed signs. Signs painted or attached to natural features
such as, but not limited to, trees and rocks, telephone and utility poles or
fence posts;
   (F)   No sign shall obscure vision or views of the natural landscape or the
larger urban area along arterial and collector streets and roads, nor shall any
such sign be distracting to motorists;
   (G)   No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any street or road in
such manner as to obstruct clear vision, nor shall any sign be erected at a
location where, by reason of its position, shape or color, it may interfere
with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any traffic sign, signal or
control device;
   (H)   Obstructing signs. Those which obstruct any ingress or egress,
including doors, windows or fire escapes;
   (I)   Off-premises signs. No outdoor advertising sign, billboard or other
advertising media not directly related to the use of the premises on which it
is located shall be permitted in any district except as a conditional use in
such districts as are hereinafter provided. Any off-premises sign permitted as
a conditional use shall be in harmony with the spirit and intent of these
regulations. Temporary signs advertising open houses shall be allowed in
accordance with §
153.15(E)(6);
   (J)   Open flames. Any open flames used to attract public attention to a
place of business or to an advertising sign;
   (K)   Trailer signs;
   (L)   Portable or wheeled signs, including signs mounted on a support
structure originally designed to be portable or to have wheels; (This shall not
be interpreted to prohibit lettering on motor vehicles.)
   (M)   Revolving, rotating, strobing, beaming, blinking beams, flashing,
reflecting or illuminating upon a public street, sidewalk or adjacent premises
in a manner constituting a traffic hazard or nuisance shall be prohibited as a
part of a sign display including signs in windows or as a device to attract
attention. Flashing or blinking lights that are incorporated into an electronic
changeable message board may be allowed as provided in this ordinance;
   (N)   Signs affixed. Signs affixed to trees or other natural vegetation,
rocks, or to any structures or poles used for utilities;
   (O)   Signs continuously outlined with individual light bulbs or string of
lights including lights that outline property lines, sales areas, or any
portion of a structure and are intended to advertise or draw attention to a
business or commercial activity, except as follows:
      (1)   Lights used temporarily as holiday decorations;
      (2)   Lights or other devices used on a temporary basis on parcels on
which carnivals, fairs, or other similar temporary activities are held; or
      (3)   Lights or other devices used as design element within the CBD and
MUD zone districts.
   (P)   Signs which emit smoke, visible vapors, particles, sound or odor or
traffic controls;
   (Q)   Unpainted signs, broken signs and signs on vacated buildings shall be
removed from the premises or repaired or renovated by the owners of the
premises on order of the city building inspector;
   (R)   Curb signs;
   (S)   Signs which are placed on any curb, sidewalk, utility post or pole,
hydrant, bridge, or other surface located on public property, except community
banners authorized under §
153.05(A);
   (T)   Signs which obstruct free ingress to or egress from a required door,
window, fire escape or other required exit way;
   (U)   Signs which are erected on or project into or over any public right-
of-way, except a sign for which a permit has been issued in conformance with
the requirements of this chapter, and except community banners authorized under
§
153.05(A);
   (V)   Signs facing onto residential districts unless separated by a public
right-of-way; (This prohibition shall not include projecting or free-standing
signs located between the building and the street right-of-way at the locations
permitted in §
153.15.);
   (W)   Signs or sign structures which:
      (1)   In any way obstruct the view of, may be confused with, or purport
to be an official traffic sign, signal or device or other official sign;
      (2)   Use any words, phrases, symbols or characters implying the
existence of danger or the need for stopping or maneuvering of a motor vehicle;
      (3)   Create in any other way an unsafe distraction for motor vehicle
operators; or
      (4)   Obstruct the view of motor vehicle operators entering a public
roadway from any parking area, service drive, private driveway, alley or other
thoroughfare.
   (X)   Signs or sign structure which are structurally unsafe or are capable
of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in contact with the
same;
   (Y)   Signs which bear or contain statements, words or pictures of an
obscene, pornographic or immoral nature;
   (Z)   Signs which advertise an activity, business, product or service no
longer conducted or available on the lots upon which the signs are located,
except community banners authorized under §
153.05(A); and
   (AA)   Signs not on the lot which they serve or any other signs not
pertinent and clearly incidental to the permitted use on the lot where located;
provided that this restriction shall not apply to signs of institutional uses
nor to any commercial message displayed within the confines of a spectator
activity facility, except community banners authorized under §
153.05(A).
(Prior Code, § 13-423)  (Am. Ord. 1229, passed 12-7-82; Am. Ord. 1377, passed
6-3-86; Am. Ord. 1473, passed 8-6-91; Am. Ord. 1621, passed 11-2-99; Am. Ord.
1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 153.20  MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.
   (A)   Every sign, including those exempted from this chapter, shall always
be maintained in good structural condition. All signs shall be kept neatly
painted, including all metal parts and supports thereof that are not rust
resistant. The building inspector or authorized representative shall inspect
and shall have authority to order the painting, repair, alteration or removal
of any sign which constitutes a hazard to the health, safety or general welfare
of the public.
   (B)   No person shall suffer or permit any sign, whether conforming or
nonconforming, to become or constitute a hazard to health or safety by reason
of dilapidation, destruction or improper or inadequate maintenance.
   (C)   It shall be the affirmative duty of those having control over the
signs to keep or bring the same into compliance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-430)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.21  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Signs erected prior to the date of enactment of this chapter, which
signs do not conform to the sign regulations contained in this chapter, shall
not be expanded, enlarged, modified or changed in any way except in conformity
with these sign regulations.
   (B)   A nonconforming sign that lawfully exists at the time of the passage
of this ordinance shall not be continued and maintained by reasonable repairs
if:
      (1)   The sign is deemed unsafe;
      (2)   The sign is located within the sight triangle and obstructs the
view of motorists;
      (3)   The sign has been destroyed, intentionally or unintentionally, to
the extent that the estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds 50% of the
appraised replacement cost as determined by the City Building Inspector;
      (4)   The sign is in 50% disrepair as determined by the City Building
Inspector;
      (5)   The sign cannot be maintained in conformance with the building,
electrical and fire codes;
      (6)   The sign is in a required parking space or located in the public
right-of-way;
      (7)   The sign has been determined to be abandoned. As determined by the
lot or building space served by the sign has been unoccupied for a continuous
period of one year; or
      (8)   The sign is an off-premise sign.
(Prior Code, § 13-432)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 153.22  REMOVAL OF SIGNS.
   Any signs existing on or after the date of enactment of this chapter, which
signs identify a business or activity which no longer exists or a product which
is no longer sold on the premises, shall be removed by the owner of the
premises upon written notice of the City Building Inspector. The City Building
Inspector, upon determining that such sign exists, shall notify the owner of
the premises in writing to remove such sign within 30 days of the date of the
notice.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
CHAPTER 154:  SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Definitions
   
154.02   Authority
   
154.03   Jurisdiction
   
154.04   Purpose
   
154.05   Consistency with comprehensive plan
   
154.06   Administration and amendment
   
154.07   Violation
Platting Procedure
   
154.20   Subdividing unplatted land
   
154.21   Subdividing platted land
   
154.22   Deed approval
   
154.23   Lot line adjustments
   
154.24   General procedure for subdividing
   
154.25   Preliminary plat application and approval process
   
154.26   Contents of preliminary plat
   
154.27   Review and approval of preliminary plat
   
154.28   Time of submission of final plat
   
154.29   Final plat application
   
154.30   Contents of final plat
   
154.31   Planning Commission and Council action
   
154.32   Recording of plat
   
154.33   Minor subdivision
   
154.34   Lot-splits for existing two-family dwellings
   
154.35   Filing fees
Vacated Recorded Plats
   
154.36   Vacating recorded plats
Improvements and Standards
   
154.45   Purpose
   
154.46   Urban design principals
   
154.47   Block design standards
   
154.48   Lot design standards
   
154.49   Building line design standards
   
154.50   Improvements required
   
154.51   Permanent markers
   
154.52   Streets and alleys
   
154.53   Sidewalks
   
154.54   Water lines and fire hydrants
   
154.55   Sanitary sewers
   
154.56   Storm drainage facilities
   
154.57   Fencing and permanent evergreen plant screening
   
154.58   Public areas and open spaces
   
154.59   Easement design standards
   
154.60   Continuity and assurance of improvements
   
154.61   Construction of improvements
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.75   Submission of performance bond
   
154.76   Construction permit for off-site improvements
   
154.77   Inspection of improvements
   
154.78   Acceptance of required improvements
   
154.79   Deferral of required improvements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A minor public right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary
access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on
some other street.
   APPLICANT. The owner of the land proposed to be subdivided or his or her
representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the property.
   BLOCK. A parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is
surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public walks,
public parks or green strips, rural land or drainage channels or a combination
thereof.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of any
persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind.
   BUILDING LINE or SETBACK LINE. A line or lines designating the area outside
of which buildings may not be erected.
   CITY. The City of Bethany, Oklahoma.
   CITY CLERK. The City Clerk of Bethany.
   CITY STAFF. The city administrative staff.
   COLLECTOR STREET. Any street intended to move traffic from local streets to
secondary or primary arterials or major thoroughfares. A COLLECTOR STREET
serves a neighborhood or large subdivision.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The comprehensive development plan for the city which
has been officially adopted to provide long-range development policies for the
area subject to urbanization in the foreseeable future and which includes,
among other things, the plan for land use, traffic and community facilities.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of Bethany.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate
terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
   EASEMENT. Grant or authorization by the property owner to the public, a
corporation or persons, for the use of a strip of land for specific purposes.
   GRADE. The slope of a road, street or other public way, specified in
percentage terms.
   LOCAL STREET.
      (1)   A street intended to provide access to collectors or thoroughfares.
      (2)   The designation as to the classification of streets shall be based
on the principles established in the comprehensive plan.
      (3)   If a question exists as to the functional or design classification
of streets the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make the final
determination.
   LOT. A tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land
intended as a unit for the transfer of ownership or for building development.
   LOT ADJUSTMENT COMMITTEE. Committee composed of the City Engineer, City
Building Inspector and Community Development Coordinator.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two or
more streets.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot which runs through a block from street to street
and which has two nonintersecting sides abutting on two or more streets.
   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT. A relocation of the lot lines of two or more lots
included in a plat which is filed of record, for the purpose of making
necessary adjustments to building sites.
   LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE. A double frontage lot which is to be developed with
the rear yard abutting a major street and with the primary means of ingress and
egress provided on a minor street.
   MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision
including but not limited to subdivisions of tracts which are two acres or
greater in area or which are to be subdivided into four or more lots, or any
size subdivision requiring any new street or drainage improvements or extension
of municipal facilities or the creation of any public or off-site improvements.
   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE. A road or street intended to move through traffic to and
from major attractions such as central business districts, shopping centers,
colleges, places of employment and similar traffic generators and/or as a route
for traffic between communities or large areas.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision of a tract of less than two acres
comprising the total area of a single ownership which is to be subdivided into
three or fewer lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new
street or road or drainage improvements or the extension of municipal
facilities or the creation of any public or off-site improvements.
   OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS. Any utility, structure or modification of topography
which is, or will be, located within, under or over a right-of-way or easement
of record and which is, or will be, owned and/or maintained by other than the
individual owner(s) of developed real estate.
   OPEN SPACE BUFFER. An open area that is excluded from development which
consists of natural plantings that will function to significantly reduce the
sight and sound of the use of the property being developed.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The City Planning and Zoning Commission.
   PLAT, FINAL. A map of a land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for
filing of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances and
with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks,
streets and alleys, public and other dimensions of land.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A map of a proposed land subdivision showing the
character and proposed  layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate
conformity of the proposed subdivision with the purposes of the comprehensive
plan and these regulations.
   RESUBDIVISION. A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat
if the change affects any street layout on the map or area reserved thereon for
public use or creates any additional lots.
   REVERSE STRIP. A part of the property being subdivided which is platted and
restricted so as to prohibit access to an adjacent public easement or right-of-
way.
   STREET. Any public or private right-of-way which affords the primary means
of access to abutting property.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity,
acting as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined.
   SUBDIVISION. The division or re-division of land into two or more lots,
tracts, sites or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for
development, or the dedication or vacation of a public or private right-of-way
or easement or the recording of property previously divided, as provided for by
these regulations contained herein.
   SUITABLE EFFECTIVE SCREENING. An open space buffer consisting of natural
plantings, fencing or similar material that will significantly reduce the
penetration of noise from an adjacent street.
(Prior Code, § 13-501)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.02  AUTHORITY.
   By authority granted by 11 O.S. and other applicable laws, statutes, orders
and regulations of the state and the city, the City Council does hereby
exercise the power and authority to review, approve or disapprove plats for the
subdivision of land within the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-502)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
Statutory reference:
   Powers over land subdivision generally, see 11 O.S. § 45-104
§ 154.03  JURISDICTION.
   These regulations shall apply to the following forms of subdividing and
developing of land within the corporate limits of the city:
   (A)   The establishment, erection or construction of a building or dwelling
of any nature on any tract, lot, site or parcel of land containing five acres
or less in area;
   (B)   The erection, establishment, development or construction of two or
more buildings or residences of any nature, on any tract, lot, site or parcel
of land containing ten acres or less in area;
   (C)   The dividing of land into two or more tracts, lots, sites or parcels
any part of which when subdivided shall contain five acres or less in area;
   (D)   The redividing of land, previously divided or platted into tracts,
lots, sites or parcels, any part of which when redivided, shall be five acres
or less in area;
   (E)   The dedicating, vacating or reserving of any public or private
easement through any tract of land, regardless of area involved, including
those for use by public and private utility companies; and
   (F)   The dedicating of any street or alley, or addition to any street or
alley, through any tract of land, regardless of the area involved.
(Prior Code, § 13-503)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.04  PURPOSE.
   (A)   The subdivision of land should be the first step in the process of
urban development. The arrangement of land parcels in the community for
residential, commercial and industrial uses and for streets, alleys, schools,
parks and other public purposes, will determine to a large degree the
conditions of health, safety, economy and amenity that prevail in the urban
area.
   (B)   (1)   The quality of these conditions is of public interest.
      (2)   These regulations and standards for the subdivision and improvement
of land for urban use are to make provision for adequate light, air, open
spaces, drainage, transportation, public utilities and other needs, to ensure
the development and maintenance of a healthy, attractive and efficient
community that provides for the conservation and protection of its human and
natural resources.
   (C)   These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
      (1)   To guide the future growth and development of the city in
accordance with the comprehensive plan;
      (2)   To provide for adequate light, air and privacy and to secure safety
from fire, flood and other danger and to prevent overcrowding of the land;
      (3)   To limit development to an amount equal to the availability and
capacity of public facilities and services;
      (4)   To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of
land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the city, having
particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways
and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various per location
and width of streets and building lines;
      (5)   To harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of
land to the existing community and facilitate the future development of
adjoining tracts;
      (6)   To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdividing and resubdividing;
      (7)   To insure proper legal descriptions and adequate and accurate
records of land subdivision; and
      (8)   To provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit
the tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the
tract.
(Prior Code, § 13-504)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.05  CONSISTENCY WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to consider the
subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided plat as
subject to the control of the city pursuant to the comprehensive plan for the
orderly, planned, efficient, physical and economic development of the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-505)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.06  ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT.
   (A)   Applicable regulations. Subdivision review and approval, conditional
approval or denial must be based on the regulations in effect at the time a
subdivision application and preliminary plat is deemed to contain sufficient
information for review. If regulations change during the element or sufficiency
review, the determination of whether the application contains the required
elements and sufficient information, and the subdivision review, must be based
on the new regulations.
   (B)   The City Council may, from time to time, adopt, amend and make public
rules and regulations for the administration of these regulations to the end
that the public be informed, and that approval of plats be expedited. These
regulations may be enlarged or amended by the City Council after public
hearing, due notice of which shall be given as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 13-506)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.07  VIOLATION.
   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new
structure or change, improvement or alteration of any existing structure on any
tract of land which itself does not comply with the provisions of these
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 13-507)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
   PLATTING PROCEDURE
§ 154.20  SUBDIVIDING UNPLATTED LAND.
   No deed, plat, plan, scheme or conveyance of any kind which divides any
unplatted land in the city into tracts or parcels where any part thereof shall
be five acres or less in size shall be filed for record in the office of the
County Clerk until the instrument has been approved by the Planning Commission
and the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-510)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.21  SUBDIVIDING PLATTED LAND.
   No lot, piece or parcel of land heretofore platted shall be subdivided or
replatted and no instrument conveying a portion or part of the land or plat,
scheme or plan of any nature, subdividing the lots, pieces or parcels of land
shall be filed for record in the office of the County Clerk without the
approval of the City Planning and Zoning Commission and Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-511)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.22  DEED APPROVAL.
   A subdivision of land into no more than three lots, tracts or parcels. Said
subdivision shall include all processes related to the conveyance of title by
(1) deed described by metes and bounds; and (2) deed described by reference to
an unapproved plat.
   (A)   Classification as deed approval. Subdivision of land shall be
classified as a deed approval if:
      (1)   An existing lot, tract, site or parcel of land is subdivided into
no more than three lots, tracts, sites or parcels. Said subdivision shall
include all processes related to the conveyance of title by:
         (a)   Deed by metes and bounds description; or
         (b)   Deed described by reference to an unapproved plat.
      (2)   The subdivision does not involve nor include the dedication or
abandonment of public rights-of-way and/or easements.
      (3)   The subdivision can satisfy these regulations and other applicable
ordinances and statutes without the construction of streets, water facilities,
storm drainage facilities or other improvements. It is the intent of this
provision to limit this classification to those cases where the improvements
required by these regulations have been provided and all such improvement
requirements have been satisfied.
      (4)   The property is zoned commercial, institutional, or industrial.
Property located in CBD zoning districts is not eligible for classification as
deed approval.
   (B)   Classification as deed approval not construed to waive requirements.
The classification of a subdivision as a deed approval procedure shall not be
construed to waive any requirements of these regulations, nor the provisions of
any other ordinance or statute pertaining to the property.
   (C)   Deed approval procedure. Administrative review and approval of deed
approvals is required in accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   Submittal of application. Application for deed approval review
shall be filed with the Community Development Director. Such application shall
consist of the proposed deed with the legal description provided there on or
attached thereto as Exhibit for the subject property and, at the discretion of
the Director, a site plan or survey of the subject property. All items
submitted in paper form shall also be submitted in digital form. A fee, as set
forth by the Bethany City Council, shall also accompany the application.
      (2)   Subdivision review process. The Community Development Director
shall submit the application for review and comment to The Lot Adjustment
Committee. The Lot Adjustment Committee may approve or disapprove a request.
Approval of a request shall be by unanimous signed consent of the total
membership of the Lot Adjustment Committee. Any disapproved request may be
appealed to the Planning Commission and subsequently to the City Council. The
Community Development Director may submit the application to other agencies
and/or departments as staff deems necessary. Within 14 days of the official
date of the submission of a complete application, the Lot Adjustment Committee
shall approve or disapprove the application for deed approval and the Community
Development Director shall notify the applicant of said decision. However, the
applicant may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of said
period. If the application is not approved by the City of Bethany, the
applicant may apply to the Planning Commission and subsequently to the City
Council for public hearing and action.
   (D)   Delegation of authority for administrative approval of deeds. The Lot
Adjustment Committee has the authority to approve deeds under the following
conditions:
      (1)   Pre-existing deeds. The property to be conveyed by the deed
submitted for review existed in its present configuration prior to its
annexation to the city or prior to the December 13, 1973, adoption of the
Bethany Subdivision Regulations. Documentation of prior configuration shall be
required.
      (2)   Exempted deeds.
         (a)   The configuration of the property to be conveyed was created by
a court decree or by an action of other governmental authority. Documentation
of such court decree or governmental action shall be required.
         (b)   The property to be conveyed is bounded on all sides by
properties that have previously received deed approvals by the Lot Adjustment
Committee or Planning Commission. Documentation of such deed approvals shall be
required.
         (c)   The deed submitted for review is exempted from the requirements
of Planning Commission approval by any provision of state law. Documentation of
such exemption shall be required.
         (d)   The property to be conveyed existed in its present configuration
prior to December 13, 1973, and meets the following criteria:
            1.   It is in compliance with all requirements and regulations of
the Drainage and Flood Damage Prevention Ordinances; and
            2.   It is not landlocked nor does it landlock another lot, tract
or parcel of land.
      (3)   Other deeds eligible for administrative approval. The property to
be conveyed meets the following criteria:
         (a)   All current subdivision regulations are met, including all
ordinances and regulations relating to the improvements of streets and the
installation of water, sewer and drainage facilities.
         (b)   Properties must front on approved streets meeting city
standards, except in the case of
property included in a PUD approved by the City Council and under the
conditions described in division (D)(3)(a)8. below.
         (c)   All applicable regulations of the Planning and Zoning Ordinances
are met, including those regulations concerning nonconforming uses.
         (d)   All applicable regulations of the Drainage and Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinances are met.
         (e)   All applicable regulations of the sewer ordinances are met.
         (f)   No more than three total lots, tracts or parcels, regardless of
size, are being created from a presently platted lot, tract or parcel.
         (g)   Nonresidential zoned or developed lots, tracts or parcels must
maintain a minimum frontage/width of 50 feet at the front property line, except
in the case of property included in a PUD approved by the City Council and
under the conditions described in division (D)(3)(a)8. below.
         (h)   When a proposed deed approval pertains to property that is part
of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) that has been properly approved by the City
Council, the street frontage requirements of division (D)(3)(a) 2. and 7. above
may be relaxed under the following conditions:
            1.   Any common features including, but not limited to, access
ways, parking areas, easements, setbacks, landscaping reserves, or other public
spaces as described in the approved PUD must be preserved.
            2.   Preservation and maintenance of common features, especially
access ways and parking, must be guaranteed by the PUD design documentation,
owners' association duties, and/or the proper covenants and restrictions. Said
documentation, covenants, and restrictions must be approved by the City
Attorney and shall be enforceable by the City of Bethany as a beneficiary of
same.
         (i)   Approval of the deed submitted shall not create a substandard
lot on adjoining property. The deed submitted may be approved if the
substandard lot created on the adjoining property is combined by restrictive
covenant with other property to create a standard lot. Both deeds must be
approved simultaneously, and the restrictive covenant must be of a form
approved by the City Attorney and be filed in the office of the County Clerk.
      (4)   Limits of delegated authority. No further delegation of the
Planning Commission's authority for deed approval is hereby granted or implied.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the applicant from requesting a public
hearing before the Planning Commission.
   (E)   Staff guidelines regarding improvements.
      (1)   Required improvements. When requests for deed approvals are
submitted to the Planning Commission, requirements for improvements shall be
determined by the City Council, after review by the Planning Commission.
      (2)   Paving. The Community Development Director shall recommend the
installation of proper street paving with the approval of all deeds, if that
paving does not already exist.
      (3)   Water. The Community Development Director shall recommend the
extension and installation of water mains to serve all subdivided property.
      (4)   Sanitary sewer. The Community Development Director shall recommend
the extension and installation of sanitary sewer lines to serve all subdivided
property.
      (5)   Force of approval. Once the initial deed or any subsequent deed has
been approved by the Lot Adjustment Committee or Planning Commission, such
approval relates back to the original subdivision and covers all future
conveyances using the same legal description. However, no more than three deed
approvals shall be approved based on the initial deed or any subsequent deed.
(Ord. 1784, passed 5-15-07)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.23  LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The purpose of this section is to allow adjustments to be made
to lot lines of platted or unplatted lots for the purpose of adjusting the size
of building sites; however, it is not intended that extensive replatting be
accomplished by use of this section.
      (2)   The lot line adjustments shall be permitted for the purpose stated,
but shall not violate any of the requirements of the zoning code or of the
design and improvement provisions of this chapter and shall meet the following
conditions:
         (a)   No additional lot shall be created by any lot line adjustment;
         (b)   No lot line adjustment shall be allowed unless all required off-
site improvements are either completed and accepted by the city or their
construction is secured under applicable requirements contained in these
regulations;
         (c)   All proposed residential dwelling sites contained in a proposed
lot line adjustment shall have a width at the front building line which is
equal to or greater than the narrowest width lot, measured at the front
building line, which fronts on the same street as the proposed dwelling site
and which is located within the same block, or is across the street from the
same block, in which the dwelling site is located;
         (d)   All proposed parcels or building sites involved in a lot line
adjustment shall abut on either an existing alley or adequate utility easement
and on a public street;
         (e)   Unusable parcels shall not be created as a result of any lot
line adjustment.
   (B)   Lot line adjustments shall be administered by the Lot Adjustment
Committee, composed of the City Engineer, the City Building Inspector and the
Community Development Director. Each lot line adjustment shall be processed in
accordance with a standardized form and procedure recommended by the Planning
Commission and approved by the City Council.
   (C)   The Lot Adjustment Committee may approve or disapprove a request.
Approval of a request shall be by unanimous signed consent of the total
membership of the Lot Adjustment Committee. Any disapproved request may be
appealed to the Planning Commission and subsequently to the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-513) (Am. Ord. 1706, passed 10-21-03; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-16-19)
§ 154.24  GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVIDING.
   Before any building permit may be issued for the erection or construction of
a structure on land which has not been subdivided according to these
regulations it shall be necessary for the subdividing owner, or his or her
authorized agent, to apply for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision
in accordance with the following procedures for obtaining preliminary plat and
final plat approval:
   (A)   Pre-application meeting. The subdivider must attend a pre-application
meeting for a proposed subdivision. A pre-application meeting must occur within
30 days after the sub divider submits a written request to the Community
Development Director.
   (B)   At the time of the written request for the pre-application meeting,
the subdivider must provide the city with the following general information:
      (1)   A preliminary sketch plan drawn to scale showing general
information on the current status of the site; including:
         (a)   Location;
         (b)   Approximate tract and lot boundaries of existing tracts of
record;
         (c)   Description of general terrain;
         (d)   Natural features, e.g., lakes, streams and riparian vegetation;
         (e)   Existing structures and improvements;
         (f)   Approximate location of existing utility lines and facilities;
         (g)   Approximate location of existing easements and rights-of-way;
and
         (h)   Parks and open space.
      (2)   A preliminary sketch plan drawn to scale showing general
information on the proposed subdivision, including:
         (a)   Approximate location tract and lot boundaries;
         (b)   Building/lot layout;
         (c)   Proposed access;
         (d)   Proposed public improvements;
         (e)   General location of proposed utility lines and facilities;
         (f)   Approximate location of easements and rights-of-way; and
         (g)   Parks and open space, if applicable.
      (3)   General maps and information including:
         (a)   A brief narrative of the project;
         (b)   Zoning map with site identified, if applicable;
         (c)   Comprehensive plan map with site identified;
         (d)   Floodplain map with site identified, if applicable;
         (e)   Vicinity sketch showing adjacent uses with site identified;
         (f)   Topographic map with site identified;
         (g)   Aerial photograph, if available, with site identified; and
         (h)   Slope category map, if applicable.
      (4)   At the pre-application meeting the city will identify, for
informational purposes, the state laws, local regulations and growth policy
provisions that may apply to the subdivision review process. Information on the
public utilities, and any other entities that have a substantial interest in
the proposed subdivision.
      (5)   If the subdivision application is not submitted within one year of
the preapplication meeting, the subdivider must request a second pre-
application meeting prior to submitting the application.
(Prior Code, § 13-514)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.25  PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS.
   The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat for presentation to the
Planning Commission and City Council. The plat shall conform to the minimum
standards and requirements of these regulations and the zoning code of the city
and be in compliance with the comprehensive plan. The subdivider shall submit
the completed application for approval of the preliminary plat and ten copies
of the preliminary plat to the office of the City Engineer at least 14 days
prior to the regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting. All items
submitted in paper form shall also be submitted in digital form. The Planning
Commission shall publish notice and hold a public hearing on the preliminary
plat and follow the same procedure for the final plat.
(Prior Code, § 13-515)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
Statutory reference:
   Platting requirements, see 11 O.S. §§ 41-101 et seq.
§ 154.26  CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   Ten copies and a digital file in pdf format of the preliminary plat drawn to
a scale of 100 feet to one inch shall be provided, and shall contain or be
accompanied by the following information:
   (A)   The land contours, with vertical intervals not greater than two feet,
referenced to a United States Geological Survey or Coast and Geodetic Survey
benchmark or monument;
   (B)   A current list, three sets of the list printed on mailing label,
certified by a bonded abstractor or the County Assessor of Oklahoma County, of
all the property owners within 300 feet of the exterior boundary of the
property being platted;
   (C)   Scale, north point and date;
   (D)   Proposed name of the subdivision;
   (E)   Name and address of the owner of record and the subdivider;
   (F)   Legal description of property to be subdivided (paper form and
editable digital format);
   (G)   Total acreage to be subdivided and the number of lots to be created;
   (H)   Name and address of the registered engineer preparing the plat;
   (I)   Name and address of the registered land surveyor who surveyed the
property;
   (J)   Name and address of lawyer providing legal counseling on proposed
subdivision;
   (K)   Existing zoning of property being subdivided;
   (L)   A key map showing the location of the proposed development referenced
to major streets;
   (M)   Names, with location of intersecting boundary lines, of adjoining
subdivisions and location of city limits, if falling within or immediately
adjoining the tract;
   (N)   Location of existing buildings, surface water, water courses and
location of dedicated streets at the point where they adjoin and/or are
immediately adjacent to the subdivision;
   (O)   Length of boundaries of the tract, measured to nearest foot, and
proposed location of width of street, alleys, easements and setback lines and
approximate lot dimensions;
   (P)   Existing sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, bridges, culverts and
all other underground structures within the tract, or adjacent thereto, with
pertinent information as to their size, condition and elevation;
   (Q)   Proposed sanitary sewer layout;
   (R)   Proposed water main layout;
   (S)   Proposed paving layout and/or paving widening, with arrows indicating
the direction of flow of stormwater, showing typical paving section or
sections;
   (T)   Drainage area, in acres, shown at points where storm water enters and
leaves the proposed subdivision, where drainage channels intersect roadways and
at junction points;
   (U)   Location of all drainage channels and sub- surface drainage
structures, proposed method of handling stormwater through the subdivision.
Information shall include the area, in acres, draining into inlets or paved
channels, with sizes of the drainage system;
   (V)   Information concerning special structures such as lift stations and
bridges;
   (W)   Classification of every street easement within or adjacent to the
subdivision, in accordance with intended use of the street based on the
proposed design (This shall be done by placing the appropriate term, “major
thoroughfare,” “collector” or “local street,” in parenthesis directly on each
street.); and
   (X)   Areas for public open space and public institutional uses, including
schools, recreation areas and civic uses.
(Prior Code, § 13-516)  (Am. Ord. 1880, passed 6-17-14; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 154.27  REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Copies of both the completed application and the preliminary plat
shall be submitted by the city staff to appropriate agencies and utility
companies for their review and recommendation.
   (B)   Each plat submitted for preliminary approval shall be placed on the
agenda of the Planning Commission only after fulfilling the appropriate
requirements of this chapter. However, a plat not meeting all the requirements
may be placed on the agenda providing the subdivider presents with the plat a
written request for specific exceptions and explains the reasons therefor.
Notice of application for preliminary plat approval shall be sent to all
property owners within 300 feet of the exterior boundary of the property to be
platted. The notice is to be sent at least ten days prior to the regularly
scheduled Planning Commission meeting at which time action has been requested.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall approve, approve conditionally or
disapprove the plat within 60 days of the date of its submission by the
applicant, unless extended by mutual agreement, lithe preliminary plat is
disapproved or approved conditionally, the reasons for such action shall be
stated in writing, a copy of which shall be signed by the Planning Commission
Chairperson and shall be attached to one copy of the plat and transmitted to
the subdivider and City Council. Reasons for disapproval and conditional
approval shall refer specifically to those parts of the plan or specific
regulations which the plat does not conform. On conditionally approving a plat,
the Planning Commission may require submission of a revised preliminary plat.
   (D)   (1)   City Council shall approve, approve conditionally or disapprove
the plat within 90 days of the date of its submission by the applicant unless
extended by mutual agreement, lithe preliminary plat is disapproved or approved
conditionally, the reasons for the action shall be attached to one copy of the
plat and transmitted to the subdivider.
      (2)   Reasons for disapproval or conditional approval shall refer
specifically to those parts of the plan or specific regulations with which the
plat does not conform. On conditionally approving a plat, the City Council may
require submission of a revised preliminary plat.
(Prior Code, § 13-518)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.28  TIME OF SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLAT.
   The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission and City Council for final approval within one year of the
date on which the preliminary plat was approved. If not submitted for final
approval within the time the preliminary plat shall be considered as having
been disapproved unless the City Council agrees to an extension of time.
(Prior Code, § 13-519)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.29  FINAL PLAT APPLICATION.
   A final plat, neatly drawn in ink on tracing cloth or suitable reproducible
material and five dark line prints thereof shall be submitted to the office of
the City Clerk not less than 14 days before the Planning Commission meeting at
which time it is to be considered for final approval. At the same time, there
shall be submitted five sets of the proposed plans and specifications for all
improvements and proposed restrictions in final form. The final plat may be
approved subject to later submission of final improvement plans and
specifications. The survey of the final plat shall be prepared by a registered
land surveyor licensed to practice in the state and the design shall be
prepared by a professional engineer registered to practice in the state. All
items submitted in paper form shall also be submitted in digital form.
(Prior Code, § 13-520)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.30  CONTENTS OF FINAL PLAT.
   The final plat shall show the following information:
   (A)   The location and description of all section corners and permanent
survey monuments in or near the tract to at least one of which the subdivision
shall be referenced;
   (B)   The length of all required lines dimensioned in feet and decimals
thereof and the value of all required true bearings and angles dimensioned in
degrees of minutes, as hereafter specified;
   (C)   The boundary lines of the land being subdivided fully dimensioned by
lengths and bearings and the location of the boundary lines of adjoining lands,
with adjacent subdivisions identified by official names;
   (D)   The lines of all proposed streets fully dimensioned by lengths and
bearings or angles;
   (E)   The lines of all proposed alleys; (Where the length or direction of an
alley is not readily discernible from data given for lot or block lines, the
length and bearing shall be given.)
   (F)   The widths, and names where appropriate, of all proposed streets and
alleys and of all adjacent streets, alleys and easements which shall be
properly located;
   (G)   The lines of all proposed lots fully dimensioned by lengths and
bearings or angles, except that where a lot line meets a street line at right
angles, the angle or bearing value may be omitted;
   (H)   The outline of any property which is offered for dedication to public
use fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings with the area marked "Public;"
   (I)   The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision
and the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block, with areas to be
excluded from platting marked "Reserved" or "Not a Part;"
   (J)   The location of all building lines, setback lines and easements for
public services or utilities with dimensions showing their location;
   (K)   The radii, arcs, points of tangency, points of intersection and
central angles for curvilinear streets and radii for all property returns;
   (L)   The proper acknowledgments of owners and the consent by the mortgagee
to plat restrictions;
   (M)   The following which shall be made and shown on the cloth tracing:
      (1)   Owner's certificate and dedication, signed;
      (2)   Engineer's or registered surveyor's certificate of survey, signed
and his or her seal;
      (3)   Certificate for release of mortgage for any portion dedicated to
the public;
      (4)   Reference to any separate instruments, including restrictive
covenants, filed in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds which directly
affect the land being subdivided;
      (5)   Certificate of Planning Commission approval;
      (6)   Certificate of City Council acceptance of ways, easements and
public land dedications; and
      (7)   Treasurer's certificate;
   (N)   A title which shall include:
      (1)   Name of subdivision;
      (2)   Name of city, county and state; and
      (3)   Location and description of the subdivision referenced to section,
range and township;
   (O)   Final construction plans for paving and storm sewer, including
complete drainage computations, typical paving sections and storm sewer
details, i.e. manhole, inlets, special structures and the like, in accordance
with the standards, contained in these regulations;
   (P)   Final construction plans for sanitary sewer with the following:
      (1)   Note flow line elevations at every point where line enters or
leaves manhole; (Normally, 1/10 of a foot is desired between flow lines.
Maximum differential without drop connection is two feet.)
      (2)   Show detail of manhole and all special instructions or conditions;
and
      (3)   Engineer's report for State Health Department approval.
   (Q)   Final site development and area grading plans, including abutting
lots;
   (R)   Final estimate of cost and cost detail unit prices of required
improvements; and
   (S)   Final design criteria, reports, calculations and all other related
computations, if not previously submitted with preliminary plat.
(Prior Code, § 13-521)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.31  PLANNING COMMISSION AND COUNCIL ACTION.
   (A)   Each plat submitted for final approval shall be placed on the agenda
of the Planning Commission only after fulfilling the appropriate requirements
of this chapter. However, a plat not meeting all the requirements may be placed
on the agenda providing the subdivider presents with the plat a written request
for specific exceptions and explains the reasons therefor.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Planning Commission to act upon the final
plat within 60 days after it has been submitted for final approval unless
extended by mutual agreement. This approval and the date thereof of the
approval shall be shown on the plat over the signature of the Planning
Commission Chairman or Secretary member.
   (C)   Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of an unusual size and shape or
is surrounded by the development or unusual conditions that the strict
application of the requirements contained in this chapter would result in
substantial hardship or inequity, the Planning Commission may vary or modify,
except as otherwise indicated, the requirements of design, but not of procedure
or improvements, so that the subdivider may develop his or her property in a
reasonable manner, but so that, at the same time, the public welfare and
interests of the city are protected and the general intent and spirit of these
regulations preserved. The modification may be granted upon written request of
the subdivider stating the reason for each modification and may be waived by
three-fourths vote of the regular membership of the Planning Commission,
subject to the acceptance of the plat and the dedications thereon by the City
Council.
   (D)   (1)   Before recording the final plat, it shall be submitted to the
City Council for approval and for acceptance of public ways and service and
utility easements and land dedicated to the public use. This approval of the
plat shall be shown over the signature of the Mayor and attested by the City
Clerk. The disapproval of any plat or plan by the City Council shall be deemed
a refusal of the proposed dedication shown thereon.
      (2)   The reasons for disapproval shall refer specifically to those parts
of the comprehensive plan or ordinance or regulation with which the plat does
not comply.
(Prior Code, § 13-522)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.32  RECORDING OF PLAT.
   (A)   After receiving approval of the final plat and having affixed all
necessary signatures on the original tracing, the subdivider shall provide the
City Engineer with three dark lines prints thereof and one contract
reproducible tracing and the original tracing.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the City Clerk, or his or her
designee, to file the plat with the County Recorder of Deed's office within
seven days of receipt of the signed plat. Simultaneously with the filing of the
plat, the City Clerk or his or her designee, shall record the agreement of
dedication together with the legal documents as shall be required to be
recorded by the City Attorney.
   (C)   All final plats shall be filed within two years of date of approval by
the Planning Commission and no lots shall be sold from any plat until recorded.
Failure to record the final plat within two years of the date of the Planning
Commission or City Council approval, whichever is the later, shall void the
approval of the final plat.
   (D)   There shall be filed with the final plat, plans and specifications for
the construction of all required water mains and laterals, sanitary sewer mains
and laterals and storm sewers or drainage structures, as required by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-523)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.33  MINOR SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   Whenever a tract of less than two acres comprising the total area of a
single ownership is to be subdivided into three or fewer lots, or whenever a
proposed subdivision zoned for single-family residential use contains three or
fewer lots, a preliminary and final plat will not be required.
   (B)   This procedure shall not constitute an exemption from any of the
design or off-site improvement requirements contained in the chapter.
   (C)   Exemptions for minor subdivisions as defined herein may be permitted
under the following procedures:
      (1)   An accurate survey of the tract, prepared by a land surveyor
registered in the state, and the proposed subdivision thereof shall be
submitted to the office of the City Engineer. The survey shall be in suitable
form for filing with the County Recorder of Deeds Office. All items submitted
in paper form shall also be submitted in digital form.
      (2)   The City Engineer and planning staff shall review the proposed
minor subdivision to insure compliance with all design and off-site improvement
requirements of these regulations and they shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission for consideration at the next regular meeting of the Planning
Commission. All minor subdivision applications must be submitted to the city
staff at least 21 days prior to any regular meeting of the Planning Commission.
      (3)   If the application is approved by the Planning Commission, it shall
be certified by the signature of the Chairperson of the Planning Commission and
attested by the Secretary member. If the application is denied, the reasons for
denial shall be stated in writing, with reference made to the express provision
of the regulations to which the proposed minor subdivision does not conform and
shall be transmitted to the applicant.
      (4)   Whenever a deviation is required from the design of improvement
requirements contained herein, or whenever a street, easement or other element
is to be dedicated, the action of the Planning Commission shall be forwarded to
the City Council for its approval and for acceptance of dedication. For all
other minor subdivision applications, the action of the Planning Commission
shall be final.
      (5)   After the proposed minor subdivision has been approved and
certified as required above, the City Clerk, or his or her designee, may file
the following documents with the County Recorder of Deeds office within seven
days of the receipt of the required documents: the certified survey of the
tract, the agreements of dedications and legal documents as shall be required
to be recorded by the City Attorney.
      (6)   (a)   Each minor subdivision submitted for approval shall be placed
on the agenda of the Planning Commission only after fulfilling the appropriate
requirements of this chapter. However, a minor subdivision not meeting all the
requirements may be placed on the agenda providing the subdivider presents with
the plat a written request for specific exceptions and explains the reasons
therefor.
         (b)   Notice of application for minor subdivision approval shall be
mailed to all property owners within 300 feet of the exterior boundary of the
property. The notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the scheduled
Planning Commission meeting at which time action has been requested. The
applicant shall furnish a list of all property owners within 300 feet of the
exterior boundaries of the property, with the list being certified to accuracy
by a registered, professional engineer, a registered land surveyor, a licensed
attorney or a bonded abstractor.
(Prior Code, § 13-525)  (Ord. 1291, passed 6-5-84; Am. Ord. 1353, passed 10-15-
85; Am. Ord. 1362, passed 2-17-86; Am. Ord. 1595, passed 5-19-98; Am. Ord.
1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 154.34  LOT-SPLITS FOR EXISTING TWO- FAMILY DWELLINGS.
   The Planning Commission is hereby authorized to approve the instrument of
conveyance, which divides a lot zoned residential two-family and which is
occupied by a two-family dwelling unit into two separate parcels with each
resulting parcel containing an attached dwelling unit sharing a common wall
with the other under the following conditions:
   (A)   After the lot division, each parcel shall contain a minimum lot area
of 4,500 square feet.
   (B)   The dwelling unit on each divided parcel shall meet all applicable
front, side and rear set back requirements of the zoning code except for the
side which forms the common wall.
   (C)   Each parcel and dwelling created by the division shall be served by
separate connections for water, sewer, gas and electricity.
   (D)   (1)   For duplexes constructed after May 11, 1982, common or party
walls shall meet the "fire wall" requirements of the BOCA Building Code, 1987
edition.
      (2)   For duplexes constructed before May 11, 1982, the applicants, as a
condition of approval, shall execute, acknowledge and record in the office of
the County Clerk a statement reading as follows: "Applicants have been informed
that there is no fire wall between the units as now required by the building
codes of the City of Bethany, and applicants, by signing this application,
hereby covenant and agree to hold the City of Bethany harmless from any
liability as a condition for and in consideration of the approval of the
conveyances dividing applicants' lot into two separate parcels and this
provision shall constitute a covenant running with the land."
   (E)   All plumbing connections, electrical service and gas service for each
unit shall meet the requirements of the codes of the city pertaining to single-
family dwellings.
   (F)   A party wall agreement providing for maintenance and repair of common
areas in a form acceptable to all owners of the tract of land shall be recorded
of record.
   (G)   An application for the approval of the lot split shall be signed and
submitted by all owners of the property to be divided, and owner shall include
a survey of the property showing the proposed lot division, all structures,
easements, setbacks and identifying any areas to be held in common by the
owners on a common property line. All items submitted in paper form shall also
be submitted in digital form.
(Prior Code, § 13-526)  (Ord. 1495, passed 11-3-92; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 154.35  FILING FEES.
   At the time of submission of the preliminary plat, final plat or minor
subdivision application, there shall be deposited with the City Clerk the fee
as may be established therefor by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-527)  (Am. Ord. 1353, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1495, passed
11-3-92; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
VACATING RECORDED PLATS
§ 154.36  VACATING RECORDED PLATS.
   To remove or vacate a plat from county records, the following procedure must
be followed:
   (A)   A petition for vacating the plat must be presented to the City Council
specifically identifying the plat and stating that petitioners are the owners
of all the land described in the plat and that no rights of any person have
intervened since the filing of plat that would be adversely affected by the
cancellation or annulment of the plat;
   (B)   The City Council must hold a public hearing on the plat vacation.
Notice of the public hearing should be given by certified mail to the
landowners and anyone else with an interest in the land (including mortgage
holders);
   (C)   Public notice of the hearing must be given by posting in three public
places and publishing in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at
least one week prior to the hearing on the petition; and
   (D)   The determination of the City Council should be based on public
interest factors, including those that would be relevant to vacating public
roads. If the plat is to be vacated, the order of vacation must designate to
which properties the title to the streets and alleys must revert and that
interior streets may pass to the adjoining landowners, with each adjoining
landowner taking title to the center of the street. The City Council must
consider the following in making its determination:
      (1)   Previous platting;
      (2)   The manner in which the right-of-way was originally dedicated,
granted or conveyed;
      (3)   The reasons stated in the petition requesting the vacation; and
      (4)   Any agreements between the adjacent property owners regarding the
use of the vacated area.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
   IMPROVEMENTS AND STANDARDS
§ 154.45  PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to specify the nature of improvements
which shall be required in conjunction with the subdivision and development of
land and to identify the methods and standards which will assure the city and
the public that the required improvements will be accomplished.
(Prior Code, § 13-530)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.46  URBAN DESIGN PRINCIPLES.
   (A)   The quality of design of the urban area is dependent on the quality of
design of the individual subdivisions that compose it. Good community design
requires the coordination of the efforts of each subdivider and developer of
land within the urban area.
   (B)   Therefore, the design of each subdivision shall be prepared in
accordance with the principles established by the comprehensive plan for the
land use, traffic, community facilities and public utility services and in
accordance with the following general principles:
      (1)   It is intended that the city's urban area should be designed as a
group of integrated residential neighborhoods and appropriate commercial and
industrial and public facilities. The neighborhood, as a planning unit, is
intended as an area principally for residential use.
      (2)   The size of lots and blocks and other areas for residential,
commercial, industrial and public uses should be designed to provide adequate
light, air, open space, landscaping and off-street parking and loading
facilities.
      (3)   The arrangement of lots and blocks and the street system should be
designed to make the most advantageous use of topography and natural physical
features. Tree masses and large individual trees shall be preserved. The system
of sidewalks and roadways and the lot layout should be designed to take
advantage of the visual qualities of the area.
      (4)   Traffic within the urban area shall be provided in accordance with
the following design criteria:
         (a)   Each subdivision shall provide for the continuation of all
collector streets and major thoroughfares as shown on the comprehensive plan.
Arterial streets should be located on the perimeter of the residential
neighborhood.
         (b)   Local streets shall be designed to provide access to each parcel
of land within the residential neighborhood and within industrial areas and in
a manner that will discourage use by through traffic. They shall be planned so
that future urban expansion will not require the conversion of local streets to
collector or thoroughfare streets.
         (c)   Collector streets shall be designed to provide a direct route
from other local streets to the major thoroughfare street system.
         (d)   Ingress and egress to residential properties shall be provided
only on local or collector streets.
         (e)   Pedestrian ways shall be separated from roadways used by
vehicular traffic. Sidewalks shall be designed to provide all residential
building sites with direct access to all neighborhood facilities, including the
elementary schools, parks and playgrounds, churches and shopping centers.
      (5)   Minimum standards for development are contained in Chapter 158 of
this code of ordinances, the Building Code and in this subchapter. However, the
comprehensive plan expresses policies which are intended to achieve optimum
quality of development in the urban area. If only the minimum standards are
followed, as expressed by the various ordinances regulating land development, a
standardization of development will occur. This will produce a monotonous urban
setting. Subdivision design shall be of a quality to carry out the purpose and
spirit of the policies expressed in the comprehensive plan and in these
provisions rather than be limited to the minimum standards required herein.
(Prior Code, § 13-531)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.47  BLOCK DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of
appropriate depth not to be less than 200 feet in width. Exceptions to this
prescribed block width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets,
railroads or waterways.
   (B)   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but
block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 1,200 feet, nor be less
than 300 feet in length. Wherever practicable, blocks along major arterioles
and collector streets shall be not less than 1,000 feet in length.
   (C)   In long blocks, the Council may require the reservation of an easement
through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities or pedestrian
traffic. Pedestrian ways or crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, may be
required by the Planning Commission through the center of blocks more than 600
feet long where deemed necessary to provide safe pedestrian circulation or
access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other
community facilities.
(Prior Code, § 13-532)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.48  LOT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Residential lots shall be not less than 60 feet in width at the front
building line and shall abut a street a distance of not less than 35 feet,
except that a corner lot shall be not less than 70 feet in width at the front
building line.
   (B)   Side lot lines should be approximately at right angles or radial to
street lines.
   (C)   The area of residential lots shall not be less than that required by
the applicable zoning regulations.
   (D)   (1)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided,
except where they are needed to provide for the separation of development from
traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation.
      (2)   A suitable effective screening easement of at least 20 feet, shall
be provided along the portion of the lots abutting a traffic artery or other
use where screening is required. There shall be no right-of-way access across a
planting screen easement.
   (E)   Depth, width and necessary service roads for properties reserved or
laid out for commercial or industrial development adequate to meet the
standards in Chapter 158 of this code of ordinances and to comply with the
purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan.
(Prior Code, § 13-533)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.49  BUILDING LINE DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   A front building line shall be located a minimum of 25 feet back of
the street right-of-way line.
   (B)   A side yard building line on the side of a residential corner lot
abutting the street shall be located not less than 15 feet back of the street
right-of-way when the lot is back to back with another corner lot and not less
than 25 feet back of the street right-of-way line in every other case.
   (C)   A side yard building line shall be provided not less than ten feet
back of a crosswalk right-of-way line on the side of a lot abutting a mid-block
crosswalk.
   (D)   A minimum side yard building line of ten feet shall be provided on at
least one side of each interior lot with a minimum five-foot side yard being
provided on the other side.
   (E)   Restrictions requiring buildings to be located within the building
lines shown on the plat shall be set forth on the plat or on a separate
recorded instrument.
   (F)   Commercial or industrial property shall depict building lines and
setbacks as set forth in the zoning code and other pertinent regulations.
(Prior Code, § 13-534)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.50  IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Unless specifically excluded or excepted in this subchapter, no
building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new
structure or change, improvement or alteration of any existing structure on any
tract of land until the subdivider installs and constructs the following
specified off-site improvements in conformance with the minimum standards and
specifications established by the regulations related thereto:
      (1)   Permanent markers;
      (2)   Streets and alleys;
      (3)   Sidewalks;
      (4)   Water mains;
      (5)   Fire hydrants;
      (6)   Sanitary sewers;
      (7)   Storm sewers and appurtenant drainage structures;
      (8)   Fencing and permanent evergreen plant screening; and
      (9)   Natural features and amenities.
   (B)   In this subchapter, the phrase "required off-site improvements" shall
refer to and mean the required improvements in division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 13-535)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.51  PERMANENT MARKERS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall place permanent markers in the subdivision as
required herein and as approved by a registered land surveyor.
   (B)   (1)   Standard concrete monuments in accordance with the adopted
standard of the city shall be placed at all corners and changes in direction of
the boundary of the subdivision.
      (2)   Where boundaries are comprised of curves, the point of curvature
(P.C.), point of intersection (P.I.), and point of tangency (P.T.) shall be
monumented. All monuments shall be placed flush with the ground and the four
corner monuments shall have at least two reference points established with the
ties distances not to exceed 250 feet.
      (3)   In cases where boundaries have more than four corners, the
reference ties shall be provided as directed by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Iron pins at least 1/2-inch in diameter and at least 18 inches in
length shall be placed at all block corners, P.C.s, P.I.s and P.T.s along the
dedicated street rights-of-way and are not required to be monumented with
concrete monuments.
   (D)   All monuments shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a
registered land surveyor prior to acceptance of street improvements.
(Prior Code, § 13-536)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.52  STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall lay out, grade or otherwise improve all streets
and alleys that are designated on the approved plat or that directly serve the
subdivision in compliance with the standards and specifications of the city
code in compliance with the following provisions:
      (1)   Except for major thoroughfares and expressways, streets and alleys
shall be constructed in accordance with standards and specifications governing
the same.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, all street
right-of-way widths shall conform to division (B)(9) below.
      (3)   Streets shall be compliance with the provisions found in §
158.32.
   (B)   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets shall conform to all the elements of the most recently adopted
comprehensive plan and shall be designed and approved in accordance with the
following provisions:
      (1)   Major thoroughfares and collector streets shall be planned to
conform to the comprehensive plan.
      (2)   Access to major thoroughfares or expressways. Development adjacent
to a major thoroughfare or expressway designated on the comprehensive plan
shall comply with the following:
         (a)   Only backing or siding residential lots shall be located
adjacent to the above described highways unless a frontage road is provided for
local access purposes.
         (b)   A suitable effective screening easement of at least ten feet
shall be provided along the portion of the lots backing or siding a major
street. There shall be no right of access across a planting screen easement,
except where sidewalks and/or bicycle paths are deemed appropriate.
         (c)   Steel mesh fencing at least four feet high with permanent
evergreen plant screening or an opaque fence as approved by the Planning
Commission, shall be installed by the developer within the required screening
easement at the right-of-way line behind or at the side of residential lots and
shall be maintained by the developer for one year from the date of
installation. When planted, the evergreen plants shall be at least three feet
high.
         (d)   In any area where residential single-family or residential two-
family lots abut a major thoroughfare or expressway shown on the comprehensive
plan, no curb cuts shall be made or permitted from the lots onto the traffic
ways at any time, except where the lots have no other access to a street right-
of-way.
         (e)   Commercial and industrial subdivisions shall provide access from
each parcel to a major thoroughfare or expressway by means of a street system
designed for the use, but they shall not have access to residential streets in
a manner that encourages or promotes the movement of traffic through
residential neighborhoods.
      (3)   Local streets shall be laid out so that their use by arterial
traffic will be discouraged and the principles of the neighborhood unit concept
as provided in the comprehensive plan will be followed.
      (4)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way
or limited access highway right-of-way there may be required a street
approximately parallel to one each side of the right-of-way at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land. The distances also
shall be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and
future grade separation structures.
      (5)   Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited,
except where their control is placed in the city under conditions approved by
the City Council and acceptable to the subdivider.
      (6)   Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract
owned or intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan of a
proposed future street system for the unsubdivided portion may be required of
the subdivider.
      (7)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
      (8)   Intersections shall have the following design standards:
         (a)   Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at an angle of less
than 75 degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved
approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at
least 100 feet therefrom. Not more than two streets shall intersect at any one
point unless specifically approved by City Council.
         (b)   Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street
shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the
opposite side of the street. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than
125 feet shall not be permitted, except where the intersected street has
separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where
streets intersect with major streets, their alignment shall be continuous.
         (c)   Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two local streets
shall be at least 30 feet and a minimum curb radius at an intersection
involving a collector street shall be at least 35 feet.
         (d)   Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practicable. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a
leveling area shall be provided having not greater than 2% grade at a distance
of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting
street.
         (e)   Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or
existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by
limiting visibility, the developer shall cut the ground and/ or vegetation,
including trees, in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to
the extent deemed necessary by the City Engineer to provide an adequate sight
distance.
         (f)   The cross-slopes on all streets, including intersections, shall
be 3% or less.
      (9)   Street right-of-way-widths shall be in accordance with the
comprehensive plan and where not designated therein shall be not less than the
following:
         (a)   Minimum right-of-way widths for major thoroughfares shall be 100
feet.
         (b)   Minimum right-of-way widths for collector streets shall be 60
feet.
         (c)   Minimum right-of-way widths for local streets shall be 50 feet.
         (d)   Minimum right-of-way widths for cul-de-sacs shall be 50-foot
radius.
      (10)   The paved widths of all streets shall be adequate to serve the
existing and future estimated traffic load for the facility. Lane widths for
all public streets shall be as follows:
         (a)   The paved width of major thoroughfare streets shall be 48 feet.
         (b)   The paved width of collector streets shall be 32 feet.
         (c)   The paved width of local streets shall be 26 feet.
         (d)   The paved area of cul-de-sacs shall be at a radius of 40 feet to
the face of the curb.
      (11)   Dead-end streets shall be permitted provided the following
requirements are complied with:
         (a)   The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of
streets between adjacent properties when the continuation is necessary for the
convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection or for the efficient
provision of utilities. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street
must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to
the property line. A cul-de-sac, "T-" or "L-shaped" turnabout shall be provided
on all temporary dead-end streets, with the notation on the subdivision plat
that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abutters
whenever the street is continued. The City Council may limit the length of
temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards of these
regulations.
         (b)   Where a road does not extend to the boundary of the subdivision
and its continuation is not required by the City Council for access to
adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to the boundary
than 50 feet. However, the City Council may require the reservation of an
appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic or
utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of a permanent
dead-end street in accordance with city construction standards and
specifications.
         (c)   For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police,
fire protection and sanitation service, permanent dead-end streets shall, in
general, be limited in length in accordance with the design standards of these
regulations.
            1.   Permanent cul-de-sacs or other dead-ends shall be limited to a
maximum length of six times the minimum lot width, however, in no case shall a
cul-de-sac or other dead-end serve more than 14 families or exceed 500 feet in
length.
            2.   Temporary cul-de-sacs or other temporary dead-ends shall be
limited to a maximum length of 12 times the minimum lot width, however, in no
case shall a temporary cul-de-sac or other dead-end serve more than 25 families
or exceed 1,000 feet in length.
      (12)   Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of this code and provided that the Council finds it will be
practical to obtain the dedication of the other half of the street easement
when the adjoining property is subdivided. Whenever a half street is adjacent
to the tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted
within the tract being subdivided.
      (13)   The arrangement of streets shall be such as to cause no hardship
in the subdividing of adjacent properties. The Council may require the
dedication of street rights-of-way to facilitate the development of adjoining
properties.
      (14)   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused
with the names of existing streets. A road which is or is planned as
continuation of an existing street shall bear the same name. Street names shall
be subject to the approval of the Council.
      (15)   All grades shall conform to the requirements of the City Engineer
with the following minimum standards observed:
         (a)   Street grades for major streets shall not exceed 5%.
         (b)   Street grades for all other classes of streets shall not exceed
80%.
         (c)   No street surface shall have a finish grade of less than 0.35%.
         (d)   When deemed necessary the Council may permit an exception from
these grades in order to adjust to the topographical conditions and with
recommendations of the City Engineer.
   (C)   The following design standards apply to alleys:
      (1)   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts,
except that the Council may waive this requirement where other definite and
assured provisions are made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
      (2)   Alleys serving commercial and industrial areas shall not be less
than 30 feet in width.
      (3)   Alleys are not required for residential areas, but when provided
shall not be less than 20 feet in width.
      (4)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment should be
avoided, but when necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit
safe vehicular movement.
      (5)   Dead-end alleys should be avoided, but if necessary, shall be
provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead-end, as determined by
the Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-537)  (Am. Ord. 1347, passed 10-1-85; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 154.53  SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the terms "local residential street,"
"residential collector street," "major thoroughfare" and "expressway" shall be
defined as indicated in the comprehensive plan.
   (B)   Sidewalks no less than four feet in width shall be constructed along
properties abutting residential collector streets, and no less than five feet
in width along properties abutting major thoroughfares and expressways.
Sidewalks shall be required along residential streets and shall be no less than
four feet in width.
   (C)   Sidewalks shall be constructed within dedicated street rights-of-way
along streets improved to city standards. On unimproved streets, covenants
deferring sidewalk construction until the street is improved according to city
standards shall be required.
   (D)   Within residential developments, required sidewalks shall be located
adjacent to or within one foot of the property line. Within non-residential
developments, the placement of required sidewalks shall be at the discretion of
the Council.
   (E)   Sidewalks shall be laid out, graded and otherwise improved as
specified in standards and specifications adopted by the City Council and on
file with the City Engineer.
   (F)   All sidewalks shall be incorporated into the street improvements
construction plans required to be submitted by the developer for plat approval.
   (G)   In order to facilitate access from streets to schools, parks,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation facilities or other community
facilities, the City Council may require pedestrian access ways or crosswalks
not less than five feet wide to be located within perpetual unobstructed
easements at least 20 feet in width. The easements shall be indicated on the
plat.
   (H)   Sidewalks shall be compliance with the provisions found in §
158.32.
(Prior Code, § 13-538)  (Am. Ord. 1228, passed 10-19-82; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 154.54  WATER LINES AND FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   General requirements for water lines and fire hydrants are as follows:
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided herein, the subdivider shall install
water lines and fire hydrants in compliance with the city's code and in
compliance with standards and specifications governing water line and fire
hydrant installation approved by the Council and on file with the City
Engineer.
      (2)   All water lines shall be at least six inches in diameter.
      (3)   To eliminate future street excavations, all underground utilities
for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves and all other
supply improvements, shall be installed before any final paving of a street
shown on the subdivision plat.
   (B)   For two-family and multi-family residential and non-residential
districts, the subdivider shall install water lines and fire hydrants which
connect to a public water main and which are in compliance with construction
standards and specifications approved by the Council and on file with the City
Engineer. Fire hydrants shall be located within 300 feet of all portions of a
building of any occupancy located in multi-family residential and non-
residential districts.
   (C)   For low-density and single-family residential districts, water lines
and fire hydrants shall be required as follows:
      (1)   Fire hydrants shall be located not more than 300 feet away from any
residential single-family or two-family lot.
      (2)   The subdivider shall install water lines and fire hydrants which
connect to a public water main and which are in compliance with construction
standards and specifications and approved by the Council and on file with the
City Engineer.
      (3)   In cases involving minor subdivisions, as defined herein, where a
public water system is not reasonably accessible, the subdivider may install
individual wells within the subdivision, provided that the wells are approved
in writing by the office of the City Engineer and the County Health Department.
(Prior Code, § 13-539)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.55  SANITARY SEWERS.
   (A)   General requirements for sanitary sewer improvements are as follows:
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided herein, the subdivider shall install
sanitary sewer lines in compliance with construction standards and
specifications governing sanitary sewer line installation approved by the
Council and on file with the City Engineer. All plans shall be designed in
accordance with the rules, regulations and standards of the City Engineer and
the State Health Department. All items submitted in paper form shall also be
submitted in digital form.
      (2)   All sanitary sewer lines shall be at least eight inches in
diameter.
      (3)   To eliminate future street excavations, all underground utilities
for sanitary sewer lines shall be installed before any final paving of a street
shown on the subdivision plat.
      (4)   All new construction will require back flow preventers.
   (B)   For two-family and multi-family residential and nonresidential
districts, sanitary sewage systems shall be installed to serve each lot and to
grades and sizes required by the City Engineer and the State Health Department.
No individual disposal system shall be permitted. Sanitary sewerage facilities
shall be subject to the specifications, rules, regulations and guidelines of
the City Engineer and the State Health Department.
   (C)   For low-density and single-family residential districts, sanitary
sewerage facilities shall be constructed as follows:
      (1)   The subdivider shall connect with public sanitary sewerage
facilities and provide sewers accessible to each lot within the subdivisions.
      (2)   In minor subdivisions only where a public sanitary sewerage system
is not reasonably accessible, the subdivider may install individual sanitary
sewerage systems, provided that the systems are approved in writing by the
office of the City Engineer and the City-County Health Department.
(Prior Code, § 13-540)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.56  STORM DRAINAGE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Storm sewers and appurtenant drainage structures shall be provided and
constructed in compliance with the requirements contained in these regulations
and in compliance with construction standards and specifications governing
storm sewers and drainage facilities approved by the Council and on file with
the City Engineer.
   (B)   Unless otherwise specifically designed, the developer of a subdivision
is responsible for the following:
      (1)   All surface drainage within the subdivision;
      (2)   The improvement, enlargement or replacement of all drainage
channels lying within the subdivision to accommodate potential runoff from the
entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision; and
      (3)   The maintenance of all floodways and flood fringe areas which have
not been dedicated to the public.
   (C)   In making the determination of stream flow and runoff, the developer
shall be responsible for having an engineer registered in the state prepare a
drainage assessment of all the area of the subdivision, all upstream drainage
areas affecting the sizing of all drainage channels and structures and all of
the area affected by runoff resulting from development of the proposed
subdivision, in accordance with the following provisions:
      (1)   The maximum flood to be used for the purpose of determining all
runoff for the sizing of drainage channels and structures shall be contained in
city specifications approved by the Council and on file with the City Engineer.
      (2)   Values used in formulas for runoff and size of drainage structures
shall be based on maximum potential urbanization of the watershed, as set forth
in the projected land use pattern contained in the comprehensive plan of the
city.
      (3)   The calculation of stream flow and runoff characteristics of the
subdivision shall be carried out in consultation with the City Engineer and the
methodology and formulas used shall result in quantities which would not be
less than those derived from the application of the following formulas:
         (a)   Runoff from all drainage areas shall not be less than that
determined by the Rational Formula.
         (b)   The size of closed storm sewers, open channels, culverts and
bridges shall not be less than that determined by the Manning Formula.
      (4)   The City Engineer shall review and approve all stream flow and
runoff calculations as may be required of a developer.
   (D)   Prior to the approval of any plat of subdivision, the Council shall
evaluate the drainage improvements proposed by the developer to determine
whether the improvements are in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations.
      (1)   The developer shall be required to install adequate storm sewer and
drainage facilities in accordance with the requirements of these regulations
connecting a public storm water drainage system, except as provided herein.
      (2)   The City Engineer shall evaluate the effect of each subdivision on
existing downstream storm drainage facilities outside the area subdivision.
Where it is anticipated that drainage improvements are necessary outside the
boundaries of the subdivision or where existing downstream storm drainage
facilities will be adversely affected by magnitude or velocity of storm waters
to be carried by the proposed drainage system, the Council may withhold
approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the necessary
drainage improvements as determined by the Council.
      (3)   In residential subdivisions containing four or more platted lots,
in residential multiple-family subdivisions and in all non-residential
subdivisions, underground storm sewer systems shall be constructed in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, except where the combined
drainage area served by the proposed storm drainage facility exceeds 40 acres,
in which case an open improved storm drainage channel may be used for the
conveyance of storm water.
      (4)   In residential subdivisions containing three or fewer platted lots,
the strict requirement for underground storm sewers may be waived by the
Council, provided that the developer makes adequate provision for the disposal
of storm water, subject to the specifications of the City Engineer and the
final approval of the Council.
   (E)   The storm water drainage system shall be separate and independent of
any sanitary sewer system. New or replacement water supply and sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed and installed to minimize or eliminate infiltration
of floodwaters into water systems or discharges from sewage systems into
floodwaters. On-site waste disposal systems, where use is permitted, shall be
designed, located and constructed to avoid impairment of them or contamination
from them during flooding.
   (F)   Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by the Rational and
Manning Formulas or other methods as approved by the Council and a copy of
design computations shall be submitted along with plans.
   (G)   All channels shall be sized in accordance with city specifications,
shall be designed for self-cleaning and ease of maintenance, shall have
sufficient hard surface along the flow line to prevent ponding of water and
shall have design characteristics of alignment, materials of construction and
cross-sectioned elements that will be hydraulically efficient and visually
harmonious with the adjacent landscape.
   (H)   Open improved storm drainage shall be in accordance with the
following:
      (1)   Where the combined drainage area served by the proposed storm
drainage facility exceeds 40 acres, it is desirable that drainage be maintained
by an open improved storm drainage channel, with sloped and sodded banks
designed and constructed to control erosion. The banks shall be sufficiently
wide to carry a 50-year maximum flood.
      (2)   Where special or unusual conditions make open channels hazardous or
otherwise unfeasible, enclosed storm sewers may be required by the City
Engineer.
      (3)   An open storm drainage channel shall not be located in a street
easement, except under the following conditions:
         (a)   Where a paved street surface is located on both sides of the
drainage channel to give access to abutting properties;
         (b)   Where lots are platted in a way that the drainage channel is
located between the side or rear lot lines and the paved street, provided that
there shall be no access constructed over the open drainage channel to the side
or rear of lots so platted; and
         (c)   Adequate space adjacent to the channel has been dedicated as
right-of-way to provide for maintenance of the paved drainage channel and its
unpaved bank.
   (I)   Surface drainage shall be in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Surface drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and
block In single-family residential, duplex or mobile home development, site
grading shall be carried out in a manner that surface water from each lot shall
flow directly to a storm sewer, improved channel, sodded swale or paved street
without crossing more than four adjacent lots.
      (2)   Surface water collected on streets shall be diverted to storm
drains at satisfactory intervals to prevent overflow of 6-inch high curbs
during a 25-year frequency rain for the area and grades involved. Regardless of
flow, inlets shall be provided so that surface flow in gutters shall be
diverted to storm sewers by inlets at intervals not exceeding 990 feet.
   (J)   Site improvement shall provide for the grading of all building sites
and streets to an elevation where all lots, building areas and streets will not
be subject to overflow and in a manner that will provide for the rapid runoff
of all rainfall. Whenever possible, it is desirable that the improvements are
carried out in a manner that will preserve and protect large trees and
attractive physical features of the area.
   (K)   All storm drainage facilities, bridges, culverts and other drainage
structures shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications and
design criteria of the city when the city shall have present or future
maintenance responsibility.
(Prior Code, § 13-541)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.57  FENCING AND PERMANENT EVERGREEN PLANT SCREENING.
   All fencing and evergreen planting required under the requirements of this
article shall be installed in accordance with those requirements and shall be
completed following the installation of the required streets, sidewalks,
drainage and utility construction in the adjacent right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 13-542)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.58  PUBLIC AREAS AND OPEN SPACES.
   (A)   Open space greenbelts or buffers depicted in the comprehensive plan
shall be shown on the preliminary and final plat as open space buffers. Any
greenbelt or open space buffer depicted on the comprehensive plan shall be
provided for by the subdivider of the property, which when developed, requires
the buffering so as not to adversely affect adjacent property.
   (B)   (1)   Existing features which would add value to residential
development or to the city as a whole, such as trees, watercourses, historic
spots and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the
subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision nor any change of
grade of the land effected until approval of the preliminary plat has been
granted.
      (2)   All trees on the plat required to be retained shall be preserved
and all trees where required shall be welled and protected against change of
grade. The preliminary plat shall show the number and location of existing
trees as required by these regulations and shall further indicate all those
marked for retention.
(Prior Code, § 13-543)  (Am. Ord. 1224, passed 9-21-82; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 154.59  EASEMENT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   (1)   Where alleys are not provided, easements not less than 15 feet
wide shall be provided along each rear lot line. A 7-1/2-foot easement
alongside lot lines of individual lots may be required where necessary for use
by public and private utilities.
      (2)   The Council may require aerial easements and easements of greater
width for the extension of main storm and sanitary sewers and other utilities
where it is deemed necessary.
   (B)   (1)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage
channel or stream, which drains 160 acres or more of land there shall be
provided a right-of-way for drainage and public parks and public utility
purposes, adequate to contain all of the runoff from a 50-year maximum flood
and conforming substantially to the lines of the water course.
      (2)   The right-of-way shall include all the land within the subdivision
that has an elevation below the 50-year maximum flood elevation which shall be
calculated in accordance with, and shall be adequate to provide for, the
drainage requirements of the regulations relating thereto.
      (3)   This shall not be interpreted as prohibiting the reclaiming of
lands subject to flooding by filling or other appropriate methods.
   (C)   Specific drainage easement requirements shall be as follows:
      (1)   Where topography or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way,
perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width for the drainage
facilities shall be provided across property outside the road lines and with
satisfactory access to the road. Easements shall be indicated on the plat.
Drainage easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or
to other drainage facilities.
      (2)   A proposed drainage channel shall not carry water across private
land outside the subdivision unless necessary drainage rights-of-way and
easements
have been secured.
      (3)   The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or
conservation easement of land on both sides of existing watercourses, a
distance necessary to provide for overflow and future widening.
      (4)   The applicant shall dedicate all land having an elevation below the
50-year maximum flood elevation for the purpose of providing drainage, for
Public Park or utility easement use. The land shall not be computed in
determining the number of lots to be utilized for average density procedure nor
for computing either the area requirement or the open space requirement of any
lot.
(Prior Code, § 13-544)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.60  CONTINUITY AND ASSURANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The development plan for required improvements shall be approved by
the city only after it is found that a proposed development, when considered in
conjunction with the entire subdivision and the areas surrounding or adjacent
to it, will contain public utilities and improvements which will be logical and
orderly extensions of existing public improvements, as well as future
improvements to be installed within and without the boundaries of the
subdivision.
   (B)   The accomplishment of improvements required herein shall be assured by
either one of two methods, as follows:
      (1)   Completion of all required improvements prior to the recording of
the approval of final plat; or
      (2)   Filing with the City Clerk a performance bond approved by the City
Engineer and City Attorney to secure the actual construction of required
improvements.
   (C)   Either one or a combination of the methods listed in division (B)
above shall be used to assure the construction of all improvements.
(Prior Code, § 13-545)  (Am. Ord. 1292, passed 6-19-84; Am. Ord 1974, passed 8-
6-19)
§ 154.61  CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   When a subdivider elects to install or construct any or all the improvements
required herein prior to the recording of a final plat approved by the Council,
the procedure shall be as follows:
   (A)   Coincident with the submission of the final plat for consideration by
the Planning Commission, and prior to the installation and construction of any
required improvements within the subdivision, seven sets of prints of the
preliminary plans and specifications therefore shall be prepared by a
professional engineer registered in the state and submitted to the office of
the City Engineer. All items submitted in paper form shall also be submitted in
digital form.
   (B)   In addition to the above requirement, the subdivider shall submit a
written request to the City Engineer indicating in specific detail the required
improvements which he or she proposes to install and construct prior to the
recording of the approved final plat.
   (C)   (1)   The City Engineer shall review the preliminary plans and
specifications and the subdivider's proposed construction program.
      (2)   He or she shall then submit to the Planning Commission and
thereafter to the Council his or her report indicating the following:
         (a)   The preliminary plans and specifications either comply or do not
comply with all current regulations and standards applicable thereto; and
         (b)   The subdivider's proposed construction program has been
submitted and is feasible and not contrary to the public interest.
   (D)   Following the decision of the Council that the final plat is in order;
the Council may approve the final plat.
   (E)   In all cases where the Council approves a program of construction of
required improvements prior to the recording of the final plat, the final plat
shall be held in escrow by the city through the office of the City Engineer. It
shall not be released for any purpose until the approved program of
construction is completed and all improvements are accepted by the Council.
   (F)   City approval of a program of construction under this method is null
and void two years from the date of approval unless the construction program is
in process and will be completed within 90 days after the expiration date.
Plans for which approval has expired shall be resubmitted for review and
reapproval before any work is undertaken on the project.
(Prior Code, § 13-546)  (Am. Ord. 1292, passed 6-19-84; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.75  SUBMISSION OF PERFORMANCE BOND.
   When a subdivider elects to submit a performance bond to secure to the city
the actual construction of required improvements within a specific period, the
procedure shall be as follows:
   (A)   Coincident with the submission of the final plat for consideration by
the Planning Commission and prior to the installation and construction of any
required improvements within the subdivision, seven sets of prints of the
preliminary plans and specifications therefor shall be prepared by a
professional engineer registered in the state and submitted to the office of
the City Engineer.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to the above requirement, the subdivider shall
submit a performance bond to secure to the city the actual construction of the
improvements in a satisfactory manner, within a period not exceeding two years.
      (2)   The performance bond shall be in an amount of 120% of the estimated
costs of the improvements at the time of filing the performance bond, as
determined by the developer's engineer and approved by the City Engineer and
City Attorney.
   (C)   The City Engineer shall review the preliminary plans, specifications
and performance bond, and if same meet all applicable regulations and standards
then a construction permit may be issued as provided herein.
   (D)   In all cases where a subdivider elects to submit a performance bond,
the performance bond shall be released only upon completion of the approved
program of construction and upon acceptance and approval by the Council of the
performance of construction, and upon acceptance of all improvements by the
Council.
   (E)   In those cases where a performance bond has been posted and required
improvements have not been installed within the terms of the performance bond,
the city may thereupon declare the bond to be in default and require that the
subdivider and/or his or her surety forthwith pay over to the city a sum
sufficient to contract, after competitive bidding, for the installation and
construction of all required improvements not theretofore installed and
constructed by the subdivider.
   (F)   The subdivider posting the performance bond shall assume full
responsibility for assuring the construction of required improvements, and any
action of the city to secure compliance may be against the original subdivider
or the surety.
(Prior Code, § 13-547)  (Am. Ord. 1292, passed 6-19-84; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 154.76  CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FOR OFF- SITE IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   A construction permit issued by the office of the City Engineer shall
be required prior to any construction or installation of improvements to be
located within street and alley right-of-way or to be located within utility or
drainage easements.
   (B)   The issuance of the construction permit shall be conditioned upon the
following:
      (1)   Final plat approval by the Council;
      (2)   Approval by the City Engineer of preliminary plans and
specifications for the construction and installation of the improvements;
      (3)   Submission of a performance bond in a form and amount approved by
the City Engineer and City Attorney;
      (4)   Payment to the city of an inspection fee in an amount as follows:
         (a)   Two percent of the first $100,000 construction costs;
         (b)   One and one-half percent of the next $100,000 construction cost;
and
         (c)   One percent of all over $200,000 construction cost.
      (5)   The date of commencement of the construction shall be approved by
the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 13-548)  (Am. Ord. 1292, passed 6-19-84; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 154.77  INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   If the City Engineer finds, upon inspection, that any of the required
improvements have not been constructed in accordance with these regulations or
the plans and specifications, the subdivider shall be responsible for
completing the improvements. Whenever the cost of improvements is covered by a
performance bond the subdivider and his or her surety shall be severally and
jointly liable for completing the improvements according to specifications.
   (B)   Any and all costs of testing as set forth in the standard
specifications shall be paid for by the subdivider and/or the contractor before
the work receives final approval by the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-549)  (Am. Ord. 1292, passed 6-19-84; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 154.78  ACCEPTANCE OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   When the subdivider has completed construction and installation of required
off-site improvements, the procedure for acceptance of the off-site
improvements shall be as follows:
   (A)   The subdivider shall make written request to the city through the
office of the City Engineer that the off-site improvements be accepted by the
city. In addition, he or she shall be required to submit the following through
the offices of the City Engineer:
      (1)   One set of reproducible "as- built" plans and specifications
certified and signed by a registered, licensed engineer;
      (2)   A written statement from the project engineer indicating that the
off-site improvements have been constructed in accordance with the approved
plans and that the "as- built" plans are a true and accurate representation of
the off-site improvements;
      (3)   A maintenance bond in an amount considered to be adequate by the
City Engineer, guaranteeing the maintenance of all paved streets, sidewalks and
alleys for a period of five years and guaranteeing the maintenance of all
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water lines and fire hydrants for a period of
two years; and
      (4)   Payment for any and all costs of testing as set forth in the
standard specifications.
   (B)   The City Engineer shall submit a written report to the City Manager
indicating the following:
      (1)   The off-site improvements either have or have not been constructed
in compliance with approved plans and specifications and all other requirements
of the city code;
      (2)   The "as-built" plans either provide or do not provide a true and
accurate representation of the off-site improvements;
      (3)   All required maintenance bonds have been submitted and are in an
amount considered adequate by the City Engineer; and
      (4)   The applicant has submitted payment for any and all costs of
testing as set forth in the standard specifications.
   (C)   Upon the City Manager's receipt of the written report from the City
Engineer, the report shall be submitted to the Council for their acceptance of
improvements and required maintenance bonds.
   (D)   If the Council finds the off-site improvements and all associated
requirements to be in compliance with the city's code, the improvements shall
be accepted for maintenance as well as the required maintenance bonds therefor.
The approval shall constitute authorization for recording the final plat and/or
for release of the performance bond where applicable.
(Prior Code, § 13-550)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
§ 154.79  DEFERRAL OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The Council may defer at the time of final subdivision approval,
subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all off-site
improvements as in its judgment are not requisite in the interests of the
public health, safety and general welfare or which are inappropriate because of
inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities, incompatible grades, future
planning or for other reasons.
   (B)   Whenever it is deemed necessary by the Council to defer the
construction of any improvement required herein, the subdivider shall pay his
or her share of the costs of the future improvements to the city prior to
signing of the final subdivision plat or the developer may post a bond insuring
completion of the improvements upon demand of the city prior to signing of the
final subdivision plat. The deferral shall not exceed five years, unless
extended by the Council.
   (C)   In cases involving minor subdivisions, as defined herein, where all
off-site improvements are not in place, and where the tract is zoned for
residential single-family or two-family use, the requirement for the
construction of the required off-site improvements shall not be waived, but the
requirement to post bond may be waived at the discretion of the Council and the
installation of off-site improvements may be postponed until the time that an
operational project can be accomplished by an improvement district.
   (D)   A building permit may be issued prior to the installation of and
acceptance of all required improvements where the subdivider has obtained a
deferral under the provisions of this section.
   (E)   A certificate of occupancy may be issued prior to the installation and
acceptance of all required improvements only where the subdivider has paid his
or her share of the costs of the future improvements to the city prior to
signing of the final plat or where improvements have been postponed until the
time that an operational project can be accomplished by an improvement
district.
(Prior Code, § 13-551)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-16-19)
CHAPTER 155:  SITE PLANS
Section
   
155.01   Scope
   
155.02   Certificate of occupancy required
   
155.03   Submission of site plan
   
155.04   Procedure for processing
   
155.05   Conditions for approval
   
155.06   Appeals procedure
   
155.07   Site plan not substitute for final, dedications
   
155.08   Perpetual compliance
   
155.09   Facade requirements–commercial, industrial, and central business
district
   
155.10   Landscaping requirements
Cross-reference:
   Subdivisions, see
Ch. 154
   Zoning, see
Ch. 158
§ 155.01  SCOPE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, no building permit shall be issued for
the construction, erection or alteration of any building, structure or parking
lot without first submitting a site plan and obtaining approval of the same
from the City Community Development Director as set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   The following are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
      (1)   The construction, erection or alteration of single-family or two-
family structures; and
      (2)   (a)   A building, or addition to an existing building, with a gross
floor area less than 10% of the combined gross floor areas of all existing
buildings on the lot where the proposed building or addition is to be located.
         (b)   This exemption shall not apply where the granting of an
exemption for the proposed building or addition would cause the sum of all
exemptions to exceed 10% of the lot area.
(Prior Code, § 13-801)  (Am. Ord. 1235, passed 4-10-83; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
2-7-84; Am. Ord. 1941, passed 9-5-17; Am. Ord 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 155.02  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall occupy or use any building or
structure, or portion thereof, without first obtaining a certificate of
occupancy indicating compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   No certificate of occupancy shall be granted until all public and
private improvements shown on the approved site plan have been completed in
accordance therewith.
(Prior Code, § 13-802) (Am. Ord. 1941, passed 9-5-17; Am. Ord 1974, passed 8-6-
19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.03  SUBMISSION OF SITE PLAN.
   (A)   Every site plan shall be submitted to the City Community Development
Director three identical copies on one or more sheets of paper and a digital
format copy, drawn to a standardized scale, certified by a licensed land
surveyor, professional engineer or professional architect and with the name,
address and telephone number of the owner, developer and designer, which shall
show the following:
      (1)   North arrow.
      (2)   The legal description of the property written on the plan or
attached, and identity of the location of the tract, with regard to corner of
the section, block and street corners.
      (3)   All property lines accurately drawn to scale with the dimensions of
each line numerically illustrated in feet.
      (4)   Physical indication of boundaries, such as monuments, markers and
fences and all encroachments or deviations from description of subject property
or conflict with descriptions of adjacent properties; and the location, height
and type of each wall, fence and all other types of screening.
      (5)   The exact location, dimensions and type of all easements that abut
and/or are situated on the property shall be shown.
      (6)   All adjacent street and alley rights-of-way, showing the centerline
of each, the width and length of each, and any street names. Property lines
shall be included as a part of these rights-of-ways by showing dimensions from
the centerline.
      (7)   The location of all existing or proposed utility service,
including:
         (a)   Location and size of all sanitary sewer facilities and water
lines, existing and proposed.
         (b)   Location and capacity of all drainage structures and pipes,
existing and proposed, including contour lines to indicate natural flows, and
the direction of flow of stormwater facilities. If the location is within a
floodplain area, the first-floor elevation should also be included.
      (8)   The location of every existing and proposed building on the
property.
         (a)   The buildings shall be located by indicating the distance from
each building to all rights-of-way, property lines and other buildings.
         (b)   The dimensions and total square footage in each floor of every
existing and proposed building shall be specified, including the square footage
in each floor that is contained in areas designed for storage, utilities and
building services.
         (c)   Statement concerning the specific uses of every existing and
proposed building.
         (d)   The number of dwelling units in each building, where applicable.
         (e)   Locate each dumpster pad; (The pad shall be constructed of
concrete and dimensioned ten feet by ten feet by six inches. Pads shall be
readily accessible to rear loading sanitation trucks.)
      (9)   Existing and proposed elevations over the entire property by
accurately platted contour lines at a one-foot vertical interval and the
elevations of a reasonable portion of adjacent property; and elevations of
existing streets, roads, drives, walks, curbs and catch basins.
      (10)   The location, dimensions and type of surfacing for proposed
driveways, parking spaces, loading spaces and on-site sidewalks; (All parking
areas shall indicate the type of paving through the use of a typical section.)
      (11)   Demonstration that hazards or damage to other property will not be
created by any channeling, cutting, filling, bulk-heading or other treatment of
water flow from or past the site.
      (12)   The site plan shall indicate if the development is to proceed in
phases or not.
   (B)   Every person, firm or corporation which submits a site plan for
approval shall pay a fee to the City Clerk in an amount as may be established
by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-803) (Am. Ord. 1730, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1941, passed 9-
5-17; Am. Ord 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 155.04  PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING.
   (A)   The Community Development Director, or designee, shall check the site
plan for general compliance and completeness with the provisions of this
section and shall so certify the application.
   (B)   The Director shall see that all administration reviews are completed
within 15 days. The Director may extend the review by one 15-day period, and
thereafter, the site plan shall be automatically approved if administrative
review is not completed. The 15-day period is not applicable if the application
and site plan are incomplete.
(Ord 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 155.05  CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   No site plan shall be approved unless it is in proper form, contains
all the required information and is in conformance with these regulations and
with all other ordinances of the city.
   (B)   The City Community Development Director may approve the site plan when
the above requirements have been met and when all the following specific
requirements have been met:
      (1)   The proposed use and construction conforms to Chapter
158 of this code of ordinances;
      (2)   The lot has been platted or subdivided in accordance with Chapter
154 of this code of ordinances;
      (3)   All of the public improvements enumerated in Chapter
154 of this code of ordinances either have been installed or are included in
the development plan; Provided where an existing paved public street abuts the
property the street improvements of Chapter
154 shall not be required; improvement abutting water mains to current city
specifications shall not be required where the proposed building is within 300
feet of an adequate fire hydrant as determined by the fire chief and where the
existing water service is adequate to serve the new facility as demonstrated by
a hydraulic analysis of the water flow at the building site. For site plans for
parking lots the requirements stated above dealing with storm drainage shall be
included but no water, sewer or street improvements shall be required as part
of the site plan;
      (4)   The proposed driveways, parking spaces, loading spaces and
sidewalks are designed to provide an efficient and safe movement of traffic;
      (5)   Screening is provided as required by ordinance; and
      (6)   The proposed method of providing for stormwater drainage, both
surface and subsurface, is in conformance with the requirements contained in §
154.56 pertaining to design standards for storm drainage facilities. The
Director shall not approve any site plan that is contrary to the provisions of
this code and other current ordinances or statutes. Neither shall the director
disapprove the site plan on grounds other than a documented deviation from this
code or other current ordinances or statutes.
   (C)   Site plans other than those approved by the Community Development
Director may be approved by the City Council, following approval by the
Planning and Zoning Commission. The site plans shall be submitted to the city
staff at least 14 days prior to any regular meeting of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
   (D)   If the submitted site plan does not comply with an approved
development plan, any condition imposed on that development plan or applicable
regulations of the zoning ordinance, the Community Development Director must
disapprove the site plan and advise the applicant in writing of the specific
reasons for disapproval.
(Prior Code, § 13-804)  (Am. Ord. 1274, passed 2-7-84; Am. Ord. 1941, passed 9-
5-17; Am. Ord 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.06  APPEALS PROCEDURE.
   If the Community Development Director does not approve the site plan, the
applicant may either: (1) resubmit the site plan to correct the plan's
inconsistencies and deficiencies, or (2) within 60 days of the date of notice
of disapproval, appeal the decision of the Community Development Director by
filing a notice of appeal with the planning commission. If such an appeal is
filed, the site plan must be reviewed by the Planning Commission following the
hearing and notice requirements that apply to minor amendments of approved
development plans. The Planning Commission's decision may be appealed following
the procedures of § 158.072.
(Ord 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 155.07  SITE PLAN NOT SUBSTITUTE FOR FINAL PLAT, DEDICATIONS.
   Site plan approval, in and of itself, does not constitute effective
dedication of rights-of-way or any other public improvements, nor will the site
plan be the equivalent of or an acceptable alternative to the final platting of
land prior to the issuance of building permits.
(Ord 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 155.08  PERPETUAL COMPLIANCE.
   A site plan and any requirements or conditions imposed by the city shall be
maintained and/or complied with in perpetuity.
(Prior Code, § 13-805) (Am. Ord. 1941, passed 9-5-17; Am. Ord 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 155.09  FACADE REQUIREMENTS– COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND CENTRAL BUSINESS
DISTRICT.
   Buildings within any commercial, industrial, or central business district
zoning district shall be constructed with the primary material of those
exterior walls described hereinafter, being brick, concrete
panels, textured concrete, adobe, Exterior Insulation Finish System (EIFS) or
stone. All materials used for exterior walls must be rated for exterior use.
These materials shall comprise at least 65% of the total area of any side of
the building which faces a public street, or which abuts or adjoins property
zoned or used for residential use. (Properties separated by a strip of land 50-
feet-wide or less shall be deemed to abut and adjoin under this section.) The
portion of any building wall containing fascia glass, window frames, doors,
signs, or trim shall not be included when computing the 65% requirement for use
of the primary materials. No Masonite, asphaltic wall material, aluminum, or
steel siding, non-architectural sheet metal, non-textured concrete block, or
other similar materials shall be used as primary material under this section,
except as trim. Upon receiving recommendation from the Planning Commission, the
City Council may grant exceptions to the allowed materials where the applicant
demonstrates that the use of a prohibited exterior wall material is necessary
to meet a particular theme or architectural requirement of the owner, and such
materials will be compatible with adjacent properties. The proposed facade
materials for the building shall be reviewed as a part of the site plan.
(Ord. 1877, passed 11-19-13; Am. Ord. 1941, passed 9-5-17; Am. Ord 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 155.10  LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   All new non-residential development and redevelopment areas, shall
be landscaped to provide visual buffering, enhance the beautification of the
city, safeguard and enhance property values, protect public and private
investment, and to protect the public health, safely and general welfare of the
citizens of the city. The landscaped area will help reduce soil erosion, and
the volume and rate of discharge of stormwater runoff.
      (2)   All new residential development/ redevelopment of six or more
dwelling units and/or three or more acres shall comply with the provisions of
this section for landscaping requirements.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      LANDSCAPED AREA. The area within the boundaries of a given lot which is
devoted to and consists of plant material, including but not limited to grass,
trees, shrubs, flowers, vines and other ground covers, planters, brick, stone,
natural forms, water forms, or aggregate or other inorganic features, but not
including the use of smooth concrete or asphalt; provided, however, that the
use of the brick, stone, aggregate or other inorganic materials shall not
predominate over the use of organic plant material.
      REDEVELOPMENT. Remodeling, renovation and/ or expansion of improvements
on an existing developed property where the usable square footage of the
remodeling, renovation and or expansion is increased by 50%, or the costs of
the project exceeds 50% of the preredevelopment valuation, or where the project
is required to file a site plan under Chapter
155.
      VALUATION OF IMPROVEMENTS PRIOR TO REDEVELOPMENT. A determination of the
fair market value of the property from the most reliable information available
which includes County Assessor valuation, recent appraisals, recent sales price
and such further information as may be determined by the Community Development
Director.
   (C)   Requirements for development and redevelopment.
      (1)   Development. New construction of buildings classified with respect
to use or occupancy as business, mercantile, assembly, educational, or
institutional as provided by the International Building Code shall be
landscaped with living plants, trees, bushes, grass or similar vegetation.
Nonresidential uses that are either permitted by right or under an enabling
permit shall be landscaped.
      (2)   Redevelopment. Redevelopment of buildings classified with respect
to use or occupancy as business, mercantile, assembly, educational, or
institutional as provided by the International Building Code shall be
landscaped with living plants, trees, bushes, grass or similar vegetation.
Nonresidential uses that are either permitted by right or under an enabling
permit shall be landscaped.
   (D)   Required area. The public right-of-way between the property line and
the curb and not less than 5% of the total land area of the lot shall be
landscaped. To the extent practical, at least 75% of the landscaped lot area
shall be in the front or side yards and visible from public or private streets
providing access to the property. Inner courts that are not visible from the
public street shall not be calculated for purposes of meeting this requirement.
Exception: When the minimum landscape area requirements cannot be met, the
required landscaped area may be reduced, upon approval by the City Council.
   (E)   Landscaped materials and plan. An application for a building permit
and/or special use permit for nonresidential land usages shall be accompanied
by a detailed landscaping plan for both the required lot area and the area
within the public street right-of-way between the property line and the curb. A
landscape plan shall be required as a part of the site plan review process. The
plan shall conform to the following requirements:
      (1)   The quantity, location and types of all plants:
         (a)   The maximum height for mature trees shall not exceed 25 feet;
         (b)   Street yard. One tree shall be planted and maintained or
preserved for each 1,500 square feet of street yard or fraction thereof;
         (c)   Surface parking areas located outside the street yard. One tree
shall be planted and maintained or preserved for each 12 parking spaces; and at
least one tree shall be planted and maintained or preserved in each required
landscaped area;
         (d)   Rock gardens or sculpture may be approved; however, the use of
gravel or chat as ground cover shall not be considered as meeting the landscape
requirements;
         (e)   The landscape plan shall respect sight triangles at
intersections and all other elements relating to traffic control;
         (f)   Trees and shrubs located in and over utility easements shall be
limited to those trees and shrubs which in their mature state will not
interfere with overhead and underground utilities; and
         (g)   The plan shall be reviewed and approved as part of the building
permit and special use permit review process.
      (2)   (a)   Tree requirements.
         (b)   Selection of tree species. The following list constitutes the
species of trees that may be planted under the terms of this chapter. No
species other than those included in this list may be planted without the
express written permission of the City Arborist.
            1.   Small trees:
               A.   Flowering Crabapple; Malus spp;
               B.   Redbud; Cercis canadensis, Cercis chinensis;
               C.   Purple Leaf Plum; Prunus cerasifera;
               D.   Hawthorn; Crateagus spp;
               E.   Flowering Dogwood; Corpus florida, Corpus kousa;
               F.   Buckeye; Aesculus arguta, Aesculus glabra;
               G.   Crapemyrtle;  Lagerstroemia indica;
               H.   Euonymus (deciduous); Euonymus atropurpureus;
               I.   Holly:
                  (i)   American; Ilex opaca;
                  (ii)   Deciduous; Ilex deciduas; and
                  (iii)   Yaupon; Ilex vomitoria;
               J.   Amur Maple; Acer ginnala;
               K.   Russian Olive; Elaeagnus angustifolia L;
               L.   Autumn Olive; Elaeagnus umbellate Thunberg; and
               M.   Smoketree; Cotinus coggygria
            2.   Medium trees:
               A.   Honeylocust (thornless); Gleditsia triacanthos;
               B.   Pin Oak; Quercus palustrus;
               C.   River Birch; Betula nigra;
               D.   Kentucky Coffeetree; Gymnocladus dioica;
               E.   Red Mulberry (male); Morus rubra;
               F.   Golden Raintree; Koelreuteria bipinnata, Koelreuteria
paniculate;
               G.   Osage Orange (male, thornless); Maclura pompifera;
               H.   Bald Cypress; Taxodium distichum;
               I.   Japanese Pagoda Tree; Sophora japonica;
               J.   Chinese Pistachio; Pistacia chinensis;
               K.   Ornamental Pear; Pyrus calleryana; and
               L.   Red Maple; Acer rubrum.
            3.   Large trees:
               A.   Burr Oak; Quercus macrocarpa;
               B.   Hackberry; Celtis occidentalis;
               C.   London Planetree; Platanus X acerifolia;
               D.   American Sycamore; Platanus occidentalis;
               E.   Pecan; Carya illinoinensis;
               F.   Red Oak; Quercus rubra;
               G.   Black Walnut; Juglans nigra;
               H.   Green Ash; Fraxinus pennsylvanica;
               I.   Cottonwood (male); Populus deltoids;
               J.   Chinese Lacebark Elm; Ulmus parvifolia;
               K.   Ginkgo; Ginkgo bilboa;
               L.   Fruit trees (fruitless); Malus spp;
               M.   Oaks:
                  (i)   Chesnut; Quercus prinus, Quercus muehlengergi;
                  (ii)   Sawtooth; Quercus acutissima;
                  (iii)   Shumard; Quercusw shumardi;
                  (iv)   Water; Quercus nigra;
                  (v)   Willow; Quercus pheloos; and
                  (vi)   Red; Quercus rubra, Quercus falcata;
               N.   American Linden; Tilia americana;
               O.   Pine:
                  (i)   Austrian; Pinus nigra;
                  (ii)   Loblolly; Pinus taeda;
                  (iii)   Ponderosa; Pinus ponderosa;
                  (iv)   Slash; Pinus ellioti;
                  (v)   Scotch; Pinus sylvestris;
                  (vi)   White; Pinus strobes; and
                  (vii)   Virginia; Pinus virginiana;
               P.   Cedar:
                  (i)   Atlas; Cedrus atlantica; and
                  (ii)   Deodar; Cedrus deodara
      (3)   The following list of trees shall not be planted:
         (a)   Aspen; Populus spp;
         (b)   Black Locust; Robinia pseudoacacia;
         (c)   Box Elder; Acer negundo;
         (d)   Catalpa; Catalpa speciose, Catalpa bignonioides;
         (e)   Chinese Elm (except lacebark); Ulmus parvifolia;
         (f)   Cottonwood (female); Populus deltoids;
         (g)   Fruit trees (except fruitless); Malus spp;
         (h)   Osage Orange (female); Maclura pomifera;
         (i)   Poplar; Populus alba, Populus nigra;
         (j)   Silver Maple; Acer saccharinum;
         (k)   Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus); Ailanthus altissima;
         (l)   Willow; Salix spp;
         (m)   Eastern Red Cedar; Juniperus virginiana.
      (4)   A certificate of occupancy for a structure shall not be issued
until the landscaping has been installed in accordance with the plan; provided,
however, that if a structure and all its site improvements are complete except
for the landscaping requirements and the season of the year will not permit
planting, temporary occupancy may be permitted until a date certain in the
growing season. In this case an inspection date in growing season shall be set
by the building inspector to determine if the landscaping has been installed;
      (5)   All landscaping shall be maintained in a live and healthy
condition;
      (6)   Failure to install or maintain landscaping as required and approved
shall constitute a violation of this section; and
      (7)   A landscape plan shall be required as a part of the site plan
submitted for all building permits and special use permit applications. This
plan shall show detailed landscape treatment of the area. This landscaping plan
must include building footprint, parking, easements, types of plants, typical
species of plant, size, location of plants and details of irrigation system,
water lines and other utilities, driveways, easements or utilities, irrigation
systems or other items as required by the community development director or
building inspector.
   (F)   Landscape plan content. All landscape plans shall include the
following information:
      (1)   North arrow and scale;
      (2)   The location of existing property lines and dimensions of the
tract, accurately drawn to scale;
      (3)   Exact locations and outline of all rights-of-way;
      (4)   The location and size of all existing and proposed buildings, and
parking areas, including the exact number of parking spaces provided;
      (5)   The location and size of any permanent fixture or structure
including, but not limited to, sidewalks, walls, fences, trash enclosures,
project storage, lighting fixtures, signs and benches, which are relevant to
the landscape plan;
      (6)   The location, size, and type of all above- ground and underground
public utilities with notation, where appropriate, as to any safety hazards to
avoid during installation. Alternatively, a letter of no objection provided by
the utility company may be provided;
      (7)   The location, size, type, species, spacing (on center), and
quantity of all proposed plant materials and existing plant materials credited
for points shall be graphically represented and referenced on the plan by a
common name and/or scientific name, or an appropriate key of all plant species;
      (8)   Indicate the method of irrigation on plans and define the area of
coverage. If an automatic irrigation system is not proposed, the location of
all required hose connections and other watering sources shall be noted; and
      (9)   All screening required by this code.
   (G)   Maintenance and enforcement.
      (1)   When it is determined by the director, or person officially
designated, that improvements required by this division are not being
maintained, it shall be his/her duty to give notice in writing to the property
owner. Such notice shall specify in what manner the improvements are in need of
maintenance and a date for compliance. The property owner shall not have less
than 30 days to comply with the notice; provided, however, that any person
aggrieved by any such order or disagreeing with any of the requirements of the
notice may file an appeal within the 30-day period to the Board of Adjustment.
      (2)   Failure to provide the improvements required by this division or
failure to maintain required improvements in the manner prescribed by this
section shall constitute an offense and violation of this chapter. Each day
such violation occurs shall be a separate offense.
   (H)   Where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by the administrative official in the enforcement of this
section pertaining to landscape requirements, the developer or land owner shall
have the right to appeal to the Board of Adjustment for relief.
(Ord. 1912, passed 2-16-16; Am. Ord. 1914, passed 5- 3-16; Am. Ord. 1941,
passed 9-5-17; Am. Ord 1974, passed 8-6-19)
CHAPTER 156:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose, and Methods
   
156.01   Statutory authorization
   
156.02   Findings of fact
   
156.03   Statement of purpose
   
156.04   Methods of reducing flood losses
Definitions
   
156.15   Definitions
General Provisions
   
156.25   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
156.26   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
156.27   Establishment of development permit
   
156.28   Compliance
   
156.29   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
156.30   Interpretation
   
156.31   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
156.45   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator; duties and
responsibilities
   
156.46   Permit procedures
   
156.47   Variances
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
156.60   General standards
   
156.61   Specific standards
   
156.62   Standards for subdivisions
   
156.63   Floodways
   
156.64   Severability
 
   
156.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   District Regulations; zoning, see  §§
158.020 et seq.
   Public Improvements, see
Ch. 157
   Site plans; conditions for approval, see §
155.05
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND METHODS
§ 156.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state has in 82 O.S. §§ 1601 through 1620.1, as
amended, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
ordinances designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city ordains the
following chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-701)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1834, passed
11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 156.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation,
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Prior Code, § 13-702)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1834, passed
11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 156.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in
floodplains;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   (G)   Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area.
(Prior Code, § 13-703)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1491, passed
7-7-92; Am. Ord. 1834, passed 11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 156.04  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters, or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Prior Code, § 13-715)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1834, passed
11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
DEFINITIONS
§ 156.15  DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specially defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage. The
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning. This is meant to provide this chapter its most
reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as
the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES include but are not
limited to garages and storage sheds.
   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of property
as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to
the use of the principal structure.
   AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD. The land area that would be
inundated by the 1% annual chance (100 year) flood based on future conditions
hydrology.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance
of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within the city
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. After detailed
rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone
A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AE, A99, AR, AH, VE or V.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) and found in accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for A, AE, AH and
AR that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has
1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year; also commonly
called BASE FLOOD.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BFE. Base flood elevation.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended  through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
   CFR. The Code of Federal Regulations, also referred to as the National Flood
Insurance Program Regulations.
   CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A permit issued by the city Floodplain Administrator
which authorizes development in a special flood hazard area in accordance with
this chapter.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building built, in the case of a building
in Zones AE, A, and X, to have the top of the elevated floor adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a
flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones AE, A, and X,
elevated building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid
foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of flood waters.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM
or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. Existing
construction may also be referred to as existing structures.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for  servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the city.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FIRM. The flood insurance rate map.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an
examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or
flood-related erosion hazards.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. An official map of Oklahoma County on which FEMA
has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium
zones applicable to Oklahoma County.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by FEMA for Oklahoma
County
which contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as
well as the floodway width, section area, and mean velocity (also see
definition for FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY).
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. A person accredited by the OWRB and designated by
the City Council to administer and implement laws, ordinances, and regulations
relating to the management of floodplains.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. (See definition of FLOOD.)
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning codes and ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose regulations
and ordinances such as floodplain, grading, and erosion control regulations and
ordinances and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within the city subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of
the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane
tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood
modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering
standards.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or  adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage
to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY (commonly referred to as the REGULATORY FLOODWAY). The channel of a
river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height. A floodway is located within
areas of special flood hazard established in §
156.26. A floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use that cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LEVEE. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of 44 CFR 60.3.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on the city's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation
adopted by the City Council and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the City Council.
   OWRB. The Oklahoma Water Resources Board.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Public Law  97-348),
includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged-condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before start of construction of the
improvement. This includes structures that have incurred substantial damage,
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration
would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by City Council to a person from the terms of
this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A
variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise
prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements see 44 CFR 60.6.)
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter, the city's flood damage prevention ordinance.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(Prior Code, § 13-704)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1834, passed
11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.25  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter, the flood damage prevention ordinance, shall apply to all
areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 1834, passed 11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.26  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific and
engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Oklahoma County,
Oklahoma, and Incorporated Areas" dated December 18, 2009, with the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter. This chapter shall go into effect on
December 18, 2009.
(Prior Code, § 13-705)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1532, passed
5-2-95; Am. Ord. 1834, passed 11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty,
see §
156.99
§ 156.27  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter, the floodplain management ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 13-706)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1834, passed
11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.28  COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
(Prior Code, § 13-707)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1834, passed
11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see § 
156.99
§ 156.29  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and any
other ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 13-708)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1834, passed
11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 156.30  INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 13-709)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1834, passed
11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 156.31  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the city or any official, employee or
designee/contractor of the city thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 13-710)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1834, passed
11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 156.45  DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES AND
RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The City Council shall designate by resolution the City Engineer to
serve as the Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency
Management and Assistance—National Flood Insurance Program Regulations)
pertaining to floodplain management.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Become accredited by the OWRB in accordance with Title 82 O.S. §§
1601 through 1618, as amended.
      (2)   Review permit applications to determine whether the proposed
building sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be
reasonably safe from flooding.
      (3)   Review, approve, or deny all applications for development permits
required by this chapter.
      (4)   Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval are required.
      (5)   Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as
to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions).
      (6)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the OWRB
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of
such notification to the FEMA.
      (7)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
      (8)   When base flood elevation data contemplated by §
156.26 has not been provided by FEMA, the Floodplain Administrator shall
obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from any federal, state, or other source in order to
administer the provisions of §§
156.60 through
156.64.
      (9)   When a floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zone A or AE as
delineated on the Oklahoma County FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city.
      (10)   After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures
in the city, determine if the residential and non-residential structures and
manufactured homes have been substantially damaged, and enforce the substantial
improvement requirement.
      (11)   Maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal from a
decision of the Floodplain Administrator or the City Council.
      (12)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records
pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-722)
(Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1834, passed 11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974,
passed 8-6-19)
§ 156.46  PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   An application for a development permit shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not
be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      (1)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure shall be flood proofed;
         (b)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet
floodproofing criteria of this chapter, §
156.61;
         (c)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         (d)   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
this chapter, §
156.46.
   (B)   Approval or denial of a development permit by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be based on all the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems;
      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
      (10)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
(Prior Code, § 13-723)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1834, passed
11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.47  VARIANCES.
   (A)   City Council, as established by the community, shall hear and render
judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   City Council shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it
is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
   (C)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of City Council may
appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
   (E)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   (F)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of ½ acre or less in size contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood
level, providing the relevant factors in §
156.46(B) of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the ½ acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter (§
156.03).
   (H)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (I)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   (J)   Prerequisites for granting variances:
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (3)   Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
   (K)   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in §
156.47(A)-(I) are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected
by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.
(Prior Code, §§ 13-724 and 13-725)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord.
1834, passed 11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
156.99
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 156.60  GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements:
   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Prior Code, § 13-716)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1834, passed
11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.61  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevations have been
provided or are otherwise determined as set forth in §§
156.26,
156.45(B)(8), or
156.62(D), the following provisions are required:
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection is
satisfied.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure
shall have the lowest floor including basement) elevated at least one foot
above the base flood elevation or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation in relation to mean sea level to which such structures are flood
proofed shall be submit to the Floodplain Administrator verifying that the
standard of this subsection is satisfied.
   (C)   Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
      (1)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade; and
      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (D)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on
the Oklahoma County FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage and have the bottom of the I-beam elevated at least 36
inches above grade or at least one foot above the base flood elevation. For the
purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored
to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. The home shall be installed
by a licensed installer according to state law and compliance herewith shall be
certified in writing to the Floodplain Administrator by said installer prior to
habitation of the manufactured home.
      (2)   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within Zone AE on the Oklahoma County FIRM on sites (i) outside of a
manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or
subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the bottom of the I-beam
for the manufactured home is elevated at least one foot above the base flood
elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system
to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces. A licensed installer shall install the home in accordance with
state law and compliance herewith shall be certified in writing to the
Floodplain Administrator by said installer prior to habitation of the
manufactured home.
      (3)   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zone AE on
the Oklahoma County FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of division (D)
of this section be elevated so that the bottom of the I-beam of the
manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. A licensed installer shall install
the home in accordance with state law and compliance herewith shall be
certified in writing to the Floodplain Administrator by said installer prior to
habitation of the manufactured home.
   (E)   Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within Zones A and AE on the Oklahoma County FIRM either:
      (1)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
      (3)   Meet the permit requirements of §
156.46, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes"
in division (D) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions.
   (F)   Accessory structures. Accessory structures to be placed on sites
within Zones A and AE on the Oklahoma County FIRM shall comply with the
following:
      (1)   The structure shall be unfinished on the interior;
      (2)   The structure shall be used only for parking and limited storage;
      (3)   The structure shall not be used for human habitation. Prohibited
activities or uses include but are not limited to working, sleeping, living,
cooking, or restroom use;
      (4)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must be
elevated at least one foot above the BFE;
      (5)   Structures shall be small in size, not exceed 600 square feet in
size;
      (6)   Structures exceeding 600 square feet in size will be required to
meet all applicable standards of §§
156.27,
156.46,
156.60 and
156.61 including relevant subsections;
      (7)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site
so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      (8)   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential
and constructed with flood resistance materials;
      (9)   The structure shall be considered low in value, designed to have
low flood damage potential and constructed with flood resistance materials;
      (10)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement;
      (11)   Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the
structure;
      (12)   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below the BEE; and be placed on opposing walls with the net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of the size of the
footprint of the structure (flood vents);
      (13)   The openings (flood vents) shall be located no higher than one
foot above grade;
      (14)   The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters; and
      (15)   The structure shall be located so as not to cause damage to
adjacent and nearby structures.
(Prior Code, § 13-717)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1834, passed
11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.62  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   The applicant for a development permit for any subdivision located in
Zones A and AE shall generate the base flood elevation data for that
subdivision.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with §§
156.02,
156.03 and
156.04 of this chapter.
   (C)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet Floodplain
Development Permit requirements of §§
156.27,
156.46,
156.60 through
156.64 and
156.99 of this chapter.
   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever
is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to §§
156.26 or
156.46(B)(8) of this chapter.
   (E)   All subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
   (F)   All subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
(Prior Code, § 13-718)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1456, passed
11-30-90; Am. Ord. 1834, passed 11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19) 
Penalty, see § 
156.99
§ 156.63  FLOODWAYS.
   Because the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
flood waters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential,
the following provisions shall apply:
   (A)   Encroachments, including but not limited to fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development are prohibited within the
adopted floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels
within the city and/or surrounding communities during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
   (B)   If division (A) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   The city may permit encroachments within the adopted floodway that
would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the
applicant for the development permit complies with all of 44 CFR 65.12.
(Prior Code, § 13-720)  (Am. Ord. 1350, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1834, passed
11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.64  SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said
holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1834, passed 11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 156.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations. A structure or other development
without the elevation certificate or other certifications required in this
chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of
its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500 for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case.
   (C)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Council or its City
Attorney from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
(Ord. 1834, passed 11-17-09; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
CHAPTER 157:  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
157.01   Definition
   
157.02   Standards specifications adopted; conformance
   
157.03   Plans and specifications; review
Requirements; Procedure
   
157.15   Easement required
   
157.16   Bids for contracts
   
157.17   Council approval; revision
   
157.18   Bonds required
   
157.19   Inspection fees
   
157.20   Certificate of insurance
   
157.21   Work order required
   
157.22   Inspection of work
   
157.23   Streets to be open
   
157.24   Safety warnings
   
157.25   Removal of barriers; travel when streets are closed
   
157.26   Damage to streets, bridges and the like
   
157.27   Improvement to become city property
   
157.28   Utility crossings
   
157.29   Cutting pavement; permit required; fees
   
157.30   Restoring street; deposit
   
157.31   Curb cuts in residential areas
   
157.32   Driveways, sidewalks, aprons and approaches; permit required
   
157.33   Closing public ways
   
157.34   Complete streets
   
157.35   Unified access and circulation
Cross-reference:
   Community Development Department, see  §§
32.045 et seq.
   Health and Sanitation, see
Ch. 93
   Street Lights, see §§
92.40 et seq.
   Streets; obstructions, see §§
92.20 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.01  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Building, erecting, constructing or improving any street, sidewalk,
alley or other public way;
      (2)   Any additions or improvements to the water system, sanitary sewer
system, any storm sewer, drainage ditch, waterway bridge or culvert within the
city;
      (3)   Any additions to the water system or sanitary sewer system outside
the city;
      (4)   Any appurtenances to any of the improvements listed above; or
      (5)   Any building or structure located on city-owned property or right-
of-way.
(Prior Code, § 15-201) (Am. Ord. 1959, passed 7-17-18; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)
§ 157.02  STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS ADOPTED; CONFORMANCE.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby adopted the "Standard Specifications for the
Construction of Pavements, Sanitary Sewer Mains, Water Mains and
Appurtenances," as prepared by the City Engineer and approved by the Council of
the city by resolution.
      (2)   At least three copies of the specifications are on file with the
City Clerk.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or
corporation to construct, erect or establish any paved streets or sidewalks in
the city which do not conform to the specifications adopted by the city or
which do not conform to the procedure and requirements set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 15-203)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.03  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS; REVIEW.
   (A)   No person shall erect, build or establish in the city any public
improvements to the city without having first submitted detailed plans and
specifications, prepared and certified by a registered licensed engineer as
required by ordinance. The plans shall include a construction cost estimate.
   (B)   The plans and specifications required in division (A) above shall be
submitted in triplicate copies to the City Engineer for his or her inspection.
After careful consideration and study, the City Engineer shall endorse thereon
his or her approval or disapproval or his or her recommendations for any change
in the improvements so offered for consideration and approval, which
recommendation shall be endorsed upon the plans.
(Prior Code, § 15-205)  (Ord. 1292, passed 6-19-84; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
REQUIREMENTS; PROCEDURE
§ 157.15  EASEMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall build, construct, erect, lay out, operate or maintain
any public improvement to the city until first there has been filed an easement
with the city over the property and premises where the public improvement shall
be laid out, built or erected.
The easement shall be approved by the City Attorney and accepted by the Council
of the city.
   (B)   If any person builds, constructs, erects or lays in or outside the
city any water mains or lines or sewer lines or laterals which are connected to
the water system or the sewer system of the city or storm sewers, culverts,
bridges or drainage ditches inside the city without having filed with the city
an easement as required, it shall be presumed that there was granted unto the
city an easement of not less than the width of the public improvement, plus
five feet on each side thereof.
(Prior Code, § 15-206)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 157.16  BIDS FOR CONTRACTS.
   (A)   When public improvements are to be constructed pursuant to a contract
with the city and public bids for the construction have been solicited and are
to be received by the city, the bids shall include the following:
      (1)   Bid security as may be prescribed by the city's specifications for
the work to be done;
      (2)   A bidder's statement of non-collusion as required in the city's
specifications for the work to be done;
      (3)   A bidder's business relationship affidavit as required in the
city's specifications for the work to be done; and
      (4)   A non-discrimination affidavit as required in the city's
specifications for the work to be done.
   (B)   Any failure to provide the information required in this section shall
be sufficient reason for rejecting a bid.
(Prior Code, § 15-207)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 157.17  COUNCIL APPROVAL; REVISION.
   (A)   The Council shall consider and study the plans and materials so
submitted, together with the recommendations of the City Engineer and may
approve or disapprove the same as appears to the best interest of the city and
its inhabitants.
   (B)   If the plans, specifications and estimates of cost be approved, the
same shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk. One copy
shall be filed with the City Clerk, one copy shall be retained by the City
Engineer and one copy shall be returned to the person submitting the same.
   (C)   If disapproved in whole or in part, the three copies shall be returned
to the person submitting the same for correction, revision, addition, redesign
or other change as may be required by the Council. The plans, specifications
and estimates of cost of the improvement contemplated, so revised, changed or
corrected may be resubmitted for reexamination and approval by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 15-208)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 157.18  BONDS REQUIRED.
   (A)   At the time the plans of the public improvement are approved as
provided in this chapter, a performance bond shall be furnished, with corporate
surety licensed to do business in the state, in a sum equal to 100% of the
estimated construction cost of the improvement in favor of the city and
conditioned as follows:
      (1)   Providing that the improvement shall be made according to the
approved plans and without unnecessary delay;
      (2)   Providing the payment of all labor and material going into the
improvement shall be fully paid; and
      (3)   Holding the city harmless against all claims for injuries of
persons and damaged property arising from or growing out of the construction
work.
   (B)   In addition to the performance bond, there shall be filed with the
city a good and sufficient maintenance bond, with corporate surety licensed to
do business in the state, in a sum equal to 100% of the cost of construction of
the improvement for the first year and 15% of the cost of construction of the
improvement for each subsequent year, in order to guarantee the proper
maintenance and operation of the improvement, for the following periods of
time.
      (1)   For the construction of any addition or extension to water or sewer
systems to the city, the bond shall be for a period of two years from and after
acceptance of the improvement by the City Council.
      (2)   For the construction of any pavements in the city, the bond shall
be for a period of five years from and after the date of acceptance of the
improvement by the City Council.
   (C)   All bonds required in this section shall be approved by the City
Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 15-209)  (Ord. 1292, passed 6-19-84; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 157.19  INSPECTION FEES.
   Before a work order is issued, there shall be paid to the city an inspection
fee as established and amended by the City Council from time to time by
resolution with the fees currently being as follows:
 
0 to $2,000:          6.9% of construction cost
2,001 to $5,000:      6.3% of construction cost
5,001 to $10,000:     5.5% of construction cost
10,001 to $25,000:    4.9% of construction cost
25,001 to $50,000:    4.1% of construction cost
Greater than $50,000: 3.5% of construction costs
 
(Prior Code, § 15-210)  (Am. Ord. 1837, passed 1-19-10; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 157.20  CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE.
   Prior to issuance of the work order, the contractor shall provide the city
with a certificate of liability insurance coverage in the amounts not less than
provided in the State Political Subdivision Tort Claims Act. The contractor
shall further provide the city a certificate of workmen's compensation
insurance in amounts complying with state law.
(Prior Code, § 15-211)  (Ord. 1251, passed 9-6-83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 157.21  WORK ORDER REQUIRED.
   (A)   Before any work shall commence upon any public improvement in the
city, there shall first be a work order issued by the City Engineer.
   (B)   The final approval of the plans and specifications and estimate of
cost by the City Council, furnishing of bonds, payment of inspection fees and
submission of the certificate of insurance as required, shall constitute
authority for the City Engineer to issue a work order for construction of the
improvements.
   (C)   Issuance of the work order shall not allow, permit or authorize the
following acts and it shall be unlawful and an offense against the city for any
person, firm or corporation to do any of the same:
      (1)   To commence or carry on any work after the same has been ordered
stopped by the City Engineer;
      (2)   To commence or carry on the construction work in an unauthorized
manner; or
      (3)   To fail or neglect to give the warning or to place lighted
barricades at night, as required in §
157.24.
(Prior Code, § 15-212)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.22  INSPECTION OF WORK.
   (A)   The City Engineer or any competent person authorized by him or her
shall inspect, check, test or measure any or all work or improvements so
approved by the Council at any or all times during the work or construction.
   (B)   If the Engineer or his or her designee should discover the work or
improvement is not in compliance with the approved plans, then the Engineer
shall order the work discontinued until full compliance with the plans is made.
(Prior Code, § 15-213)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 157.23  STREETS TO BE OPEN.
   (A)   Whenever possible, all streets, alleys and public ways in the city
shall remain open to the traveling public.
   (B)   No person constructing any public improvement shall close the street,
alley or way without first obtaining permission from the City Engineer or his
or her designee and notifying the City Police Department, Street Department and
Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 15-214)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 157.24  SAFETY WARNINGS.
   (A)   Any person doing construction work as provided in this chapter shall
give warning thereof to the traveling public.
   (B)   Where the construction work causes an unsafe condition for travel, the
warning shall disclose the condition.
   (C)   Lighted barricades shall be placed about the work at night.
(Prior Code, § 15-215)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19
§ 157.25  REMOVAL OF BARRIERS; TRAVEL WHEN STREETS ARE CLOSED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to remove or
destroy any barrier, barricade or guard or to travel upon the streets with any
vehicle when a street has been closed, as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-216)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.26  DAMAGE TO STREETS, BRIDGES AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig, remove or carry away any sand,
rock, gravel or sod or cut out any tree or bush from any street, alley, lane or
other public thoroughfare, to remove any portion of any sidewalk or any support
from any sidewalk or crossing or loosen or remove any plank, stringer or other
support from any culvert or bridge, without the permission of the City Manager
or the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 15-217)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.27  IMPROVEMENT TO BECOME CITY PROPERTY.
   The city shall accept improvements, place the maintenance bond into effect
and make the improvements as part of the public improvements of the city, upon
completion of the improvements and after:
   (A)   The total construction cost has been paid in full;
   (B)   The Engineer's final inspection has been made;
   (C)   The work has been approved by the City Engineer; and
   (D)   An "as-built" plan has been furnished to the city.
(Prior Code, § 15-218)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 157.28  UTILITY CROSSINGS.
   Any utility crossing of a street shall be made by boring under the streets
in accordance with specifications on file in the City Engineer's office, except
as otherwise provided in §
157.29.
(Prior Code, § 15-219)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 157.29  CUTTING PAVEMENT; PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, alter, mutilate, remove or
change in any way or manner for any purpose any paved or traveled portion of
any street or alley, curb, gutter, catch basin, storm sewer or any other
appurtenance of the same or any sidewalk in the city without securing a permit
from the City Clerk, after express approval by the City Engineer, to make the
cut, alteration or change.
   (B)   The approval of the Engineer may be granted only in the following
circumstances:
      (1)   When there is no other method of making a crossing with utilities;
      (2)   Where access to utilities cannot be obtained by boring under the
street; or
      (3)   On streets, other than major thoroughfares or collector streets,
which are not improved according to city standards as provided in Chapter
154 of this code of ordinances and are on file in the Engineer's office.
   (C)   Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall pay a fee in an amount
determined by resolution of the City Council for each cut to be made.
   (D)   (1)   Street repairs after cutting made pursuant to this section shall
be done according to approved standard details on file in the City Engineer's
office;
      (2)   All street repairs must be completed within 96 hours of permit
issuance;
      (3)   Additional time for repairs may be granted by the City Manager or
his designee where extenuating circumstances have delayed the repairs. The
request for additional time must be made in writing to the City Manager;
      (4)   If the repair (including street reopening) is not completed within
96 hours the city will make the repairs and charge the cost against the cash
deposit of the permit holder.
   (E)   This requirement shall not apply to any person acting under the direct
supervision of the City Engineer or City Manager, nor shall it apply to any
person repairing or replacing a sidewalk under a sidewalk permit where the
person only changes the sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 15-220) (Am. Ord. 1819, passed 3-3-09; Am. Ord. 1885, passed 10-
7-14; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 157.30  RESTORING STREET; DEPOSIT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any person desiring to make any cut or change,
as provided in § 158.29, to secure from the City Engineer a statement
specifying the estimated cost of restoring the street, alley, curb, gutter,
sewer basin or sidewalk or other appurtenance thereto. The applicant shall
deposit the amount of the estimated sum with the City Clerk who shall issue a
duplicate receipt to the person for same.
   (B)   The duplicate receipt or copy thereof shall be delivered to the City
Engineer by the applicant. The Engineer shall issue authority to the City Clerk
to issue permit for the cutting, altering or change.
   (C)   (1)   The holder of the permit at the conclusion of the restoring of
the street, alley, gutter,
curb, sidewalk, sewer or basin or appurtenance, shall notify the City Engineer
who shall make an inspection of the same.
      (2)   If the work is satisfactory, the City Engineer shall give a
statement to the person to that effect and the City Clerk shall, upon
presentation of the statement, refund the deposit.
   (D)   If the work is not satisfactory, then the City Engineer shall notify
the person to complete the same in a satisfactory manner within ten days from
the receipt of the notice. If the work is still not satisfactorily completed,
then the City Engineer or City Manager shall have the work done and pay for the
same out of the deposit. The balance, if any, shall be refunded by the City
Clerk.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep the deposits in a
separate account.
(Prior Code, § 15-221)  (Am. Ord. 1885, passed 10-7-14; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 157.31  CURB CUTS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COLLECTOR STREET. Any street intended to move traffic from local streets to
secondary or primary arterials or major thoroughfares. A collector street
serves a neighborhood or large subdivision.
   LOCAL STREET. A street intended to provide access to collectors or
thoroughfares.
   LOT. A tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land
intended as a unit for the transfer of ownership or building development.
   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE. A road or street intended to move through traffic to and
from major attractions such as central business districts, shopping centers,
colleges, places of employment or as a route for traffic between communities or
large areas.
   (B)   The designation of classes of streets shall be based on the official
comprehensive plan of the city.
   (C)   Any lot in a residential zoned area, abutting both a major
thoroughfare and a collector or local street, shall have street access only on
the collector or local street. No curb cuts shall be approved allowing access
from the lot onto the major thoroughfare.
(Prior Code, § 15-222)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.32  DRIVEWAYS, SIDEWALKS, APRONS AND APPROACHES; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Before any driveway, apron or approach shall be installed over that
portion of the street including the city's right-of-way easement, a permit must
be obtained from the City Clerk with the approval of the City Engineer. The
application for the driveway, apron or approach shall be accompanied by the
details, plans, profiles, specifications and estimate of cost thereof. The
construction of the driveway, apron or approach shall conform to the
specification approved by the City Council for paving of streets. The permit
shall be issued only to a licensed contractor.
   (B)   Before the permit provided for in this section may be issued, the
applicant shall pay an inspection fee as required for paving streets. In no
event, however, shall the inspection fee be less than $5.
(Prior Code, § 15-223) (Am. Ord. 1959, passed 7-17-18; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-
6-19)
§ 157.33  CLOSING PUBLIC WAYS.
   The following procedure shall be followed in closing a street, alley or
easement:
   (A)   Once an application is filed the matter shall be referred to the
Planning Commission for review and comment and thereafter an ordinance shall be
introduced before the City Council providing that at least 30 days written
notice of the hearing before the
City Council be given by mail to: (a) all utility companies, (b) franchise
holders, (c) all record property owners within 300 feet in any direction of the
street, alley, or easement.
   (B)   Where a property owner is requesting the closing he or she shall upon
application for the closing provide to the city a list of all property owners
within 300 feet in any direction of the street, alley or easement, certified to
accuracy by a bonded abstractor or the Oklahoma County Assessor and he or she
shall further pay a fee of $1,000.
   (C)   The written notice to property owners shall provide that any person
protesting the closing shall have the right to protest in writing or to appear
in person before the City Council to protest the closing.
   (D)   Prior to final adoption of an ordinance closing an easement, street,
public way or alley, the Council shall provide a public hearing and allow all
parties interested an opportunity to be heard. The hearing to be held not less
than 30 days after mailing notice to all interested parties as aforesaid.
(Ord. 1875, passed 6-4-13; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 157.34  COMPLETE STREETS.
   (A)   Complete streets commitments.
      (1)   Complete streets serving all users. The city of Bethany expresses
its commitment to creating and maintaining complete streets that provide safe,
comfortable, and convenient travel along and across streets (including streets,
roads, highways, bridges, and other portions of the transportation system)
through a comprehensive, integrated transportation network that serves all
categories of users, including, but not limited to, pedestrians, bicyclists,
persons with disabilities, motorists, movers of commercial goods, users and
operators of public transportation, emergency vehicles, seniors, children,
youth, and families.
      (2)   Complete streets infrastructure: The city of Bethany recognizes the
importance of complete streets infrastructure and modifications that enable
safe, convenient, and comfortable travel for all categories of users,
including, but not limited to, sidewalks, shared use paths, bicycle lanes,
bicycle routes, safe route to schools programs, paved shoulders, street trees
and landscaping, planting strips, accessible curb ramps, crosswalks, pedestrian
islands, pedestrian signals, signs, street furniture, bicycle racks, public
transit stops, traffic signals, and other features assisting the safe travel
for all users, such as traffic circles, raised medians, dedicated transit
lanes, and transit bump outs.
      (3)   Context sensitivity. In planning and implementing street projects,
the City of Bethany shall maintain sensitivity to local conditions in
residential, commercial, and rural districts and shall work with residents,
merchants, and other stakeholders to ensure that a strong sense of place
continues.
   (B)   Safe travel requirements.
      (1)   Complete streets routinely addressed by relevant departments. The
street department, maintenance department, and planning and development
department of the City of Bethany shall work toward making complete streets
practices a routine part of everyday operations, approach every relevant
project, program, and practice as an opportunity to improve streets and the
transportation network for all categories of users, and work in coordination
with other departments, agencies, and utility providers to maximize
opportunities for complete streets, connectivity, and cooperation.
      (2)   Complete streets required.
         (a)   All projects and phases. Complete streets infrastructure
sufficient to enable reasonably safe travel along and across the right of way
for each category of users shall be incorporated into all planning, funding,
design, approval, and implementation processes for any new construction,
reconstruction, retrofit, maintenance operations, alteration, or repair of
streets (including streets, roads, highways, bridges, and other portions of the
transportation system), except that specific infrastructure for a given
category of users may be excluded if an exemption is approved via the process
set forth in division (B)(3) of this section.
         (b)   Community Development Department consultation. Transportation
projects shall be reviewed by the community development department early in the
planning and design stage prior to seeking funding or commencing environmental
review, to provide an opportunity to allow comments and recommendations
regarding complete streets features to be incorporated into the project.
         (c)   Complete streets in routine work and projects. The street
department, parks department, and utility providers shall improve complete
streets and street functionality for all categories of users as part of routine
work or projects involving pavement resurfacing, restriping, accessing or
relocating utilities, signalization operations, or maintenance of landscaping
or other features, unless an exemption is approved via the process set forth in
division (B)(3) of this section.
         (d)   Plan consultation and consistency. Maintenance, planning, and
design of projects affecting the transportation system shall be consistent with
local bicycle, pedestrian, transit, multimodal, comprehensive and other
relevant plans, except as approved via the process set forth in division (B)(3)
of this section.
      (3)   Leadership approval for exemptions. Specific infrastructure for a
given category of users may be excluded where all the following conditions are
met:
         (a)   Supporting data and documentation are assembled indicating one
of the following bases for the exemption:
            1.   Use by a specific category of users is prohibited by law;
            2.   The project is a maintenance activity that does not involve
resurfacing, restriping or  reconfiguring the street. Examples of exempt
projects include patching, sidewalk repair or cleaning;
            3.   The project is limited by available publicly owned right-of-
way;
            4.   The project is located on state or federal right-of-way, the
city has made an effort to obtain permission, and the agency with control of
the right of way has indicated they will not grant permission;
            5.   The cost for specific infrastructure would be excessively
disproportionate to the need and probable future use over the long term (costs
in excess of 20% of project total may be regarded as evidence that cost is
excessively disproportionate, as set forth by the United States department of
transportation in its policy statement on accommodating bicycle and pedestrian
travel);
            6.   There is an absence not only of current need, but also of
future need (absence of future need may be shown via demographic, school,
employment, and public transportation route data that demonstrate a low
likelihood of bicycle, pedestrian, or transit activity in an area over the next
ten to 20 years);
            7.   Planned Unit Development Overlay District (PUD) that provide a
method of alternative compliance approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission; or
            8.   Significant adverse impacts outweigh the positive effects of
the infrastructure; and
         (b)   The proposed exemption, as well as the supporting data and
documentation, shall be made publicly available prior to approval by the City
Council; and
         (c)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the proposed
exemption, as well as the supporting data and documentation, during
the planning and design phase of the project and make a recommendation to the
City Council on whether or
not the exemption is appropriate, the City Council shall make the final
decision whether the exemption will be approved after hearing the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (4)   Street network and connectivity. As feasible, the City of Bethany
shall incorporate complete streets infrastructure into existing streets to
improve the safety and convenience of users and to create employment, with the
particular goal of creating a connected network of facilities accommodating
each category of users, and increasing connectivity across jurisdictional
boundaries for existing and anticipated development.
      (5)   Deficiency. Deficiency projects are those required to correct
inadequate service and bring system capacity to adopted levels of service
standards. Deficiency expenditures shall enhance the capacity, safety and
efficiency of all modes of travel within the roadway network. New roads and
improvements to existing roadway facilities shall include improvements for all
transportation and mobility modes, including motor vehicles, transit
operations, pedestrians and bicyclists. Deficiency projects shall improve
connections between the various transportation and mobility modes and complete
missing links within the arterial roadway network. Deficiency projects shall
follow complete streets policies as prescribed in divisions (C) and (D) of this
section. Deficiency projects shall also include the continued development of
intelligent transportation system (ITS) management tools, managed lanes (using
existing lanes for different travel directions depending on demand and time of
day), queue jump lanes (providing transit priority) and other traffic
management strategies that increase the efficiency of existing and newly
constructed roadways for all transportation and mobility modes.
   (C)   Policies, plans, and studies.
      (1)   Revising policies and plans. The Street Department and Community
Development Department are hereby directed to assess additional steps and
potential obstacles to implementing complete streets in the City of Bethany and
to recommend proposed revisions to all appropriate ordinances, zoning and land
use development codes, policies, procedures, regulations, guidelines, programs,
templates, and design manuals, in order to integrate, accommodate, and balance
the needs of all users in all projects.
      (2)   Studies. All initial planning and design studies, health impact
assessments, environmental reviews, and other reviews for projects requiring
funding or approval by the City of Bethany shall:
         (a)   Evaluate the effect of the proposed project on safe,
comfortable, and convenient travel by all categories of users; and
         (b)   Identify measures to mitigate any adverse impacts on such travel
that are detected.
   (D)   Performance standards, evaluation, and reporting. The following steps
shall be taken to support implementation of complete streets goals:
      (1)   Performance standards. The Community Development Department, with
the assistance of the street department, shall put into place performance
standards with measurable outcomes to assess safety, comfort, actual use, and
functionality, particularly with regard to the development of a bicycle and
pedestrian network, for each category of users.
      (2)   Evaluation. The Community Development Department shall perform
evaluations of how well the streets and transportation network of Bethany are
serving each category of users by collecting baseline data over the next four
years and collecting follow up data on a two year basis, including data that:
         (a)   Tracks performance standards, including new miles of bicycle
lanes, sidewalks, and street trees or plantings, number of new curb ramps,
improved crossings, and signage;
         (b)   Measure latent demand and existing levels of service for
different modes of transport and categories of users, including public
transportation ridership;
         (c)   Tracks collision statistics by neighborhood and mode of
transportation, and bicycle and pedestrian injuries and fatalities;
         (d)   Assess the safety, functionality, and actual use of the
neighborhoods and areas within the corporate limits of Bethany by each category
of users;
         (e)   Assess the number of bicycle, pedestrian and transit users and
how this changes over time as more infrastructure is developed.
      (3)   Reporting. The Director of the Community Development Department and
the Street Department shall provide an annual report to the City Council
summarizing how well the City of Bethany is implementing complete streets, with
the report including: the performance standards and goals from division (D)(1)
of this section; the evaluations from division (D)(2) of this section, with an
assessment of the evaluation data; and a list and map of street projects
undertaken in the past year, with a brief summary of the complete streets
infrastructure used in those projects and, if applicable, the basis for
excluding complete streets infrastructure from any projects.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 157.35  UNIFIED ACCESS AND CIRCULATION.
   (A)   Intent. Internal connections between neighboring properties and shared
driveways allow vehicles to circulate from one business or development to the
next without having to reenter a major roadway. Unified access and circulation
improve the overall ease of access to development and reduces the need for
individual driveways. The purpose of this section is to accomplish unified
access and circulation systems for commercial development.
   (B)   Outparcels, mixed use and shopping center access.
      (1)   Outparcels are lots on the perimeter of a larger parcel that break
its frontage along a roadway. They are often created along arterial street
frontage of shopping center sites and leased or sold separately to businesses
that desire the visibility of major street locations. Outparcel access policies
foster unified access and circulation systems that serve outparcels as well as
interior development, thereby reducing the need for driveways on an arterial
street.
      (2)   In the interest of promoting unified access and circulation
systems, development sites under the same ownership or consolidated for the
purposes of development and comprised of more than one building site shall
prepare a unified access and circulation plan. In addition, the following shall
apply:
         (a)   The number of connections shall be the minimum number necessary
to provide reasonable access to the overall development site and not the
maximum available for that frontage under the connection spacing requirements
in this policy.
         (b)   Access to outparcels shall be internalized using the shared
circulation system of the principal development.
         (c)   All necessary easements and agreements shall be recorded in an
instrument that runs with the deed to the property.
         (d)   Unified access for abutting properties under different ownership
and not part of an overall development plan shall be addressed through § 158.35
(C).
   (C)   Joint and cross access. Joint and cross access policies promote
connections between major developments, as well as between smaller businesses
along a corridor. These policies help to achieve unified access and circulation
systems for individual developments under separate ownership that could not
otherwise meet access spacing standards or that would benefit from
interconnection, i.e., adjacent shopping centers or office parks that abut
shopping centers and restaurants.
      (1)   Adjacent commercial or office properties and major traffic
generators (e.g. mixed-use centers or shopping centers), shall provide a cross-
access drive and pedestrian access way to allow circulation between adjacent
properties. This requirement shall also apply to a building site that abuts an
existing developed property unless the City Engineer (or designee) finds that
this would be impractical.
      (2)   To promote efficient circulation between smaller development sites,
the City Engineer (or designee) may require dedication of a 30-foot easement
that extends to the edges of the property lines of the development site under
consideration to provide for the development of a service road system. The
service road shall be of sufficient width to accommodate two-way travel aisles
and incorporate stub-outs and other design features that make it visually
obvious that abutting properties may be tied in to it. Abutting properties
shall be required to continue the service road as they develop or redevelop in
accordance with the requirements of this policy. The easement may be provided
to the front or rear of the site or across the site where it connects to a
public roadway.
      (3)   Property owners shall record all necessary easements and
agreements, including an easement allowing cross access to and from the
adjacent properties, an agreement to close driveways provided for access in the
interim after construction of the joint use driveway(s) or service road system,
and a joint maintenance agreement defining maintenance responsibilities of
property owners that share the joint-use driveway and cross-access system.
      (4)   Joint and cross access requirements may be waived by the City
Engineer (or designee) for special circumstances such as incompatible uses,
e.g. a gas station next to a child care center, or major physical constraints,
e.g. change in grade between properties makes connection impractical.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
CHAPTER 158:  ZONING
Section
   
158.001   Title, authority, applicability, effective date
   
158.002   Definitions
   
158.003   Purpose; nature of regulations
   
158.004   Scope
   
158.005   Conflicting provisions
   
158.006   Rules of language and construction
   
158.007   Zoning map
   
158.008   Transitional provisions
   
158.009   Severability
   
158.010   Zoning districts
District Regulations
   
158.020   Residential districts
   
158.020.01   Permitted and special uses
   
158.020.02   Bulk and yard standards
   
158.021   Commercial districts
   
158.021.01   Permitted and special uses
   
158.021.02   Bulk and yard standards
   
158.021.03   Commercial district design standards
   
158.022   Industrial Districts
   
158.022.01   Permitted and special uses
   
158.022.02   Bulk and yard standards
   
158.022.03   Industrial district design standards
   
158.023   Special districts
   
158.023.01   Permitted and special uses
   
158.023.02   Bulk and yard standards
   
158.023.03   Special district design standards
   
158.023.04   Mixed-use district (MUD)
   
158.024   Overlay districts
   
158.025   Additional district regulations
General Regulations
   
158.035   Off-street parking
   
158.036   Residential parking restrictions
   
158.036.01   Open display
   
158.037   Fences
   
158.038   Use of residential structures for commercial purposes
   
158.039   Development of substandard lots
   
158.040   Reserved
   
158.041   Permitted and new uses
   
158.042   Nonconforming structures and uses; termination of nonconforming use
   
158.043   Annexation of new area
   
158.044   Special permit uses
Administration and Enforcement
   
158.055   Public hearings; notification
   
158.056   Application for rezonings; hearings; notification
   
158.057   Council procedures for rezoning hearings
   
158.058   Comprehensive plan review
Planning and Zoning Commission
   
158.070   Creation and membership
   
158.071   Organization, meetings and the like
   
158.072   Powers and duties
Board of Adjustment
   
158.085   Creation and membership
   
158.086   Organization, meetings and the like
   
158.087   Powers and duties
   
158.088   Applicants to the Board
   
158.089   Stay of proceedings on appeal
   
158.090   Time and notice of hearings; minor variances
   
158.091   Rules of decision
   
158.092   Hearing procedures
   
158.093   Rehearings
   
158.094   Appeals to the District Court
   
Appendix A:  Permitted Use Table
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 158.001  TITLE, AUTHORITY, APPLICABILITY, EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Chapter of
the City of Bethany." It may also be referred to as the "zoning ordinance".
   (B)   It is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the State
Legislature and the Charter of the city.
   (C)   The provisions of this zoning ordinance apply to all public and
private use and development of properties within the corporate limits of the
City of Bethany, except as provided by state or federal law or a as otherwise
expressly stated in this zoning ordinance.
   (D)   The provisions of this zoning ordinance become effective on August 6,
2019, except as otherwise expressly stated.
(Prior Code, § 13-601)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.002  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY.
      (1)   When used in combination with the following words:
         (a)   BUILDING(S). A detached building(s) containing an accessory use
and located on the same lot as the primary building, provided all accessory
buildings on a lot shall not exceed in size 240 square feet except as approved
as a special permit use under § 158.044. Except where a special permit use is
approved no more than two accessory buildings shall be located on each lot with
the total square footage of all accessory buildings not exceeding 240 square
feet. Accessory buildings shall not be located in front of the primary
building.
         (b)   USE(S). A use(s) on the same lot as the primary use which is
different from and customarily associated with the primary use, and which use
has dedicated to it not more gross floor area than permitted in division (a)
above.
      (2)   Examples, not inclusive:
 
Primary Building and Use Accessory Building and Use
Dwelling - Habitation    Carport - Vehicle Storage
Dwelling - Habitation    Workshop - General
Dwelling - Habitation    Greenhouse -  Cultivation
Dwelling - Habitation    Dwelling - Home Occupation
 
   ADULT BUSINESS. Any business activity which offers the opportunity to view
specified sexual activity or view, or touch, for entertainment, specified
anatomical areas. Such definition further includes but is not limited to adult
arcade, adult bookstore/film store, adult cabaret, adult lounge, adult motel or
hotel, adult retail store, and an adult theater.
   ADULT DAYCARE CENTER. A facility which provides basic day care services to
unrelated, impaired adults for more than four hours in a 24-hour period. A
center shall be a distinct entity, either freestanding or a separate program of
a larger organization. A center shall have a separately verifiable staff,
space, budget, and participant record system. ADULT DAYCARE CENTER does not
include retirement centers and senior citizen centers.
   AGRICULTURE. The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming,
dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and
animal husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or
storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such
accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities.
The term shall not include agricultural industries such as commercial poultry
or swine production, cattle or swine feed lots, fur bearing animal farms,
commercial greenhouses, commercial fish or poultry hatcheries, and other
similar activities.
   AIRPORT or LANDING FIELD. A facility used for the landing, take-off or
taxiing of aircraft.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS. An establishment other than a restaurant,
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises; that limits
patronage to adults of legal age for consumption of alcohol; and in which
limited food service may be accessory to the service of alcoholic beverages.
Drinking establishments may include but are not limited to taverns, saloons,
breweries, bars, pubs, or cocktail lounges associated with restaurants. These
establishments shall meet the conditions specified in §
110.02.
   ALLEY. A minor right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which affords a
secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise
abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes.
   AMUSEMENT, COMMERCIAL INDOOR. An amusement enterprise wholly enclosed in a
building which is treated acoustically so that noise generated by the
enterprise is not audible at the bounding property line and including, but not
limited to, a bowling alley or billiard parlor.
   AMUSEMENT, COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR. Any amusement enterprise offering
entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge
wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the open, including but not
limited to, a golf driving range, archery range and miniature golf course.
   ART GALLERY. A building where art such as paintings, sculptures or other
works are exhibited and/or sold to the public.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE. Establishments primarily engaged in general
automotive repair, including but not limited to, engine, transmission, and
motor repair shops, service garages, tire shops, glass replacement shops, and
body repair shops.
   AUTO STORAGE or AUTO AUCTION. Establishments primarily engaged in the
storage and wholesale distribution of new and used passenger automobiles,
trucks, trailers, and other motor vehicles, but not including machinery
wrecking establishments or junkyards.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. An owner-occupied housing unit with fewer than six
individual guest rooms where short-term lodging and meals are provided for
compensation.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling other than a hotel where for compensation and by
prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are provided
for three or more, but not exceeding 20 persons, on a weekly or monthly basis.
   BREWERY, CRAFT BREW. An individually owned establishment primarily engaged
in brewing beer for distribution.
   BREWERY, LARGE SCALE. Establishments primarily engaged in brewing beer, ale,
malt liquors, and nonalcoholic beer for wholesale distribution.
   BUILDING. Any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure for
persons, animals or chattel.
   BUILDING AND LANDSCAPING MATERIALS SALES YARD. A retail establishment
selling hardware, lumber and other large building materials, plant materials,
and other landscaping materials. Includes paint, wallpaper, glass, fixtures.
Includes all these stores selling to the general public, even if contractor
sales account for a major proportion of total sales.
   BUILDING, PRIMARY. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the
lot on which it is situated. In residential districts, any dwelling shall be
deemed to be a primary building on the lot on which it is situated.
   BUS STATION or TERMINAL. Establishments primarily engaged in the operation
of motor vehicle passenger terminals and of maintenance and service facilities,
not operated by companies that also furnish motor vehicle passenger
transportation.
   CARETAKER or EMPLOYEE HOUSING. A detached secondary housing unit that is
used for persons employed on the premise, where the principal commercial,
industrial or institutional use of the site involves operations, equipment or
other resources that require 24 hour oversight. Such housing shall be occupied
exclusively by the caretaker and/or employee and not for rent or use as a
separate housing unit by persons other than those employed on the premise. The
Planning Commission must find that the principal use on the site requires the
continual supervision of a caretaker, superintendent, or watchman.
   CARPORT.
      (1)   When used in the context of §
158.025, means any accessory building constructed in conjunction with the use
of a single-family or two-family dwelling and which is:
         (a)   Over a paved driveway;
         (b)   Abutting the dwelling to which it is accessory;
         (c)   Unenclosed, except for the one side abutting the dwelling;
         (d)   No more than 25 feet in total length, both within and outside
the front setback; and
         (e)   No wider than 12 feet for a single garage and/or driveway or no
wider than 24 feet for a double garage and/or driveway.
      (2)   No more than one carport shall be permitted for each dwelling unit.
   CATERING ESTABLISHMENT. A business that prepares and delivers food for
consumption on the premises of a client. Does not include mobile food vendors.
   CHARITABLE or PHILANTHROPIC INSTITUTIONS. A private, tax-exempt organization
whose primary function is to provide either health, social, recreational,
religious, or benevolent services, or research or educational activities in
areas of benefit to the public such as health, medicine or conservation of
natural resources. Does not include an organization for the purpose of
operating a trade or business or whose primary purpose or function is promoting
the economic advancement of its members, such as a professional or trade
association or a labor union.
   CHURCH. A facility operated by a religious organization used exclusively as
a place of worship or  for the promotion of religious activities, including
accessory uses on the same site. Examples of these types of facilities include
churches, mosques, synagogues, and temples. Examples of allowable accessory
uses on the same site include living quarters for ministers and staff, and
facilities for child day care and religious instruction.
   COLLEGE or UNIVERSITY. An academic institution of higher learning,
accredited or recognized  by the State of Oklahoma and offering a program or
series of programs of academic study.
   COMMUNITY CENTER. A public institution owned and operated by a governmental
body for the social or recreational uses, health or welfare of the community
served.
   COUNTRY CLUB, PRIVATE. An area of 20 acres or more containing a golf course,
a clubhouse and associated uses available only to private specific membership.
   COVERAGE. The ratio of the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot,
including the area covered by all overhanging roofs in excess of two feet, to
the lot area.
   CREMATORY. A facility licensed by the Oklahoma State Board of Embalmers and
Funeral Directors for the disposal of human remains by cremation, dehydration,
combustion, or other similar means.
   DAY- CARE CENTER. Family day-care homes and nurseries, as those terms are
defined and regulated in Chapter
112.
   DAY CAMP FOR CHILDREN. A facility arranged and conducted for the organized
recreation and instruction including outdoor activities on a daytime basis.
   DISPENSARY STORE. An establishment licensed by the Oklahoma State Department
of Health  pursuant to Title 63 O.S. § 421A, which allows the retail sale of
marijuana, or marijuana derivatives in the form provided by licensed
processors, as well as other products, including paraphernalia and clothing, to
be sold to qualifying patients or their caregiver.
   DISTRICT. A zoning district created herein.
   DORMITORY. A building reserved exclusively for and occupied as the temporary
residence of individuals enrolled in an accredited public or private
educational institution which owns the building. General kitchen and eating
facilities may be provided for the primary use of the occupants of the
building, provided the main entrance to these facilities is from within the
building.
   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used as
living quarters for one or more families, but not including trailer homes.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A dwelling designed to be occupied by three or
more families living independently of each other, exclusive of hotels or
motels.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A dwelling designed to be occupied by one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A detached dwelling designed to be occupied by two
families living independently of each other.
   DWELLING UNIT. One room or a suite of two or more rooms designed for and
used by one family for living and sleeping purposes and having one kitchen or
kitchenette.
   EQUESTRIAN EDUCATION FACILITY. An indoor or outdoor facility where horses
are housed, ridden, shown, displayed, or trained as part of the curriculum of
and in connection with an educational program of public schools or colleges and
universities.
   EQUIPMENT STORAGE/RENTAL YARD. The use of any building, land area, or
portion thereof, for the display, sale, rental or lease of heavy construction
or farm equipment, including cranes, earthmoving and grading equipment, heavy
trucks, tractors, and any warranty or repair work and other repair services
conducted as an accessory use. Outdoor display of such items may be provided
only as permitted by the district in which it is located.
   FAMILY. One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a
group of not to exceed five persons not all related by blood or marriage,
living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit and
maintaining and using the same housekeeping  facilities in common.
   FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME. A private dwelling which provides care and supervision
for seven or fewer children for part of the 24-hour day. The term "family day-
care home" shall not include  informal arrangements which parents make
independently with neighbors, friends, and others, or with caretakers in the
child's own home;
   FENCE.
      (1)   A structure, wall or hedge, erected or grown for the purpose of
dividing open space, delineating boundaries, enclosure or preventing passage or
sight.
      (2)   The height of fences shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Measurement to be taken from the highest elevation contiguous to
the fence from the base to the top;
         (b)   The fence is to follow the topography and is measured
accordingly;
         (c)   Decorative posts are to be excluded from measurement; and
         (d)   Planter boxes built to effectively lower the height of the fence
will be included in the measurement.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. An establishment primarily engaged in the
facilitation of financial transactions, such as investments, loans, and
deposits. Uses include banks and trust companies, credit agencies, and other
investment companies.
   FRATERNITY OR SORORITY LODGE or ASSEMBLY HALL. A building that is used and
occupied by a nationally chartered fraternity or sorority as a principal place
of residence for its members and support staff. Such residences shall have an
affiliation with an accredited college or university that operates campus
facilities in the City of Bethany and may contain and provide domestic and
social facilities and services thereto.
   FUNERAL HOME and MORTUARY. Establishments where the deceased are prepared
for burial or cremation, funeral services may be conducted, and cremation may
occur.
   FREIGHTING YARD or TERMINAL. A transportation facility furnishing services
incidental to air, motor freight, and rail transportation. Examples of these
facilities include freight terminal facilities, packing, crating, inspection,
and weighing services, postal service bulk mailing distribution centers, and
trucking facilities, including transfer and storage.
   GARAGE, PARKING. Any building or portion thereof used for the storage of
four or more vehicles for profit, hire or otherwise involving compensation in
which any servicing is an accessory use but where repair facilities are not
provided.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A building used for storage purposes only for vehicles used
solely by the occupants and their guests of the building to which it is
accessory.
   GARAGE, REPAIR. A building in which are provided facilities for the care,
servicing, repair or equipping of vehicles.
   GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS. The land and buildings or structures thereon used
for the retail sales of gasoline, oil fuels and vehicle accessories, and
accessory uses exclusive of painting, major repair or the sale of butane or
propane fuels. All storage tanks for gasoline shall be below the surface of the
ground and provided that no filling station shall be within 300 feet of any
school, church, hospital, convalescence hospital, playground, community
building or youth center or any other place where a large number of people
congregate and further provided that the service station conforms to this code
of ordinances.
   GOLF COURSE, COMMERCIAL. A golf course privately owned but open to the
public for a fee and operated as a commercial venture.
   GROCERY STORE OR SUPERMARKET. A retail or wholesale store that primarily
sells food, including canned and frozen foods, fresh fruits and vegetables, and
fresh (raw) and prepared meats, fish, and poultry.
   GREENHOUSE and PLANT NURSERY. A retail enterprise that sells plants, garden
supplies and services, and similar items not to include heavy equipment such as
farm machinery.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA. The sum of all horizontal areas of all the floors of a
building as measured from the facade of exterior walls or from the centerline
of common walls separating buildings and including, but not limited to the
following spaces:
      (1)   Basements;
      (2)   Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;
      (3)   Floor space for mechanical equipment with structural head room of
seven feet or more;
      (4)   Penthouses;
      (5)   Attic space providing head room of seven feet or more;
      (6)   Interior balconies, mezzanines and enclosed covered porches and
enclosed steps; and
      (7)   Accessory uses in the building exclusive of parking garages.
   GROUP HOME. A community-based residential facility located in a single-
family zoning area that admits not more than six persons with developmental or
physical disabilities who require specialized living arrangements, and that
provides for such persons a home that is subject to the care and supervision of
a responsible adult and which is licensed by or which has a contract with the
Department of Human Services. Group homes shall be subject to all restrictions
of § 60 O.S.
   HALFWAY HOUSE. Means a private facility for the placement of inmates in a
community setting for the purpose of reintegrating into the community inmates
who are nearing their release dates. The term shall not include private
prisons.
   HEALTHY AND ACTIVE LIVING. Creating or transforming neighborhoods and
districts to make physical activity through transportation, exercise, and
recreation more likely.
   HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average line of the highest and
lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest
point of coping of a flat roof, or the deck line of a mansard roof or to the
average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation carried on (owned) solely by the inhabitants
of a dwelling which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling of dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and
which is conducted entirely within the main building:
      (1)   The business/occupation shall be restricted to the providing or
performance of services. No on-site wholesale or retail sales shall be
permitted.
      (2)   The following businesses shall not be eligible for classification
as a HOME OCCUPATION:
         (a)   Beauty or barber shop;
         (b)   Tearoom/restaurant;
         (c)   Metal shop/cabinet shop;
         (d)   Lawn mower repair;
         (e)   Nursing home or clinic;
         (f)   Doctor's or dentist's office;
         (g)   Day-care center; or
         (h)   The repair of vehicles owned by someone other than the occupant;
or
         (i)   Landscaping, tree trimming and/or lawn care service.
      (3)   Only two or fewer individuals (at least one of which must be an
inhabitant of the dwelling) shall be engaged in the business.
      (4)   The home occupation shall not be conducted in an accessory
building. There shall be no outdoor storage associated with any home
occupation.
      (5)   No mechanical equipment shall be used, or activity conducted that
creates excessive traffic, noise, dust, odor or electrical disturbance beyond
the confines of the lot, except for such as is normally used for domestic
purposes.
      (6)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the dwelling
unit or any other aspect of the premises which would provide visible evidence
of the conduct of the home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding two
square feet in area, non-illuminated and mounted flat against the wall of the
dwelling unit.
      (7)   There shall not be more than one customer vehicle at a time parking
off-street and no customer parking shall be permitted in the street right-of-
way.
      (8)   A license shall be obtained and a tax paid, as required in §
110.02.
   HOSPITAL. A health care institution with an organized medical and
professional staff and with inpatient beds available on a 24 hour basis, which
has as its primary function to provide inpatient medical, nursing, and other
health-related services to patients for both surgical and nonsurgical
conditions, and which usually provides some outpatient services, particularly
emergency care.
   HOTEL or MOTEL. A building or group of buildings under one ownership
reserved primarily for  and occupied as the temporary abiding place of
transients for compensation, exclusive of mobile home or recreational vehicle
parks, sanatorium, hospital, asylum, orphanage or building where persons are
housed under restraint.
   IMPROVED SURFACE. Area that is covered by a permanent hard surface,
including concrete, asphalt, or pavers, in accordance with the City Engineer's
standards, or any combination of materials with pervious features such as
ribbon driveways that have been permitted by the Director as a functionally
hard surface.
   INMATE TRANSITIONAL LIVING CENTERS. See HALFWAY HOUSE.
   INMATE WORK CENTERS, INMATE HALFWAY HOUSES, and INMATE PRERELEASE
CENTERS. Shall have the same meanings as used in § 57 O.S. or as defined by the
Oklahoma Department of Corrections.
   INPATIENT TREATMENT. See HOSPITAL.
   ITINERANT VENDOR. Any person who engages in, does, or transacts any
temporary or transient business in the town and who, for the purpose of
carrying on such business, occupies any location for a period of less than 90
days.
   JAIL and CORRECTIONAL FACILITY. Public or private facilities providing for
the confinement of juvenile offenders, for the incarceration, confinement or
detention of individuals arrested for or convicted of a crime, or for the
punishment, correction and/or rehabilitation of individuals convicted of crimes
whose freedom is restricted.
   KENNEL. Any premises wherein any person, firm, corporation, or other legal
entity engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire,
training for a fee, or selling dogs or cats.
   LABORATORY, SCIENTIFIC or RESEARCH. Laboratories for research or testing,
but not for manufacturing, providing all work is conducted within an enclosed
building and no noise, odor, smoke or other element of the operation is
noticeable from outside the building.
   LIBRARY. A public facility for the use and loan, but not sale, of literary,
musical, artistic, or reference materials.
   LOT. A parcel of land the location, size and dimension of which are
determined according to the most recent document legally filed of record
pertaining to the same.
   LOT AREA. The horizontal area included within lot lines, exclusive of any
property over which there is an easement for flood control and/or drainage
purposes. This exclusion shall not apply to lots platted prior to December 13,
1973.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting for their
full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection
of the two sides is less than 135 degrees.
   LOT DEPTH. The minimum distance between the front and rear lot lines.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINES. The boundaries of a lot and the boundaries shall be conterminous
with right-of-way lines for those portions of a lot which abut a street or
alley.
   LOT WIDTH. The minimum distance between the side lot lines, measured at the
front yard setback line, except where specifically otherwise provided.
   MANUFACTURING, HEAVY. A facility accommodating manufacturing processes that
involve  and/or produce basic metals, building materials, chemicals, fabricated
metals, paper products, machinery, textiles, and/or transportation equipment,
where the intensity and/or scale of operations may cause significant impacts on
surrounding land uses or the community. Examples of heavy manufacturing uses
include concrete product manufacturing, garbage transfer stations, glass
product manufacturing, plastic, rubber and other synthetic product
manufacturing, and textile and leather product manufacturing. Permitted uses
shall be conducted in a manner that no noxious odor, fumes or dust will be
emitted beyond the property line of the lot on which the use is located.
   MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. A facility accommodating manufacturing processes
involving and/or producing: apparel; food and beverage products; electronic,
optical, and instrumentation products; ice; jewelry; and musical instruments.
Light manufacturing also includes other establishments engaged in the assembly,
fabrication, and conversion of already processed raw materials into products,
where the operational characteristics of the manufacturing processes and the
materials used are unlikely to cause significant impacts on surrounding land
uses or the community. Examples of light manufacturing uses include clothing
and fabric manufacturing, electronics and appliance manufacturing, and food and
beverage product manufacturing. Permitted uses shall be conducted in a manner
that no noxious odor, fumes or dust will be emitted beyond the property line of
the lot on which the use is located.
   MASSAGE CLINIC. Any establishment having a fixed place of business where any
person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on or permits to
be engaged in or carried on the activity of "massage," defined as any method of
pressure on or friction against the external soft parts of the body with the
hand or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance
commonly used in this practice by a massage therapist.
   MEDIA BROADCAST SERVICES. Commercial and public communications, including
radio and television broadcasting and receiving stations and studios, with
facilities entirely within buildings. Does not include transmission and
receiving apparatus, including antennas and towers, which are instead defined
under "Telecommunications Facilities."
   MEDICAL or DENTAL FACILITY. The use of space by individuals licensed in the
State of Oklahoma to practice medicine, osteopathy, dentistry, chiropractic,
podiatry, psychiatry, clinical psychology or other health-related professions
on an outpatient basis. The professional services provided in the  medical
office space is for the occupant's own patients and not for patients of
unrelated outside practitioners.
   MIXED USE. A development or structure which clusters homes, jobs, stores,
parks, and services within walking distance of one another.
   MOBILE and MANUFACTURED HOMES. The meaning given in Chapter 152 of this code
of ordinances, whether used as a dwelling unit or not.
   MOBILE and MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A contiguous parcel of land under single
ownership which has been developed for the placement of manufactured/mobile
homes for non-transient use.
   MUSEUM. A building serving as a repository for a collection of natural,
scientific, or literary objects of interest, or works of art, and arranged and
designed to be used by members of the public for viewing, with or without
admission charge.
   NIGHT CLUB or DANCE HALL. A facility serving alcoholic beverages for on-site
consumption, and providing entertainment, examples of which include live music
and/or dancing, comedy, etc.
   NET FLOOR AREA. The gross floor of the building less non-public and non-work
spaces, such as  storage rooms, hallways, warehouses, utility closets or
restrooms.
   NONCONFORMING. When used in combination with the following words:
      (1)   STRUCTURE. A structure in noncompliance with applicable setback,
coverage or height regulations but which, on the effective date of this
chapter, lawfully occupied the lot on which it is situated.
      (2)   USE. An activity carried on in noncompliance with applicable
district regulations but which, on the effective date of this chapter, lawfully
occupied the lot on which it is conducted.
   NURSING, CARE FACILITY, CONVALESCENT, OR REST HOME. All those facilities
required to be licensed under the Oklahoma Nursing Home Care Act (63 O. S. §§
1-1902 et seq.) to provide resident nursing care facilities, and the
definitions within the Oklahoma Nursing Home Care Act shall be used in
interpreting the provisions of this chapter. Drug and/or alcohol abuse
treatment facilities are excluded from this definition.
   OPEN DISPLAY, COMMERCIAL. The outdoor display of retail goods and products
located outside of an enclosed business. Open display uses such as car, truck,
and boat sales and/or rentals are prohibited, except as a Special Permit Use as
authorized under § 158.044 of the zoning ordinance.
   PARKING AREA. A permanently surfaced area enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient
in size to store vehicles together with a permanent surfaced driveway
connecting all parking spaces with a street or alley.
   PARKING SPACE. A permanently surfaced area enclosed or unenclosed, being 821
feet in width and 18 feet in depth and intended for the parking of vehicles.
   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. A parking space not on or extending over any
public easement or right-of-way.
   PEST CONTROL SERVICES. A commercial pest control business or occupation
which is performed primarily off-site. Only those support activities, such as
office work and storage of equipment is conducted at the business location and
provided:
      (1)   No on-site storage of more than 30 gallons of pesticide or
herbicide;
      (2)   No batch mixing of chemicals, other than individual tank mixing on
each truck operated on-site; and
      (3)   No repair of chemical equipment on-site.
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS, STORAGE and WHOLESALE. A facility for the bulk storage
and wholesale distribution of gasoline, diesel fuel, and/or other fuels and
petroleum products.
   PHARMACY. A retail store that primarily sells prescription drugs, which may
also sell nonprescription drugs and medical supplies, other health care
products, and a limited variety of convenience items.
   PROFESSIONAL OFFICES. Professional offices, such as accounting, real estate,
insurance, architectural or engineering offices where chattels, goods, wares or
merchandise are not created, stored, exchanged or sold.
   PUBLIC PARK and PLAYGROUND. A public area reserved for natural or artificial
landscaping, which may include recreational facilities and structures.
   PUBLIC UTILITY STATION. A structure or facility used by a public or quasi-
public utility agency to store, distribute, generate electricity, gas,
telecommunications, and related equipment, or to pump chemically treated water.
This does not include storage or treatment of sewage, solid waste, or hazardous
waste.
   PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES. A facility including ambulance dispatch
facilities, fire stations, other fire prevention and firefighting facilities,
police and sheriff substations and headquarters.
   PUBLISHER. An establishment engaged in printing by letterpress, lithography,
gravure, screen, offset, or electrostatic (xerographic) copying; and other
establishments serving the printing trade such as bookbinding, typesetting,
engraving, photoengraving and electrotyping. This use also includes
establishments that publish newspapers, books and periodicals.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A site under private ownership designed and
intended to be used, by campers with recreational vehicles or tents.
Recreational vehicle parks may include public restrooms, water, sewer, and
electric hookups to each lot and may also include accessory retail uses where
they are clearly incidental and intended to serve RV park patrons only.
   RETAIL, GENERAL. Stores and shops selling many lines of merchandise.
Examples of these stores and lines of merchandise include antique stores, craft
stores, clothing, shoes, and accessories, hardware stores, recreational
equipment, religious goods, stationary, and toy stores and shall be larger than
4,000 square feet.
   RETAIL, SPECIALTY. Stores and shops where the majority of the business is
devoted to the sale of specialty goods. Such uses include delicatessens,
pottery studios, tuxedo stores, small-scale book stores, and video rental
stores and shall be no larger than 4,000 square feet.
   RESTAURANT or EATING ESTABLISHMENT (NOT DRIVE-IN TYPE). Any eating or
drinking establishment where the preparation and serving of food is the primary
business of such establishment. The term "primary business" means that the
gross receipts from the sale of food are equal to or exceed 50% of the entire
gross receipts of such establishment.
   RESTAURANT or EATING ESTABLISHMENT (DRIVE-IN). A building or portion thereof
where food and/or beverages are sold, and where a driveway is located so that
vehicles may drive up to a window and receive food and/or beverages for
consumption either on the premises or elsewhere.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A building where lodging only is provided for compensation to
three or more, but not exceeding 20 persons. A building which has
accommodations for more than 20 persons shall be a hotel, as defined herein.
   SALE BARN. Barns, pens and sheds for the temporary holding and sale of
livestock.
   SALVAGE or JUNK YARD. Any land or building where metals, plumbing materials,
appliances, vehicles, vehicle parts, rags or paper, machinery or similar items
or material are kept, salvaged, stored, dismantled and/or offered for sale as
whole units, as salvaged parts or as processed materials.
   SCHOOL, BUSINESS. A business organized to operate for a profit and offering
instruction and training in a service or art such as secretarial school, barber
college, beauty school or commercial art school, but not including manual trade
schools.
   SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL TRADE. A business organized to operate for a profit and
offering instruction and training in a trade such as welding, brick laying,
machinery operation and similar trades.
   SCHOOL, PRIVATE, ELEMENTARY or SECONDARY. A private institution intended for
the purpose of elementary or secondary education, which does not secure the
major part of its funding from public sources.
   SCHOOL, PUBLIC. Consists of all free schools supported by public taxation,
and shall include nurseries, pre-schools, kindergartens, elementary and
secondary schools, and technology center schools, not to exceed two years of
junior college work, and such other schools, classes, and instruction as may be
supported by the public.
   SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY or DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT. Any attended or
unattended place, building or portion thereof, available to the general public
for the purpose of washing, drying, extracting moisture from or dry-cleaning
wearing apparel, cloth fabrics and textiles of any kind by means of a
mechanical appliance which is operated primarily by the customer. Cleaning,
pressing and laundering shops shall employ no more than 12 people on the
premises.
   SHELTER. A temporary residential facility, which provides overnight
accommodations and incidental services for homeless persons and/or families on
a short-term basis.
   SHOOTING RANGE, INDOOR. An area enclosed at which a handgun, rifle, or other
firearm is  discharged at a target, designed to prevent a projectile fired from
a firearm at a target from going beyond the boundaries of the area, by use of a
backstop or other barrier that is designed to completely stop the projectile or
prevent a potentially dangerous ricochet.
   SETBACK. The minimum yard specified.
   SIGHT TRIANGLE. The area formed by measuring from the point of intersection
of two lot lines a distance of 25 feet along each lot line and connecting the
points so established to create a triangle with at least one side abutting
street right-of-way.
   STORY.
      (1)   The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
      (2)   A basement shall be counted as a story when more than one-half of
its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground or when
subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor
employed in the premises.
   STORY, HALF. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection
of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor
level and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished
off for use. A HALF STORY containing living quarters shall be counted as a full
story.
   STREET. Any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means
of access to abutting property.
   STREET, INTERSECTING. Any street which joins another street at an angle,
whether it crosses the other.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground, or which is attached to something having a location on
the ground.
   SWIM or TENNIS CLUB. A private recreational club where swimming, tennis, and
other related uses take place, available only to private specific membership.
All private swimming and/or tennis clubs shall be properly lit, screened, and
be open during regular business hours.
   SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL. A structure located either indoors or outdoors
and designed to be primarily used for swimming or other related recreational or
athletic purposes, generally open to the public with an admission fee.
   SWAP MEET, FLEA MARKET, and OTHER SIMILAR USES. A collection or group of
stalls, booths, tables or other similar arrangement, used by individual
vendors, for the display and sale of various items of new or used personal
property, either inside a building or outside in the open.
   TATTOO and/or BODY PIERCING SHOP. An establishment where the tattooing or
piercing of human body parts is administered.
   TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES. The site, structures, equipment and
appurtenances used to  transmit, receive, distribute, provide, or offer
wireless telecommunications services. This includes but is not limited to
antennas, poles, towers, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, vaults,
buildings, electronics and switching equipment.
   TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT SERVICES- DAY LABOR BUSINESS. Any enterprise engaged in
procuring temporary employment for individuals who arrive and/or wait at the
premises in which the temporary employment business is located on a regular
basis for work assignments or transportation to a work site. Such use shall be
prohibited in the C-H District and on any property having frontage along the NW
39th Street Expressway. If such use requires parking, a Conditional Use Permit
must be obtained.
   TRANSITIONAL LIVING FACILITY. Shelter provided for persons for an extended
period, where the space is re-occupied by another program recipient after a set
period. Generally, the housing is integrated with other social services and
counseling programs to assist in the transition to self-sufficiency through the
acquisition of a stable income and permanent housing. Not for the housing of
inmates.
   TREATMENT FACILITY. An institution designed for the care and rehabilitation
of patients suffering from drug and/or alcohol abuse or related problems. This
definition shall have the same meaning as defined in 43A O.S. § 3-403
pertaining to the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Services Act.
   UNLIGHTED PRIVATE TENNIS COURT. A tennis court located within the rear yard
of a private residence. To safeguard the amenity of residential areas against
the adverse effects associated with the use of a private tennis court, an
application for special review must be submitted and reviewed by planning
staff.
   USABLE OPEN SPACE. The portion of a lot which is open; not allocated to off-
street parking spaces, parking areas, streets or any public dedication and
unoccupied and unobstructed, provided that patios, natural landscaping and
recreational facilities shall not be deemed obstructions.
   VEHICLE. A self-propelled mechanical device designed for use on streets and
highways for the conveyance of goods and people including but not limited to
the following: passenger cars, trucks, buses and motorcycles.
   VEHICLE STORAGE. A service facility for the long-term storage of operative
cars, trucks, buses, recreational vehicles, and other motor vehicles, for
clients. Does not include auto salvage yards.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. A type of animal care facility where common household
pets are provided with preventative care and/or are treated for illness,
injury, or disease, but does not include animal shelters.
   WAREHOUSE. A building or portion thereof used for storage of any
merchandise, stock, furnishings or vehicles of a business of any kind, except
that of storage area operated in conjunction with a retail business located on
the same property shall not be a warehouse.
   WAREHOUSE, MINI. A building or portion thereof used exclusively for storing
the excess personal property of an individual or family when such is not
located on the lot with their residence, such as a passenger automobile, house
trailer, motorcycle, boat, camper or other items of personal property generally
stored in residential accessory buildings, exclusive of any merchandise, stock,
furnishings or business vehicles of any kind.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. A utility facility for the collection and
treatment of sanitary sewage and storm water through mechanical, chemical and
biological processes for the purpose of improving the quality of wastewater.
   WHOLESALE OR WAREHOUSE ENTERPRISE. Establishments engaged in the storage and
sale of commercial goods or commodities, usually in bulk, for purchasers other
than individual customers. Examples include the wholesale distribution of
furniture, household goods, farm supplies, and electrical, plumbing, heating
and air conditioning supplies and equipment, but not to include freight
distribution centers, large storage facilities or the use of delivery trucks in
the routine operation of the business.
   YARD. A space at grade between a building on a lot and the adjoining lot
line as measured by the shortest horizontal distance between the lot line and
the primary building.
   YARD, FRONT. The yard extending across a lot between the side lot lines and
established according to the first one of the conditions below which applies,
the conditions being prioritized in descending order.
      (1)   For planned or existing commercial or industrial uses, it is the
yard adjacent and parallel to a major street or expressway if the lots abut
such a facility;
      (2)   It is the yard adjacent and parallel to the street upon which the
lot has its shortest dimension; or
      (3)   It is the yard indicated as the front on the subdivision plat filed
of record.
   YARD, MINIMUM. The smallest yard that shall remain unoccupied, unobstructed
and without infringement by any structure on a lot.
   YARD, REAR. The yard(s) at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard
and extending across the lot between the side lot lines.
   YARD, SIDE. All yards on a lot other than front and rear yards and extending
across the lot between the front and rear lot lines.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. Community Development Director.
   ZOO. A facility owned and operated for a fee, where live animals, birds and
reptiles are housed and displayed.
(Prior Code, § 13-602)  (Ord. 1211, passed 4-20-82; Am. Ord. 1253, passed 10-4-
83; Am. Ord. 1452, passed 10-3-89; Am. Ord. 1508, passed 1-18-94; Am. Ord.
1673, passed 7-2-02; Am. Ord. 1678, passed 9-3-02; Am. Ord. 1687, passed 11-5-
02; Am. Ord. 1753, passed 6-21-05; Am. Ord. 1758, passed 1-17-06; Am. Ord.
1759A, passed 2-7-06; Am. Ord. 1847, passed 4-19-10; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 4-
17-12; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.003  PURPOSE; NATURE OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The zoning ordinance is adopted for the purpose of:
      (1)   Promoting the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
general welfare;
      (2)   Implementing the policies and goals of the comprehensive plan and
other relevant, officially adopted plans of the city;
      (3)   Encouraging the most appropriate uses of land;
      (4)   Maintaining and stabilizing the value of property;
      (5)   Reducing fire hazards and improving public safety;
      (6)   Safeguarding public health;
      (7)   Promote compact development, to encourage the efficient provision
of public services and infrastructure;
      (8)   Provide opportunities for mixed-use, which clusters homes, jobs,
stores, parks, and services within walking distance of one another;
      (9)   Encourages human-scale design, or development in which people feel
safe and comfortable walking from place to place because buildings,
streetscapes, parking areas, landscaping, lighting, and other components of the
built environment are designed foremost with pedestrians in mind;
      (10)   Promotes healthy and active living, by creating or transforming
neighborhoods and districts to make physical activity through transportation,
exercise, and recreation more likely;
      (11)   Improves environmental health, which requires adequate light and
air circulation, management of surface water runoff, and treatment and disposal
of waste;
      (12)   Decreasing traffic congestion and its accompanying hazards;
      (13)   Preventing undue concentration of population; and
      (14)   Creating a stable pattern of land uses upon which to plan for
transportation, water supply, sewage, schools, parks, public utilities and
other facilities.
   (B)   The regulations contained herein divide the town into zoning districts
and regulate therein the use of the land, buildings and structures, the size of
buildings as to height and number of stories, the coverage of the land by
buildings, the size of yards and open spaces, the location of buildings and the
density of population, within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-603)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.004  SCOPE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, no land shall be used for any purpose
other than one that is allowed by the provisions of this zoning ordinance.
   (B)   No building, structure or improvement shall be made, erected,
constructed, moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt, or arranged in any manner
except as allowed by this zoning ordinance.
   (C)   Buildings, structures and land may be used and occupied only in
compliance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance.
   (D)   All lots created or modified must comply with all applicable
provisions of this zoning ordinance.
   (E)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to telephone
exchange buildings.
(Prior Code, § 13-604)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.005  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Conflict with state or federal regulations. If the provisions of this
zoning ordinance are inconsistent with state or federal law, the more
restrictive provision governs to the extent allowed by law. The more
restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls.
   (B)   Conflict with other city regulations. If the provision of this zoning
ordinance is inconsistent with one another or if they conflict with the
provisions found in other adopted ordinance or regulations of the city, the
more restrictive provision governs unless otherwise expressly stated. The more
restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls.
   (C)   Conflict with private agreements and covenants. This zoning ordinance
does not interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed
restriction or other agreement between private parties. If the provisions of
this zoning ordinance impose a greater restriction than imposed by an agreement
or covenant among private parties, the provisions of this zoning ordinance
govern. The city is not responsible for monitoring or enforcing agreements or
covenants among private parties.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.006  RULES OF LANGUAGE AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Meanings and intent. The language of the zoning ordinance must be read
literally. Regulations are no more or less strict than stated. Words and terms
expressly defined in Chapter 159 or other sections of this ordinance have the
specific meanings assigned, unless the context expressly indicates another
meaning. Words that are not expressly defined in this ordinance have the
meaning given in the latest edition of Merriam-Webster’s Unabridged Dictionary.
   (B)   Computation of time.
      (1)   References to "days" are to calendar days unless otherwise
expressly stated. Reference to "business days" are references to “regular
working days” of the City of Bethany, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays
observed by the City of Bethany.
      (2)   The time in which an act is to be completed is computed by
excluding the first day and including the last "day". If the last "day" is a
Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the city, that "day" is excluded.
      (3)   A "day" concludes at the close of business (5:00 p.m.), and any
materials received after that time will be considered to be have been received
the following "day".
   (C)   Tenses and usage.
      (1)   Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also
true.
      (2)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The
reverse is also true.
      (3)   The words "must," "will," "shall" and "may not" are mandatory.
      (4)   The word "may" is permissive, not mandatory or required.
      (5)   When used with numbers, "up to x," "not more than x" and "a maximum
of x" all include "x."
      (6)   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, Limited Liability Company, trust, or corporation, as well as an
individual.
      (7)   The words "used" and "occupied" include "intended, designed or
arranged to be used or occupied."
   (D)   Conjunctions. Unless the context otherwise clearly indicates,
conjunctions have the following meanings:
      (1)   "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply; and
      (2)   "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
singularly or in combination.
   (E)   Headings and illustrations. Headings and illustrations are provided
for convenience and reference only and do not define or limit the scope of any
provision of this zoning ordinance. In case of any difference of meaning or
implication between the text of this zoning ordinance and any heading, drawing,
table, figure, or illustration, the text controls.
   (F)   Versions and citations. All references in this zoning ordinance to
other city, county, state, or federal regulations are to be construed as
referring to the most up-to-date version and citation for those regulations,
unless otherwise expressly indicated. When the referenced regulations have been
repealed and not replaced by other regulations, zoning ordinance requirements
for compliance are no longer in effect.
   (G)   Lists and examples. Unless otherwise expressly indicated, lists of
items or examples that use "including," "such as," or similar terms are
intended to provide examples only. They are not to be construed as exhaustive
lists of all possibilities.
   (H)   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or another officer or employee of the city to perform an
act or duty, that provision will be construed as authorizing the department
head or officer to delegate that responsibility to others over whom they have
authority. Delegation of authority is not allowed when the provisions of this
zoning ordinance expressly prohibit such a delegation.
   (I)   Public officials and agencies.
      (1)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, all employees, public officials,
bodies and agencies to which references are made are those of the City of
Bethany or individuals or agencies legally authorized to act on behalf of the
City of Bethany.
      (2)   References in this zoning ordinance to the "city" are references to
the City of Bethany.
      (3)   References in this zoning ordinance to the "city council" are
references to the City of Bethany City Council.
      (4)   References in this zoning ordinance to the "planning commission"
are references to the City of Bethany Planning Commission.
      (5)   References in this zoning ordinance to the "board of adjustment"
are references to the City of Bethany Board of Adjustment.
      (6)   References in this zoning ordinance to the "zoning administrator"
are references to the zoning administrator of the City of Bethany.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.007  ZONING MAP.
   (A)   Establishment. The location and boundaries of the zoning districts
defined in this zoning ordinance must be established by ordinance and shown on
the city's official zoning map, which shall be entitled "Zoning Map of the City
of Bethany" and which shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and
maintained under the direction of the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Maintenance and updates. The Zoning Administrator is responsible for
directing revisions to the official zoning map to reflect its amendment as soon
as possible after the effective date of zoning map amendments (rezoning).
   (C)   District boundaries. Zoning district boundary lines must be described
by legal description or by a map that accompanies the ordinance establishing
the district or amending the district boundaries. When a legal description is
used, the zoning district boundary is deemed to extend to the centerline of
abutting streets. When a map is used, district boundary lines must be
established by dimensions, property lines, recorded lot lines, or the
centerline of abutting streets, alleys, or railroad rights-of-way, as those
features were of record at the time of adoption.
   (D)   Map interpretations. Where any uncertainty exists about a zoning
boundary that was established by legal description, the legal description
accompanying the amending ordinance governs. In other cases, the zoning
administrator is authorized to make an interpretation in accordance with the
procedures of Title I, §
10.02. The following rules apply to all map interpretations:
      (1)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following the
shoreline or centerline of a river, stream, lake, or other watercourse will be
construed as following the actual shoreline or centerline of the watercourse.
If, subsequent to the establishment of the boundary, the shoreline or
centerline of the watercourse should move as a result of natural processes
(flooding, erosion, sedimentation, etc.), the boundary will be construed as
moving with the shoreline or centerline of the watercourse.
      (2)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following a
ridge line or topographic contour line will be construed as following the
actual ridge line or contour line. If, subsequent to the establishment of the
boundary, the ridge line or contour line should move as a result of natural
processes (erosion, slippage, subsidence, etc.), the boundary will be construed
as moving with the ridge line or contour line.
      (3)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following lot
lines or other lot boundaries will be construed as following such lot lines or
lot boundaries.
      (4)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following a
street or railroad right-of-way line will be construed as following the
centerline of the street or railroad right-of-way.
      (5)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following the
boundary of an adjacent municipality will be construed as following that
boundary.
      (6)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately parallel to, or
as an apparent extension of, a feature described above will be construed as
being parallel to, or an extension of, the feature.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.008  TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this section address the transition from the previous
zoning ordinance (the one in effect before the effective date specified in §
158.001(D).
   (A)   Applications, permits, approvals.
      (1)   Any building, development or structure for which a building permit
was issued or a complete building permit application had been accepted for
processing before the effective date specified in §
158.001(D) may be completed in conformance with the issued building permit and
other applicable permits and conditions, even if such building, development or
structure does not comply with provisions of this zoning ordinance. If the
building, development or structure is not commenced and completed within the
time allowed under the original building permit and any authorized permit
extension, the building, development or structure may be constructed, completed
and occupied only if it complies with the regulations of this zoning ordinance.
      (2)   Completed applications for PUDs, development plans, special
exceptions, variance or other zoning-related approvals that are pending
approval on the effective date specified in §
158.001(D) must be reviewed wholly under the terms of the zoning ordinance in
effect immediately preceding the effective date specified in §
158.001(D). Building permits for construction and development approved under
such zoning approvals may be issued in accordance with §
158.008(A)(3).
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to issue building permits
for construction or development approved before the effective date specified in
§
158.001(D) and for developments pending approval under §
158.008(A)(2), even if such building development or structure does not fully
comply with provisions of this zoning ordinance. If building is not commenced
and completed within the time allowed under the building permit and any
authorized permit extension, then the building, development or structure may be
constructed, completed and occupied only if it complies with the regulations of
this zoning ordinance.
      (4)   When a use classified as a special exception under this zoning
ordinance exists as an approved special exception or permitted use on the
effective date specified in §
158.001(D) that use will be considered a lawfully established special exception
under this zoning ordinance. When any amendment to this zoning ordinance
changes the classification of a permitted use to a special exception, any use
lawfully established before such amendment will be considered a lawfully
established special exception after the effective date of the amendment. A
lawfully established existing use that is not allowed as a special exception or
permitted use in the district in which the use is now located will be
considered a nonconforming use and will be subject to the applicable
regulations of §
158.042 regarding nonconforming structures and uses.
   (B)   Zoning district name conversions. The zoning district names in effect
before the effective date specified in §
158.001(D) are converted in this zoning ordinance as follows:
 
Map Symbol Previous Zoning District Name Map Symbol New Zoning District Name
   Residential Zoning Districts
A   Agriculture                      A   Moved to Special Districts
Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
   No change                            
Special Districts
A   Agriculture                      A   Agriculture
PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay PUD Moved to Overlay Districts
MUD Mixed Use District               MUD New special district
PUB Public Use                       PUB New special district
Overlay Districts
PUD Planned Unit Development         PUD New overlay district
 
   (C)   Violations. The adoption of this zoning ordinance does not affect any
pending or future prosecution of, or action to abate, violations of the
previous zoning ordinance that occurred before the effective date specified in
§
158.001(D).
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.009  SEVERABILITY.
   If any portion of this zoning ordinance are held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the portion is to be
deemed severed from the zoning ordinance and in no way affects or diminishes
the validity of the reminder of the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.010  ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The city is hereby divided into zoning districts as are defined in the
zoning ordinance, shown on the Official Zoning Map and listed in Table 158.010-
1. The zoning districts shall be designated as follows and may be referred to
by full name or by symbol only.
 
Table 158.010 - 1
ZONING DISTRICTS
Symbol Name of District
Residential Zoning Districts
R-1 Residential One-family
R-2 Residential Two-family
R-M Residential Multiple family
MHP Mobile/Manufactured Home Park
PRD Planned Residential Development
   Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
C-O Commercial Office
C-R Commercial Restricted
C-G Commercial General
C-H Commercial Highway
CBD Central Business
I-L Industrial Light
I-H Industrial Heavy
   Special Districts
A   Agricultural
E-1 Educational/Institutional
MUD Mixed Unit Development
PUB Public Use
   Overlay Districts
PUD Planned Unit Development
 
(Prior Code, § 13-610)  (Am. Ord. 1421, passed 4-19-88; Am. Ord. 1225, passed
9-21-82; Am. Ord. 1810, passed 11-18-08; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 158.020  RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all use of
land, development or structures in residential districts shall conform to the
requirements set forth below.
   (B)   Residential districts' regulations are set forth in the appendices of
this chapter.
   (C)   All properties zoned R-MO, residential multiple unit ownership, on or
before November 1, 1985, may continue to be occupied and governed by the
permitted uses and area regulations in that district as of the date, but
thereafter, no property shall be rezoned to R-MO.
   (D)   All properties zoned PRD, planned residential development on or before
August 8, 1994, may continue to be occupied and governed by the permitted uses,
area regulations and stipulations specified on the date of their approval.
(Prior Code, § 13-612)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.020.01 PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES.
   Please refer to Appendix D for permitted uses and special exceptions allowed
within residential districts.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.020.02  BULK AND YARD STANDARDS.
   (A)   Table 158.020(A): Residential District Bulk and Yard Regulations
establish bulk and yard regulations for the residential zoning districts. These
regulations apply to all uses within that district unless a different standard
is listed for a specific use.
      (1)   MHP District Bulk and Yard Regulations are set forth in Chapter
152 of this code of ordinances.
Table 158:020(A): Residential District Bulk and Yard Regulations
 
BULK AND YARD R-1 R-2 R-M
Lot Dimensions                                             
Lot Width (minimum) 60 feet             60 feet             70 feet
Corner Lot Width    70 feet             70 feet             70 feet
(minimum)
Lot Area (minimum)  6,000 square feet   9,000 square feet   10,000 square feet
                                                            3,630 square feet;
Lot Area (minimum)                                          1,500 square feet
per dwelling unit   6,000 square feet   4,500 square feet   of usable open
                                                            space on the parcel
                                                            per dwelling unit
Lot Depth (minimum) 100 feet            100 feet            100 feet
Front (minimum)     25 feet             25 feet             25 feet
feet
Side - Interior     10 feet one side, 5 10 feet one side, 5 25 feet
Lots (minimum) feet feet on the other   feet on the other
Side - Street Lots  15 feet back to     15 feet back to     25 feet
(minimum) feet      back                back
Side - Corner Lots  25 feet on other    25 feet on other    25 feet
(minimum) feet      lots                lots
Rear (minimum) feet 20 feet             20 feet             25 feet
Intensity           R-1                 R-2                 R-M
Lot Coverage        NA                  30%                 30%
(maximum)
Height (maximum)    35 feet or 2-1/     35 feet or 2-1/     35 feet or 2-1/
feet                2 stories           2 stories           2 stories
Intensity of Use    1 dwelling per lot  1 dwelling per lot  12 dwelling units
(maximum)                                                   per acre
 
Notes:
1.   Lot width measured at required front yard setback.
2.   Setbacks are measured from the outside edge of the public right-of-way.
3.   If 50% or more of the lots on one side of a street between two
intersecting streets are improved with buildings which have observed an average
setback line greater or less than 25 feet and no building varies more than five
feet from this average setback line, then said building may be erected at the
setback so established by the existing buildings.
4.   Lot coverage measured as combined total area covered by main and accessory
buildings.
   (B)   Residential district design standards. Development within the
residential districts shall comply with the following design standards.
      (1)   All residential buildings shall comply with the Building Code(s)
adopted by the City of Bethany.
      (2)   Structures shall face a public or private street. If the structure
is located on a corner lot, the structure should face and be addressed from the
street which the front yard abuts, as shown on the approved plat of the
addition the structure is located.
      (3)   The following provisions shall apply in residential districts:
         (a)   When a lot has double frontage, the front setbacks shall apply
on both streets.
         (b)   Whenever a front setback line in any block is delineated on the
subdivision map or plat thereof, as approved by the Planning Commission and
City Council and recorded in the office of the County Clerk, then the setback
shown on the map or plat shall govern. In no case shall this division apply to
a lot which abuts a major thoroughfare as designated on the comprehensive plan.
         (c)   For each story more than one, there shall be an additional five-
foot setback from interior lot lines in R-1 and R-2 districts.
         (d)   Detached accessory buildings 240 square feet in size or less may
be located in the rear setback, but shall not be located in, on or over any
public easement. All other accessory buildings shall comply with all applicable
setback requirements applicable to primary buildings.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.021  COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all use of
land, development or structures in commercial districts shall conform to the
requirements set forth in division (B) below.
   (B)   Uses are permitted only as shown in Appendix D to this chapter.
   (C)   Plant nurseries and other outdoor displays of plants and landscape
materials; provided any outdoor display of plants or landscape materials shall
be on the same lot as the primary building of the business, and only on a lot
containing a building meeting the requirements of this code and applicable
building codes.
   (D)   All properties zoned C-N, commercial neighborhood, or C-S, commercial
shopping center, on November 1, 1985, may continue to be occupied and governed
by the permitted uses and area regulations in those districts as of the date,
but thereafter, no property shall be rezoned to C-N or C-S.
(Prior Code, § 13-616)  (Am. Ord. 1609, passed 3-16-99; Am. Ord. 1678, passed
9-3-02; Am. Ord. 1687, passed 11-5-02; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.021.01  PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES.
   Please refer to
Appendix A for permitted uses and special exceptions allowed within commercial
districts.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.021.02  BULK AND YARD STANDARDS.
   Table 158.021(A): Commercial District Bulk and Yard Regulations establish
bulk and yard regulations for the residential zoning districts. These
regulations apply to all uses within that district unless a different standard
is listed for a specific use.
Table 158.021(A): Commercial District Bulk and Yard Standards
 
   BULK AND YAC-O C-R C-G C-H CBD
Lot Dimensions
Lot Width                                            100 feet fronting
(minimum)          None              None    None    N.W. 39th          Non
                                                     Expressway
Corner Lot Width                                     100 feet fronting
(minimum)          None              None    None    N.W. 39th          None
                                                     Expressway
Lot Area (minimum) 7,500 square feet None    None    15,000 square feet None
Lot Area (minimum) 75 feet at the
per dwelling unit  front of the      None    None                       None
                   property line
Lot Depth          None              None    None    None               None
(minimum)
   Setbacks     C-O               C-R     C-G     C-H                CBD
Front (minimum)    25 feet           25 feet 25 feet 25 feet            None
feet
Side - Interior    25 feet abutting                  25 feet abutting
Lots (minimum)     residential       None    None    residential        None
feet               districts                         districts
Side - Street Lots 10 feet           25 feet 25 feet 10 feet            None
(minimum) feet
Side - Corner Lots 25 feet           25 feet 25 feet 25 feet            None
(minimum) feet
Rear (minimum)     30 feet           25 feet 20 feet 20 feet            15 feet
feet
   Intensity    C-O               C-R     C-G     C-H                CBD
Lot Coverage       35%               35%     35%     30%                None
(maximum)
Height (maximum)   35 feet           90 feet 90 feet 90 feet            90 feet
feet
 
Notes:
1.   Lot width measured at required front yard setback.
2.   Setbacks are measured from the outside edge of the public right-of-way.
3.   If fifty (50) percent or more of the lots on one side of a street between
two intersecting streets are improved with buildings which have observed an
average setback line greater or less than 25 feet and no building varies more
than five feet from this average setback line, then said building may be
erected at the setback so established by the existing buildings.
4.   Lot coverage measured as combined total area covered by main and accessory
buildings.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.021.03  COMMERCIAL DISTRICT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Development within the commercial districts shall comply with the following
design standards.
   (A)   All commercial buildings shall comply with the Building Code(s)
adopted by the City of Bethany.
   (B)   Structures shall face a public or private street. If the structure is
located on a corner lot, the structure should face and be addressed from the
street which the front yard abuts, as shown on the approved plat of the
addition the structure is located.
   (C)   Building materials.
      (1)   Exterior finishes of buildings or structures facing a street shall
be constructed and maintained using wood clapboards or equivalent, brick,
metal, vinyl or stone, or a combination of wood, brick, metal, vinyl and stone.
      (2)   Exterior accents of buildings or structures facing street shall
consist of stucco, Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EIFS), wood
clapboards or equivalent, brick, metal, vinyl or stone.
      (3)   Vinyl siding and metal siding shall not be permitted for use as
exterior siding for primary or accessory buildings on facades which face a
street. Maintenance and replacement of existing siding is permitted.
   (D)   The following provisions shall apply in commercial districts:
      (1)   Where any access to a commercial building in a C-R, C-G or C-
H district is from the rear, or where a commercial building in those districts
exceeds one story in height, a rear setback of 30 feet shall be provided. In
such a case, and with respect to the rear setbacks required in a C-O or CBD
district, the rear yard setback may include an alley or service court.
      (2)   In a C-R or C-G district, where an interior side yard abuts a
residential district, a setback of ten feet shall be required for one story
buildings plus an additional five feet for each additional story or portion
thereof.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.022  INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all use of
land, development or structures in industrial districts shall conform to the
requirements set forth herein.
   (B)   Properties zoned I-R and I-L prior to November 2, 1985, are hereby
reclassified to I-L and I-H respectively, after the date.
(Prior Code, § 13-617)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.022.01  PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES.
   Please refer to Appendix A for permitted uses and special exceptions allowed
within industrial districts.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.022.02  BULK AND YARD STANDARDS.
   Table 158.022(A): Industrial District Bulk and Yard Regulations establish
bulk and yard regulations for the residential zoning districts. These
regulations apply to all uses within that district unless a different standard
is listed for a specific use.
Table 158.022(A): Industrial District Bulk and Yard Standards
 
BULK AND YARD I-L I-H
Lot Dimensions                                       
Lot Width (minimum)        None                      None
Corner Lot Width (minimum) None                      None
Lot Area (minimum)         None                      None
Lot Area (minimum) per     None                      None
dwelling unit
Lot Depth (minimum)        None                      None
Setbacks                   I-L                       I-H
Front (minimum) feet       25 feet                   25 feet
Side - Interior Lots       None                      None
(minimum) feet
Side - Street Lots         25 feet                   None
(minimum) feet
Side - Corner Lots         25 feet                   None
(minimum) feet
Rear (minimum) feet        15 feet                   15 feet
Intensity                  I-L                       I-H
Lot Coverage (maximum)     None                      None
Height (maximum) feet      35 feet or 2- 1/2 stories 35 feet or 2- 1/2 stories
 
Notes:
1.   Lot width measured at required front yard setback.
2.   Setbacks are measured from the outside edge of the public right-of-way.
3.   If 50% or more of the lots on one side of a street between two
intersecting streets are improved with buildings which have observed an average
setback line greater or less than 25 feet and no building varies more than five
feet from this average setback line, then said building may be erected at the
setback so established by the existing buildings.
4.   Lot coverage measured as combined total area covered by main and accessory
buildings.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.022.03  INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Development within the industrial districts shall comply with the following
design standards.
   (A)   All industrial buildings shall comply with the Building Code(s)
adopted by the City of Bethany.
   (B)   Structures shall face a public or private street. If the structure is
located on a corner lot, the structure should face and be addressed from the
street which the front yard abuts, as shown on the approved plat of the
addition the structure is located.
   (C)   Building materials.
      (1)   Exterior finishes of buildings or structures facing a street shall
be constructed and maintained using wood clapboards or equivalent, brick,
metal, vinyl or stone, or a combination of wood, brick, metal, vinyl and stone.
      (2)   Exterior accents of buildings or structures facing street shall
consist of stucco, Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EIFS), wood
clapboards or equivalent, brick, metal, vinyl or stone.
      (3)   Vinyl siding and metal siding shall not be permitted for use as
exterior siding for primary or accessory buildings on facades which face a
street for which the structure is addressed. Maintenance and replacement of
existing siding is permitted.
   (D)   The following provision shall apply in industrial districts. Whenever
either a rear or interior side yard abuts a residential district, then the
setback shall be no less than 25 feet.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.023  SPECIAL DISTRICTS.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all use of land,
development or structures in special districts shall conform to the
requirements set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 13-618)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.023.01  PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES.
   Please refer to Appendix A for permitted uses and special exceptions allowed
within special districts.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.023.02  BULK AND YARD STANDARDS.
   Table 158.023(A): Special District Bulk and Yard Regulations establish bulk
and yard regulations for the residential zoning districts. These regulations
apply to all uses within that district unless a different standard is listed
for a specific use.
Table 158.023(A): Special District Bulk and Yard Standards
 
BULK AND YARD A E-1 MUD PUB
Lot Dimensions
Lot Width (minimum)    100 feet           None    None                     None
Corner Lot Width       100 feet           None    None                     None
(minimum)
Lot Area (minimum)     5 acres            None    None                     None
                                                  3,630 square feet; 1,500
Lot Area (minimum) per 5 acres            None    square feet of usable    None
dwelling unit                                     open space on the parcel
                                                  per dwelling unit
Lot Depth (minimum)    125 feet           None    None                     None
Setbacks               A                  E-1     MUD                      PUB
Front (minimum) feet   50 feet            25 feet None                     None
Side - Interior Lots   25 feet            15 feet None                     None
(minimum) feet
Side - Street Lots     50 feet            25 feet None                     None
(minimum) feet
Side - Corner Lots     50 feet            25 feet None                     None
(minimum) feet
Rear (minimum) feet    50 feet            15 feet 25 feet                  None
Intensity              A                  E-1     MUD                      PUB
Lot Coverage (maximum) 20%                None    None                     None
Height (maximum) feet  35 feet or 2-1/    None    90 feet                  None
                       2 stories
Intensity of Use       1 dwelling per lot None    12 dwelling units per    None
(maximum)                                         acre
 
Notes:
1.   Lot width measured at required front yard setback.
2.   Setbacks are measured from the outside edge of the public right-of-way.
3.   If 50% or more of the lots on one side of a street between two
intersecting streets are improved with buildings which have observed an average
setback line greater or less than 25 feet and no building varies more than five
feet from this average setback line, then said building may be erected at the
setback so established by the existing buildings.
4.   Lot coverage measured as combined total area covered by main and accessory
buildings.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.023.03  SPECIAL DISTRICT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Development within the special districts shall comply with the following
design standards.
   (A)   All residential and nonresidential buildings shall comply with the
Building Code(s) adopted by the City of Bethany.
   (B)   Structures shall face a public or private street. If the structure is
located on a corner lot, the structure should face and be addressed from the
street which the front yard abuts, as shown on the approved plat of the
addition the structure is located.
   (C)   Building materials.
      (1)   Exterior finishes of buildings or structures facing a street shall
be constructed and maintained using wood clapboards or equivalent, brick,
metal, vinyl or stone, or a combination of wood, brick, metal, vinyl and stone.
      (2)   Exterior accents of buildings or structures facing street shall
consist of stucco, Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EIFS), wood
clapboards or equivalent, brick, metal, vinyl or stone.
      (3)   Vinyl siding and metal siding shall not be permitted for use as
exterior siding for primary or accessory buildings on facades which face a
street. Maintenance and replacement of existing siding is permitted.
      (4)   The following provisions shall apply in E-1 district:
         (a)   In the E-1 district, buildings and facilities shall be arranged
in a manner appropriate to the function of each use, and appropriate for fire
protection and convenient circulation for pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
         (b)   The front, side and rear setbacks for buildings located in the
E-1 district may be reduced to no less than ten feet on any side where the
property abuts or is separated only by a street or alley from property zoned or
used for E-1. The reduced setbacks shall not be permitted for that side or
portion of the E-1 property which abuts an expressway or major thoroughfare.
         (c)   When a building in an E-1 district exceeds one story in height
and is located on property which abuts property zoned or used for residential,
the rear and interior side setbacks shall be no less than 20 feet, plus an
additional five feet for each story, or portion thereof, which exceeds two
stories or 35 feet in height.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.023.04  MIXED-USE DISTRICT (MUD).
   (A)   The intent of the Mixed-Use District (MUD) is to create opportunities
to increase development intensity within targeted area. Shifting from more
traditional neighborhoods toward a mix of commercial and residential uses,
Mixed-Use Districts define the uses of land and character of the improvements
to promote compatibility between residential and nonresidential uses. These
districts also are intended to encourage redevelopment of underutilized parcels
and infill development. The mixed-use districts specifically are intended to:
      (1)   Concentrate higher-density residential development, commercial and
office employment efficiently in and around the major interchanges, employment
centers, and other designated centers of activity;
      (2)   Encourage mixed-use in a broad sense by promoting urban, suburban
and village development that blends a combination of residential, commercial,
cultural, institutional or industrial uses whose functions are physically
integrated and provide both vehicular and pedestrian connectivity;
      (3)   Introduce new housing types geared to attract what Chapter 4 of the
City of Bethany Comprehensive Plan refers to as the "missing middle"
households;
      (4)   Expand commercial space capacity; and
      (5)   Ensure that development in mixed-use areas is of high quality and
provides walkable, livable, vibrant environments, which provide interest
through use of varied forms, materials, details, and colors, especially at the
ground floor and second story.
   (B)   Performance standards. Development shall conform to the standards
established in this code.
      (1)   Refer to any applicable overlay zone district and/or corridor
design standards and guidelines.
      (2)   Loading/service areas. Loading docks and trash or other service
areas shall be located only in the side or rear yards.
      (3)   Vibration, smoke, odor, noise, glare, wastes, fire hazards and
hazardous materials. No person shall occupy, maintain or allow any use in a MUD
development without continuously meeting the following minimum standards
regarding vibration, smoke, odor, noise, glare, wastes, fire hazards and
hazardous materials. Conditional use permits for uses in this district may
establish higher standards and conditions.
   (C)   Vibration. Except during construction or as authorized by the city, an
activity or operation which causes any perceptible vibration of the earth to an
ordinary person on any other lot or parcel shall not be permitted.
   (D)   Noise. The owner and occupant shall regulate uses and activities on
the property so that sound never exceeds 65 decibels at any point on the
property line.
   (E)   Glare. Lights, spotlights, high temperature processes or otherwise,
whether direct or reflected, shall not be visible from any lot, parcel or
right-of-way.
   (F)   Solid and liquid waste. All solid waste, debris and garbage shall be
contained within a closed and screened dumpster, refuse bin and/or trash
compactor. Incineration of trash or garbage is prohibited. No sewage or liquid
wastes shall be discharged or spilled on the property.
   (G)   Hazardous materials. Information and materials to be used or located
on the site whether on a full-time or part-time basis. Information regarding
the activity or at the time of any change of use or expansion, even for
existing uses, shall be provided to the Director.
      (1)   Outdoor storage and display. Outdoor storage shall only be located
in the rear half of the lot. Permanent display areas may be located beside or
behind the principal structure. For lots with double or triple frontage the
side and rear yards that are to be used for permanent display areas shall be
established with site plan approval. Portable display of retail merchandise may
be permitted.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.024  OVERLAY DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all use of
land, development or structures in special districts shall conform to the
requirements set forth herein.
   (B)   Planned Unit Development Overlay District (PUD).
      (1)   The intent of the Planned Unit Development Overlay District (PUD)
is to encourage developments with a superior built environment that permit
greater flexibility and consequently more creative and imaginative design than
generally is possible under conventional zoning regulations. It is hereby
intended to permit, upon application and upon approval of site and use plans,
the creation of Planned Unit Development Overlay Districts (PUD). Such a
designation shall be determined by, and shall be designed to provide for a mix
of uses, to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers, to promote
health and the general welfare, to provide adequate light and air, to preserve
features of historical significance, to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements,
and with a reasonable consideration being given, among other things, to the
character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses and
with a view to conserving the land throughout the city. In PUD District, the
regulations which are adopted are intended to accomplish the same purposes as
do zoning and other applicable regulations in districts which are developed on
a lot by lot rather than a unified basis.
      (2)   Application of Planned Unit Development Overlay District
provisions. A PUD Overlay District may be proposed for the Central Business
District in the city if (1) more than one land use is proposed on a single
land; (2) different land uses that would not otherwise be permitted to locate
within the same zoning district are proposed for development on one or more
adjacent parcels under single or separate ownership; or (3) an exception or
variance from the size, setback, frontage, density, uses or other standards
that are required in other zoning districts permitting the same uses are being
proposed as part of a development plan. No PUD District shall be considered
without submission of a development plan. A site proposed for a PUD District
classification shall contain a contiguous area of five acres or more, unless a
smaller area is specifically approved by the Governing Body due to special and
unusual circumstances. Property shall be deemed to be contiguous if all parts
are under unified control, to ensure that the development plan can be executed
as approved, and all parts abut or are separated by only a road, easement, or
right-of-way.
      (3)   Effect of Planned Unit Development District approval. Approval of a
PUD District shall constitute an amendment to the zoning ordinance. Designation
of a property as a Planned Unit Development District (PUD) in accordance with
an approved development plan shall supersede all existing and prior zoning
classifications. A planned district approved by the City Council by ordinance
shall be designated on the zoning map by the letter's PUD.
      (4)   Standards. All PUD Districts shall at a minimum satisfy the
following standards and requirements:
         (a)   Uses permitted. The Development Plan shall specify, both for the
project as a whole and/or for subareas within the project, as appropriate,
those principal and accessory uses as are to be permitted. The City Council may
include or exclude uses from the Development Plan or include uses with attached
conditions as appropriate to achieve the intent of these provisions. In making
its determinations of the uses to be permitted within the PUD District, the
City Council may consider the compatibility and relationship of uses within the
project, the compatibility and relationship of permitted uses adjoining or in
proximity to the PUD District, the appropriateness of permitted uses for the
area in general and their overall impact on the community and the consistency
of the permitted uses with other adopted plans and policies.
         (b)   Residential. A PUD District may allow for a more flexible
placement, arrangement and orientation of residential structures, with
accompanying flexibility in the subdivision of land and the grouping of open
space and accessory facilities such as garages and parking. A PUD District also
may provide for a mixture of housing types (single family, two family, multi-
family, etc.) according to a carefully drawn plan. The proposed residential
development shall make maximum use of natural features, and, through proper
site planning measures, it shall be compatible with the existing character and
development pattern of the surrounding area. In a PUD District proposing more
than 75 individual residential dwelling units, no more than 12% of such units
should be two-family or multi-family units.
         (c)   Office. A PUD District may contain orderly, well-designed office
and institutional uses compatible with the surrounding area.
         (d)   Commercial. A PUD District may provide for maximum attainable
commercial usage of property while ensuring development consistent with the
City Council's long-range plans.
         (e)   Conditional uses. Approval of a use requiring a "special use
permit" shall be considered as an amendment to the PUD District. In considering
a "special use permit," in addition to the Zoning Ordinance's applicable
section on conditional uses, all rezoning considerations for a PUD District
shall be applicable.
         (f)   Intensity of development. The Development Plan shall contain
provisions to regulate the intensity of development within the PUD District.
Such provisions may apply to the project as a whole or to subareas within the
project as appropriate.
         (g)   For non-residential development, the intensity of development
may be regulated;
            1.   By specifying an appropriate Floor Area Ratio(s) (FAR);
            2.   By specifying maximum square footage or gross leasable area;
            3.   By specifying setbacks, height and bulk restrictions; or
            4.   By a combination of such restrictions for the project as a
whole or for components or subareas within the project. In addition, non-
residential Development Plans may specify performance standards to be imposed
on the project and restrictions regarding the location and nature of
industrial, commercial, and other residential activities. The City Council may
impose such standards and restrictions as necessary to achieve the intent of
this section. In making its determination regarding the intensity of
development and appropriate performance standards, the City Council may
consider character and scale of similar developments, the character and scale
of surrounding development and the area in general, the real or anticipated
impact on public facilities and services, and consistency with other plans and
policies.
            5.   For residential development, the Preliminary and Final
Development Plans shall specify the residential density for the project as a
whole or for subareas within the project as appropriate. In making its
determination regarding whether the proposed residential density is
appropriate, the City Council may consider (i) compatibility of residential
densities with other uses within the district as well as outside the district,
(ii) the impact of residential densities on public facilities and services,
(iii) the consistency with the Comprehensive Plan and other adopted plans and
polices, and (iv) the comparison of allowed density under the residential
zoning districts.
            6.   Bulk, area and height requirement. The Development Plan shall
specify bulk, area and height restrictions for the project as a whole and for
subareas and/or components of the project as appropriate. The City Council may
impose alternate or additional standards or restrictions to achieve the intent
of this section. In making its determination regarding such standards or
restrictions, the City Council may consider the character and scale of the
proposed development as it relates to other uses and structures both within the
district and outside the district, the general character and scale of similar
developments within the area of the proposal, and the consistency with adopted
plans and policies. The Development Plan shall contain a summary of how the
proposed bulk, area and height requirements differ from those set forth within
the regulations of the underlying district(s).
            7.   Public facilities. The Development Plan shall specify
conditions, restrictions and standards relating to the timely provisions of
necessary public facilities as appropriate. The City Council may impose
conditions, restrictions and standards as appropriate to achieve the intent of
this Section. In making its determination regarding such conditions,
restrictions and standards, the City Council may consider the adequacy of
existing public facilities and services, the timely provision of adequate
public facilities and services and the overall cost to the community.
            8.   Access to public thoroughfares. The Development Plan shall
specify the location and general design of ingress and egress to the project
along with access restrictions as appropriate. The City Council may impose such
access standards and restrictions as necessary to protect the integrity and
function of the City's thoroughfare system and to otherwise achieve the intent
of this section. In making its determination regarding such access standards
and restrictions, the City Council may consider the classification and function
of the thoroughfare system, existing and projected traffic volumes, the
condition and design of the affected thoroughfares, the effect of the proposed
development on traffic flow and circulation patterns on other adopted plans and
policies.
            9.   Off-street parking and loading requirements. Unless
specifically modified by the Development Plan, the off-street parking and
loading requirements contained within these regulations shall apply. Reductions
in off-street parking and loading standards shall be approved only if it can be
demonstrated that parking demand will be less due to density and/or occupancy
characteristics of the project and/or the availability of public
transportation.
            10.   Signs. Unless specifically modified by the Development Plan,
the sign regulations contained within these regulations shall apply.
Modifications to the sign regulations shall be approved only if the general
intent to the sign regulations regarding size, location, illumination,
structural integrity and relation to surrounding uses is satisfied.
            11.   Perimeter treatment. The Development Plan shall specify any
special treatment of perimeter areas designed to mitigate the impact of the
project upon adjoining properties and/or to achieve an appropriate transition
between land uses and densities. The City Council may impose those standards
and requirements for perimeter treatment it deems necessary to protect
adjoining properties from adverse effects and to achieve an appropriate
transition of land uses and densities.
      (5)   Procedure. Applications for PUD District Designation shall be
processed pursuant to a three-step review process as specified in this section.
The three-step procedure shall include:
         (a)   A suggested pre-application conference;
         (b)   A preliminary development plan; and
         (c)   A final development plan.
            1.   Preliminary development plan. An applicant may submit a
Preliminary Development Plan, which shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
            2.   A legal description of the site proposed for PUD designation,
including a statement regarding present ownership and present zoning. The legal
description must contain the original signature and seal of an Oklahoma
registered surveyor.
            3.   A Master Conceptual Plan that indicates parcel, tract or lot
locations and dimensions; density per gross and per net acres in the
development and in each land use component, if appropriate; the intensity of
land use in the development and each land use component, if appropriate; the
amount of land in common area open space, recreation use or public use, if
appropriate; and the treatment of project boundaries.
            4.   Written text which includes supporting graphics describing the
overall concept of the plan; the uses included and any limitations upon uses;
building types and prototypical site layouts, if appropriate; provisions for
maintenance of common areas; any proposed agreements, dedications or easements;
any proposed private covenants and restrictions; and any other information
required by this section or pertinent to a determination of compliance with the
section.
            5.   A Circulation Plan that indicates roads adjoining the
property; the location of access from public roads into the project; and
vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems within the project. The
Circulation Plan may be included as part of the Master Conceptual Plan.
            6.   An Improvement Plan that indicates water supply and
distribution facilities as well as the source of the water supply; sewage
collection and disposal including method and location of sewage discharge;
methods and facilities for the management of storm water runoff; improvements
to streets and roads; and any other physical improvements required to support
the project.
            7.   A Statistical Summary that indicates the number of acres in
the project; the number of acres allocated to each land use within the project;
the gross and net residential density within the project and within each land
use component of the project; and floor area, floor area ratios, open space
ratios, and other data relating the intensity of development to the site size
and location.
            8.   An Environmental Impact Statement indicating possible problem
areas within the site as well as solutions to these problems as intended by the
developer.
            9.   To the extent that phases are applicable, phases of
development must be shown on the preliminary development plan. If the
development will occur in phases, the applicant shall submit a development plan
that also displays the entire development at the completion of all phases. The
phased development shall have the phases clearly outlined with expected dates
for beginning of construction and date of completion of construction. No
building permit shall be issued for any phase of development until a final
development plan for that phase is approved by the City Council.
            10.   The following elements are optional at the request of the
Planning Commission:
               A.   A Sign Plan which indicates the location, size and design
and other pertinent provisions relating to signs within the project.
               B.   A Parking Plan which shows the number of parking spaces as
well as their general location and design.
               C.   Any other plan element or technical study that the Planning
Commission or the City Council deems necessary to adequately consider and
review the Preliminary Development Plan.
            11.   The Preliminary Development Plan shall be reviewed as a
zoning amendment and shall be processed as such.
            12.   Final Development Plan.
            13.   Due to diversity in size and character of proposals
considered under this section, flexibility in the form, content and approval
procedures of the Final Development Plan should be retained. Toward this end,
the City Council shall specify, as part of its approval of the Preliminary
Plan, the form, content and approval authority of the Final Development Plan.
            14.   If the City Council considers a submission of a Final
Development Plan necessary for all or part of the District, it shall so specify
in its approval of the Preliminary Development Plan. The City Council may
retain its authority to approve the Final Development Plan or may delegate its
approval authority to the Planning Commission or to a specified official(s). In
the event the approval authority is delegated, the City Council shall specify
the limits of discretion to be exercised by the approving authority.
            15.   No building permit shall be issued for all or any portion of
a PUD District until the Final Development Plan has been approved.
            16.   Every Final Development Plan shall provide all the
information required of a Preliminary Development Plan and shall further
include grading, landscaping, lighting and signage plans.
            17.   Failure to commence construction after approval a PUD
District
            18.   If substantial construction has not commenced within three
years after the date of City Council approval for a PUD development, the
Community Development Director shall review the development plan to determine
whether the development plan should be voided or remain in effect.
            19.   If the Community Development Director shall determine that
the development plan or any phase thereof is no longer viable, he/she shall
present the matter to the Planning Commission for recommendation to the City
Council. Simultaneously therewith, the Community Development Director may
request the Planning Commission to review the existing zoning classification.
The Community Development Director may request that the property be rezoned to
that district which immediately preceded the approval of the planned district.
            20.   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
issue of voiding the development plan or any phase thereof and on the issue of
rezoning the property, if so requested by the Director of Community
Development. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be referred to
the City Council.
            21.   After a public hearing, the City Council shall have the final
determination as to whether the development plan or any phase thereof shall be
voided or remain in effect, as well as to whether the property should be
rezoned.
            22.   If the Community Development Director shall determine that
the development plan or any phase thereof is viable or necessary to carry out
the requirements of this chapter, the Community Development Director shall
declare that the development plan or any phase thereof shall remain in effect;
provided, however, that the Community Development Director shall report monthly
to the Planning Commission detailing the plans to remain in effect.
            23.   Nothing stated within this section shall be deemed to
prohibit an application for an amendment to or a subsequent application for a
planned district.
            24.   Subdivision Plats and Site Plans Required. At the option of
the applicant, the preliminary development plan may also serve as the
preliminary plat. If the option is exercised, the plan shall include
information required of preliminary plats. However, PUD Districts are to be
reviewed on their individual merits upon specific application of a developer.
Any conflicts with the other provisions of this Zoning and Subdivision
Ordinances of the city may be waived by the City Council to carry out the
intent of a plan.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.025  ADDITIONAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The requirements contained in this section are intended to provide
exceptions or to qualify and supplement the specific regulations set forth in
this subchapter.
   (B)   The following provisions shall apply in all districts:
      (1)   Trailers or other portable buildings used as temporary offices may
be installed on any lot during construction but shall be removed prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the lot or any permanent structure
thereon.
      (2)   An open space or lot area required for an existing building or
structure shall not be counted as open space for any other building or
structure.
      (3)   No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut at least
one public street for at least 35 feet and have a width of at least 60 feet at
the building line. A public street shall form the direct and primary means of
ingress and egress for all dwelling units. Alleys, where they exist, shall form
only a secondary means of ingress and egress.
      (4)   Where lots comprising 60% or more of the frontage on the same side
of the street in any block are developed with buildings having front setbacks
less than the required depth and with a variation of not more than ten feet,
the average depth of the setbacks shall establish the front setback for the
entire frontage; provided that the depth need not exceed the required setback.
      (5)   Carports, as that term is defined in §
158.002, may be allowed in the front yard setback as a special exception to
this chapter, as provided herein, subject to the following restrictions:
         (a)   Carports shall not be erected or located closer than five feet
inclusive of eaves from the right-of-way line of a public or private street.
         (b)   Carports shall not be located or erected closer to the side
property line than the applicable side yard setback or the dwelling to which it
is accessory, whichever is less.
      (6)   Open eaves, cornices, windowsills, and belt courses may project
into any setback provided that projections into interior side setbacks shall
not exceed two feet. Open uncovered porches or open fire escapes may project
into front or rear setbacks a distance not to exceed five feet.
      (7)   No portion of a lot which is located within the lines of any flood
control and/or drainage easement shall be included in measuring yard setback,
usable open space or buildable area of the lot. This exclusion shall not apply
to easements in which a closed storm sewer is located, nor shall it apply to
lots platted prior to the effective date of this chapter.
      (8)   Churches, schools, hospitals and other public and semi-public
buildings may exceed the height limitation of any district, if the side and
rear setbacks are increased one foot for each two feet by which the height of
the public or semipublic structure exceeds the prescribed height limit.
      (9)   Chimneys, elevators, poles, spires, tanks, towers and other
projections not included in a building story, as defined in § 158.002, may
extend above the height limit, subject to certain height limitations.
      (10)   All trash or garbage receptacles shall be in a permanent location
mutually convenient to the city and to the occupant.
(Prior Code, § 13-619)  (Am. Ord. 1452, passed 10-3-89; Am. Ord. 1508, passed
1-18-94; Am. Ord. 1847, passed 4-19-10; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 4-17-12; Am. Ord.
1957, passed 6-19-18; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 158.035  OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The regulations of this section are intended to ensure provision of
off-street motor vehicle parking, bicycle parking, and other transportation
access facilities in rough proportion to the generalized parking and
transportation demands of different land uses. By requiring such facilities, it
is the intent of this section to help avoid the negative impacts associated
with spillover parking into adjacent neighborhoods, while at the same time
avoiding the negative environmental and urban design impacts that can result
from parking lots and other vehicular use area.
      (2)   The provisions of this section are also intended to help protect
the public health, safety and general welfare by:
         (a)   Helping avoid and mitigate traffic congestion;
         (b)   Encouraging multi-modal transportation options and enhanced
pedestrian safety;
         (c)   Providing methods to reduce the amount of impervious surface in
parking areas and adequate drainage structures to order to reduce the
environmental impacts of stormwater runoff;
         (d)   Encouraging paving or alternate means of surfacing of parking
areas in order to address dust abatement and improve air quality; and
         (e)   Providing flexible methods of responding to the transportation
and access demands of various land uses in different areas of the city.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   General. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the parking regulations
of this section apply to all districts and all uses within zoned and unzoned
areas.
      (2)   New development. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the parking
standards of this section apply to all new buildings constructed and all new
uses established in all zoning districts.
      (3)   Enlargements and expansions.
         (a)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the parking standards of this
section apply whenever an existing building or use is enlarged or expanded to
include additional dwelling units, floor area, employees or other units of
measurement used for establishing off-street parking requirements.
         (b)   In the case of enlargements or expansions triggering
requirements for additional parking, additional off-street parking spaces are
required only to serve the enlarged or expanded area, not the entire building
or use. In other words, there is no requirement to address lawfully existing
parking deficits.
         (c)   Additional off-street parking spaces are required only when
existing development is enlarged or expanded in any way that results in more
than a 10% increase in the total number of off-street parking spaces required
for the development based on the standards of this zoning ordinance.
         (d)   Commentary: An enlargement or expansion may trigger the need to
provide or increase accessible (ADA-compliant) parking, as determined by the
city.
      (4)   Change of use.
         (a)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, when the use of property
changes, additional off-street vehicle and bicycle parking spaces must be
provided to serve the new use only when the number of parking spaces required
for the new use exceeds by more than ten percent the number of spaces required
for the lawful use that most recently occupied the building based on the
standards of this zoning ordinance. In other words, 110% "credit" is given to
the most recent lawful use of the property for the number of parking spaces
that would be required under this zoning ordinance regardless of whether such
spaces are provided. Any new parking spaces required must comply with all
applicable parking area design and layout standards.
         (b)   When the number of parking spaces required for the new use
exceeds the number of spaces required for the use that most recently occupied
the property by more than ten percent, additional parking spaces are required
only to make up the difference between the amount of parking required for the
previous use and the amount of parking required for the new use, based on the
standards of this chapter.
         (c)   A change of use may trigger the need to provide or increase
accessible ADA-compliant parking, as determined by the city.
   (C)   Exemptions, reductions.
      (1)   Landmarks and historic districts. The zoning officer, in
consultation with the historic preservation officer, is authorized to approve
exceptions and waivers to minimum off-street parking ratios for the following:
         (a)   Rehabilitation or reuse of buildings on the National Register of
Historic Places;
         (b)   Buildings designated as local cultural resources;
         (c)   Contributing buildings in National Register Historic Districts;
or
         (d)   Buildings in locally designated historic districts.
      (2)   Combination of reductions. Vehicle parking reductions in this
section may be combined.
   (D)   Compliance required. Existing parking facilities may not be altered to
violate the requirements of this section.
   (E)   Minimum requirements. Except as otherwise expressly stated, off-street
motor vehicle parking
spaces must be provided in accordance with the off-street parking schedule of
Table 20.60-1.
   (F)   Off-street parking schedule.
   (G)   Table 20.60-1 Off-Street Parking Schedule.
      (1)   In all districts in connection with every use, at the time any
building or structure is erected or enlarged, off-street parking spaces shall
be provided in accordance with the following requirements:
 
Use Number of Required Spaces
Residential and Lodging Uses
Detached house                          2 per dwelling unit, both fully
                                        enclosed
Duplex                                  2 per unit
Multiple-family                         2 per unit
Boarding/rooming house, motel, hotel    1 per guest room plus 1 per employee on
                                        maximum shift
                                        2 per 3 occupants based on maximum
Dormitories, fraternities, sororities   design plus any additional parking
and other unmarried student housing     required to meet public assembly
                                        requirements
Business and Commercial Uses
Cafeteria, restaurant (not drive-in),   8 seats per 1,000 SF net floor area
bar, lounge, tavern, private club
Drive-in restaurant                     1 per 50 s.f. net floor area plus
Office not otherwise classified         4 per 1000 s.f. net floor area
Commercial/service not otherwise        6 per 1000 s.f. net floor area
classified
                                        Adequate off-street space for vehicle
                                        being washed, fueled or serviced plus
Service station, car wash, and similar  Maximum of 5 off-street spaces per
operations                              establishment or minimum of 3 off-
                                        street spaces for each wash pack, wash
                                        space, or work stall in station plan,
                                        whichever is greater.
Day care centers or nurseries           1 per 2 employees
Business and Commercial Uses
Adult day care centers                  1 per 2 employees plus 5 public spaces.
                                        Applicants for a temporary employment
                                        service or day labor business shall
                                        submit an application and the required
                                        fee to the Planning Commission for a
                                        conditional use permit (CUP) to
                                        determine parking requirements. Notice
                                        of such application shall be given to
                                        the public by posting a conspicuous
                                        sign on the subject property at least
                                        seven days prior to the Planning
Off-street parking requirements for     Commission meeting. The recommendation
temporary employment services/day labor of the Planning Commission shall be
businesses                              forwarded to the City Council for final
                                        approval. The Planning Commission and
                                        City Council shall make a determination
                                        of the parking demand created by the
                                        proposed use and the amount of parking
                                        spaces thus determined shall become the
                                        off-street parking requirement for the
                                        permitted use. For existing structures
                                        and shopping centers the amount of
                                        available parking and the creation of
                                        potential traffic and parking hazards
                                        shall be considered.
Industrial and Warehouse Uses
                                        Adequate area for all employee and
                                        customer vehicles at all times, plus
Industrial, Warehouse                   Adequate area for loading, unloading
                                        and for all vehicles used incidental to
                                        or part of primary operation
Schools, Institutions and Places of Assembly
                                        10 per classroom (college)
                                        0 per class room (technical college/
Schools                                 trade school)
                                        8 per class room (high school)
                                        4 per class room (elementary and middle
                                        school)
                                        1 per 4 beds exclusive of bassinets,
                                        plus
Hospital                                1 per each visiting doctor/staff, plus
                                        1 per 2 employees
                                        plus, adequate area for emergency
                                        vehicles.
Medical/dental clinic or office         6 per doctor plus 1 per 2 employees
                                        1 per 3 beds, plus
                                        1 per 4 beds exclusive of bassinets,
Convalescent/nursing home               plus
                                        1 per each visiting doctor/staff, plus
                                        1 per 2 employees
                                        1 per 3 beds, plus
Community center, theater, auditorium,  1 per 4 beds exclusive of bassinets,
church sanctuary                        plus
                                        1 per each visiting doctor/staff, plus
                                        1 per 2 employees
Community center, theater, auditorium,  1 per 4 seats based on maximum seating
church sanctuary                        capacity
Place of amusement or recreation,       1 per 50 s.f. of floor space used for
convention hall, lodge, club, library   assembly or recreation in building
or museum
All Uses Not Listed
For all uses not covered in this section, the Planning Commission shall make a
determination of the parking demand to be created by the proposed use and the
amount of parking this determined shall be the off-street parking requirement
for the permitted use.
Accessible Parking for People with Disabilities
Accessible parking spaces for people with disabilities shall be provided in
accordance with applicable building codes and city engineering standards and
specifications. The spaces may be counted toward satisfaction of the required
spaces specified in this section.
 
      (2)   Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be provided in accordance
with applicable building codes, along with all state and federal requirements.
The spaces may be counted toward satisfaction of the required parking spaces.
In all districts, off-street parking areas shall be located as follows:
         (a)   In residential districts, no parking space, other than the
driveway, shall be located in the front, side or rear setbacks. Off-street
parking may be permitted in side or rear setbacks which do not abut
residentially-zoned or residentially-developed property.
      (b)   A sight triangle shall be maintained on a commercial lot at the
point where the lot abuts a residential district whenever parking spaces are to
be placed within front or side setbacks located along a street other than a
major thoroughfare.
         (c)   The off- street parking area shall be located entirely within
200 feet, exclusive of streets and any alley widths, of the principal use and
shall have direct access to a street or alley. In addition, the
off-street parking area must be located on a property having the same or a less
restrictive zoning classification and be under the same ownership.
         (d)   Required off-street parking spaces shall not thereafter be
reduced or encroached upon in any manner.
         (e)   All driveway cuts into public streets shall conform to the
standards approved by the City Council and on file with the City Engineer.
      (3)   Plan and information required:
         (a)   The applicant for a building permit of new construction,
expansion, change in use resulting in an increase in this parking requirement
or new striping arrangement of an existing parking area shall submit a site
plan showing the number, location, size and type of parking spaces and
circulation pattern.
         (b)   The applicant shall submit information regarding the projected
number of employees, seating capacities, gross floor area, gross leasable area,
number of dwelling units and any of the appropriate data necessary to verify
compliance with these regulations.
      (4)   Plans for parking area resurfacing. Site plans for surfacing of all
off-street parking areas, aisles and access driveways, will be required,
including drainage plans, and will be reviewed and approved by city staff for
compliance with city specifications.
      (5)   The following provisions shall apply to the development and
maintenance of multiple-family, commercial, industrial and institutional
parking areas:
         (a)   No building permit shall be approved until a plan has been
reviewed and approved by the Community Development Director.
         (b)   It shall e the responsibility of the property owner to certify
at the time he applies for a building permit that his plan will provide
sufficient parking spaces and facilities to accommodate his use.
         (c)   The land upon which the off-street parking lot is located shall
be owned or controlled by the same entity, which owns or controls the land on
which the principal use is located.
         (d)   At least 5% of the total lot area, exclusive of the area of the
adjacent rights-of-ways, of any off-street parking lot shall be landscaped with
grass, shrubs, and ground cover. Including landscaped dividing spaces.
         (e)   All off-street parking areas shall be effectively screened on
each side that abuts an R-1 or R-2 zoning district or an existing single-family
or two-family use with a continuous, view-reducing fence.
         (f)   The parking spaces in all off-street parking areas shall be
clearly marked with paint or plastic striping which provides permanent
delineation between spaces.
         (g)   There shall be appropriate bumpers or wheel guards centered in
the parking space to prevent any part of a parked vehicle from extending beyond
the parking area.
         (h)   All lighting equipment used in illumination of off-street
parking areas shall not create a nuisance or hazard for streets or adjoining
properties.
         (i)   All parking areas shall be located and designed so as to avoid
undue interference with the use of public streets and alleys. Parking areas
shall provide suitable maneuvering room so that all vehicles may enter an
abutting street in a forward direction. The backing of a motor vehicle onto a
public street from a parking area is prohibited, except from a residential
parking area that does not exceed two spaces per dwelling unit. Parking spaces
must be directly accessible to a parking aisle.
      (6)   (a)   Whenever two or more uses are located together in a common
building, shopping center or other integrated building complex, the parking
requirements may be complied with by providing a permanent common parking
facility, cooperatively established and operated, which contains the requisite
number of spaces for each use.
         (b)   The total number of spaces provided shall not be less than the
sum of the individual requirements.
      (7)   (a)   Every commercial or industrial building hereafter constructed
in any district shall provide off-street loading berths in accordance with the
following provisions:
 
Use                   Gross Floor Area Minimum Berths
                      1 - 12,000       0
Retail and industrial 12,000 - 48,000  1
                      48,000+          2
                      0 - 48,000       0
Office                48,000 - 100,000 1
                      10,000+          2
 
         (b)   The off-street loading berths shall be maintained on the same
lot with the building.
         (c)   Each berth shall be no less than 12 feet in width, 50 feet in
length and 14 feet in height.
         (d)   Loading berths may occupy part of any required side or rear
yard, but no space may be located closer than ten feet to the rear property
line.
      (8)   (a)   When the off-street parking space or loading berth does not
abut on a street, public or private alley or easement for access, an access
drive of the following minimum widths shall be provided:
            1.   Two-way drive: 25 feet.
            2.   One-way drive for 90-degree parking: 24 feet.
            3.   One-way drive for 60-degree parking: 18 feet.
            4.   One-way drive for 45-degree parking: 13 feet.
         (b)   The maximum width of any driveway in the residential districts
shall be 32 feet. The maximum width of any driveway in non-residential
districts shall be 36 feet.
      (9)   All off-street parking areas, driveways and loading berths shall be
constructed according to standards approved by the City Council and on file
with the City Engineer.
      (10)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section, no off-street
parking spaces or loading berths shall occupy the sight triangle at a corner.
(Prior Code, § 13-620)  (Am. Ord. 1408, passed 8-18-87; Am. Ord. 1687, passed
11-5-02; Am. Ord. 1758, passed 1-17-06; Am. Ord. 1910, passed 12-1-15; Am. Ord.
1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 158.036  RESIDENTIAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   In residential-zoned areas all vehicles, including recreational
vehicles, parked between the front building line of the lot and the street
shall be parked upon an improved driveway or parallel to and within ten feet
horizontal distance of the improved driveway. Only one side of the area
parallel to and within ten feet horizontal distance of the improved driveway
can be used as additional parking area. Where there is no improved driveway,
all vehicles shall be parked in a location where the driveway is implied by the
curb cut, approach, or evidence of usage, as determined by the Building
Inspector, and/or parallel to and within ten feet horizontal distance on one
side of the implied driveway.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to park or allow
parking of a vehicle in a manner contrary to the provisions of this section. A
citation for violation of this section may be issued to the owner or operator
of the vehicle, or to the property owner where the violation occurs. Any person
violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense
punishable by a fine of an amount not exceeding $50. Each day a vehicle is
parked in violation of this section shall be a separate offense.
(Ord. 1749, passed 5-3-05; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 158.036.01  OPEN DISPLAY.
   (A)   The open display of articles, materials or merchandise is prohibited,
except as provided in this section.
   (B)   Open display of articles, merchandise, or materials is prohibited in
all zoning districts except as may be approved as a special permit use in the
Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts under §
158.044 of the zoning ordinance.
   (C)   In the CBD zoning districts, a business use permitted under the CBD
zoning regulations and located in a building may have incidental open display
outside the enclosed building only if the items displayed outside are of the
type typically carried by the business and the items displayed outside the
building do not occupy an area of the lot greater than 100% of the area of the
building housing the permitted use. No part of the outside display area shall
be on the public right-of-way.
   (D)   The open display uses permitted as a special permit use under §
158.044, shall comply with the following provisions:
      (1)   All open display of merchandise, material, and equipment shall be
effectively screened to a height of eight feet with a continuous, view-
reducing fence on any side which abuts property used or zoned for residential
or institutional. Merchandise and materials which are not completely assembled,
or which are not immediately and actively being offered for sale, in addition
to complying with the above screening requirements, shall be so screened by
fences or permanent buildings that they cannot be seen from a public street.
      (2)   All of the lot used for open display shall have a Portland cement
or asphaltic concrete paved surface and be maintained in a manner that no dust
will be produced by continued use and shall comply with standards for parking
areas in §
158.035(H).
      (3)   All servicing of vehicles carried on as an incidental part of the
sales operation shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
   (E)   In the I-L and I-H districts, any article or material stored outside
of an enclosed building as an incidental part of the primary operation shall be
effectively screened with a continuous, view-reducing fence.
   (F)   No open display shall be permitted on any portion of the public
rights-of-way.
   (G)   This section shall not be construed to require screening in excess of
eight feet in height.
   (H)   Where a conditional use is granted for a fence, as provided in §
158.037(B), then the City Council may allow exceptions to the sight-proof
screening requirements of this section in the approval of the conditional use.
   (I)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section, no open display shall
occupy the sight triangle at a corner.
(Prior Code, § 13-621)  (Ord. 1371, passed 5-6-86; Am. Ord. 1776, passed 12-5-
06; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)  Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 158.037  FENCES.
   (A)   Except as provided in this section, the maximum height for all fences
is eight feet. Fence heights will be measured from the highest elevation on
either side of the fence.
   (B)   Fence heights are further limited in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Fences in front yard setback are limited to 4 feet in height;
except fences with greater than 20% opacity shall not exceed three feet in
height for that portion of a fence located within five feet of the property
line, or 17 feet from the edge of the street pavement, whichever distance is
greater.
      (2)   Fences located in side yards of corner lots abutting the front
yards of an adjacent lot are restricted to the same height limits as set forth
in division (B)(1) above.
   (C)   As to fences with greater than 20% opacity, OPACITY shall be defined
as the degrees to which a fence interferes with unobstructed vision. Opacity
shall be measured at right angles to any surface of the fence.
   (D)   The property owner will demonstrate to the City Engineer or designee
the accurate location of the front property line/public right-of-way limit by
one of the following methods:
      (1)   Uncovering existing property pins;
      (2)   Completion of a professional land survey and placement of front
property pins by a licensed land surveyor.
   (E)   The property owner will demonstrate to the City Engineer or designee
that after fence construction excessive water ponding and flooding of adjoining
property will not occur.
   (F)   In addition to any other applicable provisions of this section for
back to back corner lots, fences with greater than 20% opacity shall not be
constructed within 12 feet of the edge of pavement.
   (G)   Fences shall not be constructed on any portion of the public rights-
of-way.
   (H)   On a corner lot no fence shall be erected or allowed to remain between
the heights of two feet six inches and six feet above the crown of the adjacent
roadway in the sight triangle at the corner.
   (I)   Fences are prohibited in a dedicated drainage easement which contains
open storm drainage channels.
   (J)   No electrified fence or wall containing broken glass, barbed wire, or
other substances reasonably calculated to do bodily harm shall be permitted,
except as hereinafter provided:
      (1)   A barbed wire fence shall be permitted in any zoning district for
the purpose of restraining such livestock as may be legally located on the
premises under the code. The barbed wire fence shall be removed immediately
upon discontinuance of keeping of livestock on the premises;
      (2)   Barbed wire shall be permitted at a 45-degree angle on top of a
six-foot fence in all zoning districts, except residential districts;
      (3)   The city and public utilities operating under a franchise with the
city shall be permitted to install security fences containing barbed wire in
any area owned or controlled by the city or public utility where such
protection is deemed necessary for the protection of persons or property.
   (K)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit a violation of §
92.21 of this code of ordinances.
   (L)   Commercial, industrial and multi-family uses abutting property zoned
or used for single-family or two-family use shall be screened with a fence of
95% opacity and a height of eight feet on all abutting property lines, subject
to the height limitations contained in division (B).
   (M)   (1)   In E-1, C-G, C-H, I-L and I-H districts, the City Council may
allow fences in the required setbacks which exceed the height limitations
contained in division (A) above as a conditional use.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation seeking the conditional use shall
make application to the Planning Commission at least 14 days prior to the
scheduled Commission meeting and submit a fee as may be established by
resolution of the City Council. Notice of the Planning Commission and City
Council hearings on the application shall be given to the public by posting the
applicant's property at least seven days prior to the Planning Commission
meeting.
      (3)   In considering approval or denial of a proposed fence as a
conditional use, the following standards shall be used:
         (a)   The amount of street frontage of the property for which the
conditional use is requested;
         (b)   The location of uses and types of uses on surrounding
properties;
         (c)   The effect of the proposed fence on traffic movement and safety;
         (d)   The effect of the proposed fence on the surrounding properties'
right to open space, visibility, light and air;
         (e)   The effect of the proposed fence on the city's ability to
provide police and fire protection in the area;
         (f)   The extent to which the surrounding properties have been
developed and the impact of the proposed fence on future development of
surrounding property; and
         (g)   The effect of the proposed fence on the market value of
surrounding property.
      (4)   The City Council may impose conditions upon the conditional use as
it deems necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of citizens and
surrounding properties.
      (5)   Nothing contained herein shall authorize any deviation from the
requirements of division (A) above other than the permitted height in required
setbacks and no conditional use will be granted which would occupy the sight
triangle at a corner.
(Prior Code, § 13-623)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 158.038  USE OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES.
   No structure initially designed or intended for either single-family or two-
family residential purposes shall be occupied by any commercial use unless a
special exception has been granted pursuant hereto.
(Prior Code, § 13-624)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
 
§ 158.039  DEVELOPMENT OF SUBSTANDARD LOTS.
   (A)   A lot may be used as a building site even though it fails to meet the
minimum lot area, lot width or lot depth normally required of lots for the
district in which the lot is situated provided that both of the following
conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The lot was of record on December 13, 1973; and
      (2)   The lot is:
         (a)   At least 50 feet in width; or
         (b)   Less than 50 feet in width and does not adjoin vacant land
fronting on the same street which is under the same ownership as the lot to be
developed.
   (B)   The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant for development to
show through appropriate records compliance with division (A) above.
   (C)   Lots developed pursuant to this section shall meet all applicable
setback requirements, except interior lots in the R-1 and R-2 zoning districts
which satisfy the other requirements of this section may be developed with a
five-foot interior side yard setback on both sides. The authority granted
herein to develop a substandard lot shall not be sufficient, in and of itself,
to grant a variance from the requirements.
(Prior Code, § 13-645)  (Ord. 1417, passed 12-15-87; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 158.040  RESERVED.
§ 158.041  PERMITTED AND NEW USES.
   (A)   A use shall be conducted only in those districts where it is
specifically listed as a permitted use or where it is incorporated by reference
to a district in which it is specifically listed.
   (B)   If a proposed use is not specifically listed in any of the districts
contained in this chapter, then it shall be conducted only in those districts
where the proposed use conforms with the intent of the district.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall affect the location of accessory uses,
as defined in §
158.002.
(Prior Code, § 13-647)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.042  NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES; TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USE.
   (A)   Nonconforming structures and uses may be continued, maintained and
repaired, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (B)   A nonconforming structure shall not be added to or enlarged in any
manner unless the addition or enlargement is in compliance with the setback,
coverage and height regulations of the district in which it is situated. The
addition or enlargement may project into a setback where necessary to match the
building line of the existing nonconforming structure.
   (C)   (1)   A nonconforming use shall not be permitted to intensify. For
purposes of this section, intensification shall be deemed to include, but not
be limited to the following:
         (a)   The use is expanded or spread into a building or addition in
which the use was not conducted on the effective date of this chapter unless
the enclosure of the use would bring the same into conformance.
         (b)   Open display, parking or outside storage is expanded or spread
to portions of the lot which were unoccupied on the effective date of this
chapter.
         (c)   Any structure is added which has a direct connection to the
reason for the nonconforming nature of the use.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (C)(1) above, a nonconforming single-
family use may intensify; provided that any addition or structure built on or
moved to the lot shall comply with the setback, height and coverage regulations
of the R-1 district, or the district in which the use is located, whichever
regulations are more restrictive. The addition or structure may project into a
setback where necessary to match the building line of an existing nonconforming
structure occupied as dwelling.
      (3)   Restoration or replacement of the building(s) associated with a
lawful, nonconforming use is permitted when restoration or replacement is made
necessary by fire, casualty, or natural disaster, provided the physical
restoration or replacement is lawfully commenced within one year of the damage
or destruction. The restoration or replacement shall not exceed the size of the
building(s) to be restored or replaced. To the extent that the total
deterioration exceeds 60% of the cost of replacement of the building(s) using
new materials, any restoration or replacement shall be subject to the
regulations specified for the zoning district in which the land and building(s)
are located.
   (D)   (1)   It is the policy of the city that eventually over time, the use
of a lot shall come into compliance with the district in which it is located.
This section shall be interpreted and administered in conformance with this
policy.
      (2)   When a change in use is proposed for a lot which was last occupied
by a nonconforming use, then the lot shall be re-occupied only by:
         (a)   Other permitted uses of the most restrictive district in which
the last use is specifically listed as permitted use;
         (b)   Permitted uses of districts more restrictive than the district
determined in division (D)(2)(a) above; or
         (c)   Permitted uses of the district in which the lot is located.
      (3)   If the new use reoccupying the lot pursuant to division (D)(2)
above is in noncompliance with the district in which the lot is located, then
it shall be deemed a nonconforming use.
   (E)   (1)   A nonconforming portion of a structure which is intentionally
destroyed or demolished by the owner of the same shall not be rebuilt or
restored except in compliance with applicable setback, coverage and height
regulations. This requirement shall not apply to intentional destruction or
demolition which is necessary to the proper reconstruction or restoration of
the affected structure following a sudden natural or man-made disaster,
provided the physical restoration or reconstruction is lawfully commenced
within one year of the damage or destruction.
      (2)   If a lot is not occupied by a nonconforming use for a continuous
period of one year, it shall not thereafter be re-occupied, except by a
permitted use of the district in which the lot is located. For purposes of this
division, a lot which has no water usage according to official records of the
city shall be presumed to be "not occupied."
(Prior Code, § 13-652)  (Am. Ord. 1776, passed 12-5-06; Am. Ord. 1974, passed
8-6-19)
§ 158.043  ANNEXATION OF NEW AREA.
   (A)   All land newly annexed to the city is automatically placed in the A
district. The ordinance of annexation may specify a different classification
for a period of time not to exceed one year from the effective date of the
chapter.
   (B)   Within this one-year period, the Planning Commission shall study and
make recommendations concerning the rezoning of the land within the annexed
areas to promote the general welfare and in accordance with the comprehensive
plan. Recommendations for rezoning shall be forwarded to the City Council.
   (C)   The rezoning shall comply with the notification and amendment
procedures of §§
158.056(B) and
158.057.
(Prior Code, § 13-653)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.044  SPECIAL PERMIT USES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. Shall have the same meaning as defined in §
158.002 of this chapter.
   APPROVED TREATMENT FACILITY, TRANSITIONAL LIVING FACILITY, HALFWAY HOUSE,
and INPATIENT TREATMENT. Shall have the meaning as defined in 43A O.S. § 3-403
pertaining to the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Services Act.
   BODY PIERCING. A procedure in which an opening is created in a human body
solely for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration, provided,
however, that the term does not include ear piercing.
   BODY PIERCING OPERATOR. Any person who owns, controls, operates, conducts,
or manages any permanent body piercing establishment, whether actually
performing the work of body piercing or not. A mobile unit, including but not
limited to a mobile home, recreational vehicle, or any other nonpermanent
facility, shall not be used as a permanent body piercing establishment.
   EQUESTRIAN EDUCATIONAL FACILITY. An indoor or outdoor facility where horses
are housed, ridden, shown, displayed, or trained as part of the curriculum of
and in connection with an educational program of public schools or colleges and
universities.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Information and materials to be used or located on the
site whether on a full-time or part-time basis. Information regarding the
activity or at the time of any change of use or expansion, even for existing
uses, shall be provided to the Director.
   INMATE WORK CENTERS, INMATE HALFWAY HOUSES, and INMATE PRERELEASE CENTERS.
Shall have the same meanings as used in 57 O.S. or as defined by the Oklahoma
Department of Corrections.
   OPEN DISPLAY USES. Those uses of land where articles, materials,
merchandise, or property is displayed or stored outside the confines of a
completely enclosed structure, for example, car, truck, or boat sales.
   PAWNSHOPS. Shall have the same meaning as defined in §
113.01 of this Code of Ordinances.
   PUBLIC SCHOOLS. Shall have the same meaning as defined in 70 O.S.
   TATTOO OPERATOR. Any person who owns, controls, operates, conducts, or
manages any permanent tattooing establishment whether performing the work of
tattooing or not, or a temporary location that is a fixed location at which an
individual tattoo operator performs tattooing for a specified period of not
more than seven days in conjunction with a single event or celebration, the
primary function of the event or celebration being tattooing.
   TATTOOING. The practice of producing an indelible mark or figure on the
human body by scarring or inserting under the skin using needles, scalpels, or
other related equipment, provided, that medical micropigmentation, performed
pursuant to the provisions of the state Medical Micropigmentation Regulation
Act shall not be construed to be TATTOOING.
   (B)   Special uses permitted.
      (1)   A special use permit may be authorized in the commercial-highway
and industrial zoning districts of the city. Any transitional living center or
halfway house, as defined in division (A) of this section, shall be subject to
the nondiscriminatory zoning laws of the state, county or municipality in which
located, and the location of such facility is specifically prohibited within
1,000 feet of any public or private elementary or secondary school. Provided,
that if any public or private elementary or secondary school shall be
established within the prohibited distance from any such facility after such
facility has been in use as a transitional living center or halfway house, this
shall not be a bar to the continued use of the facility as designated so long
as it remains in continuous use as designated. The distance indicated in this
section shall be measured from the nearest property line of the school to the
nearest property line of the transitional living center or halfway house. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to any transitional living center or
halfway house established prior to the effective date of this act. The users
are as follows:
         (a)   Approved treatment facility (drug and alcohol);
         (b)   Transitional living facility (drug and alcohol);
         (c)   Halfway house (drug and alcohol);
         (d)   Inmate work centers and camps;
         (e)   Inmate halfway houses;
         (f)   Inmate transitional living centers;
         (g)   Prisons;
         (h)   Inmate pre-release centers;
         (i)   Crematory; and
         (j)   Open display uses.
      (2)   The following uses are allowed only as a special permit use in the
industrial light (I-L) zoning district and industrial heavy (I-H) zoning
district:
         (a)   Tattoo operator facility (effective 11-1-2006, since tattooing
facilities are illegal until that date).
         (b)   Body piercing operator facility.
         (c)   Hazardous material, treatment, storage, disposal, and use.
      (3)   In the agricultural zoning district, the following use is allowed
only as a special permit use: equestrian educational facility, provided that
such facility shall not be located on any tract of land closer than 900 feet
from the right-of-way of any major thoroughfare or expressway.
      (4)   The following uses may be allowed only as a special permit use in
residential zoning districts of the city: accessory buildings larger than 240
square feet subject to such conditions as may be imposed under the approval of
a special permit use.
      (5)   The following use may be allowed only as a special permit use in
the C-G commercial general zoning district: public schools and related public
school activities with such grade level restrictions and limitations as
determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council to be
compatible with the facility and/or location.
      (6)   The following use may be allowed only as a special permit use in
the C-G Commercial General and C-H Commercial Highway Zoning Districts: pawn
shops, provided that no more than one pawn shop may be located within a 1,000
foot radius of another pawn shop, when measured from property line to property
line of the lots where the pawn shops are or to be located. Outdoor display of
merchandise by a pawn shop is limited to those approved as a special permit use
in the Commercial Highway Use District under this chapter.
   (C)   Procedures, descriptions, and criteria.
      (1)   General description and authorization. The uses listed above as
special use permits are so classified because they more intensely dominate the
area in which they are located than do other uses permitted in the district,
and because these uses present unique security and safety issues which are not
shared by other uses in the district. With consideration given to setting,
physical features, compatibility with surrounding land uses, traffic, and
aesthetics, certain uses may locate in an area where they will be compatible
with existing or planned land uses. The City Council shall review each case on
its own merits, apply the criteria established herein, and, if appropriate,
authorize said use by granting a special use permit for it.
      (2)   Application. Application and public hearing procedures for a
special use permit shall be completed in the same manner as an application for
rezoning. A site plan shall be included with the application as outlined in
this chapter.
      (3)   Criteria for special permit approval. The City Council shall use
the following criteria to evaluate a special use permit:
         (a)   Whether the proposed use shall be in harmony with the policies
of the comprehensive plan and, in the case of open display uses, whether the
proposed open display is detrimental to the implementation of the gateway area
of the city;
         (b)   Whether the proposed use shall be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district regulations;
         (c)   Whether the proposed use shall adversely affect the use of
neighboring property;
         (d)   Whether the proposed use shall generate pedestrian and vehicular
traffic that is hazardous or in conflict with the existing and anticipated
traffic in the neighborhood;
         (e)   Whether the facility presents a health or safety hazard to
neighboring properties or the community at large;
         (f)   Where applicable, whether the facility is to be located in
proximity to elementary or secondary public and/or private schools, or other
incompatible uses;
         (g)   Whether utility, drainage, parking, loading, signs, lighting
access, and other necessary public facilities to serve the proposed use shall
meet the adopted codes of the city;
         (h)   Where applicable, whether the facility has obtained all
necessary permits to operate under the laws of the state;
         (i)   The City Council may impose specific conditions regarding
location, design, operation, screening, and security to assure safety, to
prevent a nuisance, and to control the noxious effects of excessive sound,
light, odor, dust, or similar conditions. The City Council may also impose
specific design requirements for accessory buildings to assure that such
buildings are aesthetically compatible with the surrounding neighborhood;
         (j)   For accessory buildings greater than 240 square feet in size,
the following additional conditions and restrictions shall apply:
            1.   The height of the accessory building measured at its highest
point shall not exceed the height of the primary building measured at its
highest point;
            2.   The accessory building shall not be used as a dwelling unit;
            3.   Roof pitch of the accessory building should be the same as the
predominant roof pitch of the primary structure;
            4.   An accessory building shall not be located on a lot not
occupied by a primary building, except on lots larger than two acres in size.
            5.   If the primary building on a residential lot is destroyed or
removed and not rebuilt within a two-year period from time of destruction or
removal of the primary building, then the accessory building shall be removed.
            6.   Accessory building(s) approved as a special permit use under
this section should not exceed in size the greater of 50% of the gross floor
area of the primary building or 10% of the total recorded lot area of the lot
on which the primary building is located.
      (4)   Status of special use permits. Once a special use permit has been
granted for a lot, said special use permit may not be expanded to another lot
without application for a new special use permit. The special use permit will
only authorize the specific use approved by the City Council. No additional use
(s) shall be allowed on the premises of the special use except as specifically
authorized in the special use permit. For example, a special use permit for an
approved treatment facility would not allow a change of use or adding of
additional uses such as inmate halfway house; nor would a special use permit
for a body piercing facility allow the addition of tattooing. All special use
permits shall expire by default:
         (a)   If the use is not established within 12 months following
approval by the City Council and no extension is approved. When a building
permit has not been issued for construction within 12 months of City Council
approval, the applicant or owner may request a hearing for an extension of the
initial special use permit approval. Good cause for an extension shall mean
that the owner shows evidence that he or she has contractors or applications
for continual development within the next year following the original approval;
         (b)   If the use once established has been discontinued for a period
of 12 months or abandoned;
         (c)   Whenever the City Manager finds that any proposed construction
or occupancy will not, in his or her opinion, substantially comply with the
special use permit, he or she shall refer the question to the City Council for
its review;
         (d)   When the holder of a special use permit determines that an
extension of time or modification of the use is necessary, he or she may apply
for amendment in the same manner as the original application. The amendment
shall be processed in the same manner as an original application.
      (5)   Lawful open display uses existing on the date of Ord. 1776 may
continue without the issuance of a special use permit. Any changes in the use,
including change of ownership, will require conformance with all the
requirements of this section.
(Ord. 1670, passed 5-7-02; Am. Ord. 1678, passed 9-3-02; Am. Ord. 1764, passed
6-6-06; Am. Ord. 1776, passed 12-5-06; Am. Ord. 1823, passed 6-16-09; Am. Ord.
1848, passed 4-18-11; Am. Ord. 1852, passed 6-21-11; Am. Ord. 1861, passed 4-
17-12; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 158.055  PUBLIC HEARINGS; NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Except in the case of an annexation ordinance, no ordinance which
rezones land or which changes the regulations of this chapter shall become
effective until after the Planning Commission and City Council have held public
hearings in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall
have an opportunity to be heard.
   (B)   Notification shall be given of all hearings pertaining to the rezoning
of land in accordance with §
158.056(B).
   (C)   For ordinances other than those which rezone land, the city shall give
at least 15 days' notice of the date, time and place of the City Council public
hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-654)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.056  APPLICATION FOR REZONINGS; HEARINGS; NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to have any land or
premises rezoned shall
make application therefor in writing to the Planning Commission, on the forms
provided, at least 28 days prior to the scheduled commission meeting.
      (2)   The application shall contain the following information, in
addition to other data the Planning Commission may require:
         (a)   The legal description of the property to be rezoned;
         (b)   The street address or approximate location within the city;
         (c)   The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) thereof;
         (d)   The district in which it is to be rezoned; and
         (e)   A list of names and addresses of all record property owners
within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property. This
list shall be current and certified by a bonded abstractor or the County
Assessor of Oklahoma County.
      (3)   For each rezoning application, a filing fee shall be deposited with
the City Clerk, as may be established by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   (1)   The Secretary of the Planning Commission, or his or her
designee, shall give notice of all public hearings on a rezoning application by
mailing written notice to all owners of property within a 300-foot radius of
the exterior boundary of subject property at least 20 days prior to the
Planning Commission public hearing. The notice shall contain the following:
         (a)   Legal description of the property, and the street address or
approximate location in the city;
         (b)   Present zoning and classification of the property and the
classification sought by the applicant;
         (c)   Date, time and place of the Planning Commission and City Council
public hearing; and
         (d)   General location map.
      (2)   Notice of the Planning Commission public hearing may also be given
by posting notice of the same on the affected property at least 20 days before
the date of hearing. The notice shall contain the following:
         (a)   Present zoning classification of the property and the
classification sought by the applicant;
         (b)   Date, time and place of the Planning Commission public hearing.
      (3)   The City Clerk shall also give notice of the date, time and place
of all public hearings on rezoning application by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city at least 15 days prior to the Planning
Commission public hearing. The notice shall include a map of the area to be
affected which indicates street names or numbers, streams or other significant
landmarks in the area.
   (C)   (1)   In addition to the notice required in division (B) of this
section, if the zoning change requested permits the use of treatment
facilities, multiple family facilities, transitional living facilities, halfway
houses and any housing or facility that may be used for medical or non-medical
detoxification, as these terms are defined pursuant to 43A O.S. § 3-403, the
entity proposing the change in district regulation, restriction, or boundary
shall mail a written notice within 30 days of the hearing to all real property
owners within one-quarter of a mile where the area to be affected is located,
and shall be responsible for all costs incurred in mailing this notice. The
entity proposing the change shall provide to the city an affidavit of mailing
the notice, along with certified ownership list of all property located within
one-quarter mile of the property proposed to be rezoned. The list shall be
certified as described in division (A)(2) of this section.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (C), ENTITY means any individual,
corporation, company, firm, partnership, association, trust, state agency,
government instrumentality or agency, institution, county, incorporated
municipality or municipal authority or trust in which any governmental entity
is a beneficiary, venture, or other legal entity however organized.
(Prior Code, § 13-656) (Ord. 1240, passed 7-19-83; Am. Ord. 1827, passed 8-4-
09; Am. Ord. 1880, passed 6-17-14; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.057  COUNCIL PROCEDURES FOR REZONING HEARINGS.
   (A)   When the Planning Commission has acted upon an application for
rezoning, an ordinance shall be prepared and introduced before the City Council
at a public hearing on the same date as set forth in the notice to property
owners provided in the preceding section. The City Council may continue that
hearing from time to time, prior to final action thereon.
   (B)   No rezoning application which has been heard and decided by the City
Council shall be resubmitted for a period of six months from the hearing,
except on the ground of new evidence or proof of changed conditions.
(Prior Code, § 13-657)  (Ord. 1240, passed 7-19-83; Am. Ord. 1896, passed 4-21-
15; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.058  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Any aggrieved person, officer or unit of government may make
application to the Board requesting relief for the purposes stated in §
158.087 The application must be submitted to the Board, along with all required
documents and fees, at least 21 days prior to the next scheduled Board meeting
in order to be considered at that meeting.
   (B)   Applications for an appeal shall be made as follows:
      (1)   The appeal shall be taken within 30 days from the date of the
decision of the administrative official.
      (2)   The application shall be filed in writing with the official and the
City Clerk. The application shall specify the grounds for the appeal.
   (C)   Applications for a special exception shall be made as follows:
      (1)   The application shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk. The
application shall indicate the section under which the exception is sought and
state the grounds upon which it is requested.
      (2)   The applicant shall submit with each application a current list of
names and addresses of all record property owners within a 300-foot radius of
the exterior boundary of the subject property.
      (3)   The list shall be current and certified by a bonded abstractor or
the County Assessor of Oklahoma County.
   (D)   Applications for a variance shall be made as follows:
      (1)   The application shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk. The
application shall indicate how the subject property meets the requirements of §
158.091(D).
      (2)   The applicant shall submit with each application a list of names
and addresses of all record property owners within a 300-foot radius of the
exterior boundary of the subject property.
      (3)   Where the applicant requests a minor variance, he or she shall
submit a list of names and addresses of only those owners of property adjacent
to the subject property.
      (4)   The lists shall be current and certified by a bonded abstractor or
the County Assessor of Oklahoma County.
   (E)   The applicant shall deposit with the City Clerk a fee as may be
established by resolution of the City Council.
   (F)   Upon receipt of a properly filed application, it shall be placed on
the Board agenda for hearing within 60 days, and an administrative official
shall transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the
application is made.
(Prior Code, § 13-658)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
§ 158.070  CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission of the city is hereby created
consisting of nine appointive members, all of whom shall be qualified electors
of the city. Eight of the Commission members shall be appointed by the City
Council with two members from each of the city's four wards. The ninth member
of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor. The members of the
Commission shall serve for three-year terms, except the membership as of the
date of adoption of the ordinance shall continue to serve out their unexpired
terms.
   (B)   A quorum of the Commission shall consist of five members. Before
entering the performance of their duties each member shall take and subscribe
to the oath of office as required by law. The members of the Commission shall
serve without compensation. A majority of all members of the City Council may
remove any member of the Commission for the good of the service.
(Prior Code, § 13-101)  (Ord. 1241, passed 7-19-83; Am. Ord. 1252, passed 11-
15-83; Am. Ord. 1310, passed 11-6-84; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
Statutory reference:
   Appointment of zoning commission, see 11 O.S. § 43-109
   Municipal planning commissions, see 11 O.S. §§ 45-101 to 45-105
§ 158.071  ORGANIZATION, MEETINGS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   The Commission shall select the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from
among its members. It is the duty of the Vice-Chairperson to preside over all
meetings in the absence of the Chairperson. The Commission shall keep its own
minutes and records. The Commission shall meet on the first Thursday and on the
third Thursday of each month at 7:00 p.m. in the Bethany Library or other
convenient place. If the meeting date falls on a legal holiday, the Commission
may choose another date if it determines one is necessary.
   (B)   Special meetings may be held upon the request of four members of the
Commission. At least 48 hours' advance notice shall be given to the City Clerk
of any special meetings.
(Prior Code, § 13-102)  (Ord. 1241, passed 7-19-83; Am. Ord. 1262, passed 11-
15-83; Am. Ord. 1493, passed 10-6-92; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19; Am. Ord.
1987, passed 2-4-20)
§ 158.072  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Commission shall prepare from time to time plans for the
systematic development and betterment of the city as a place of residence or
for business. It may consider and investigate any subject matter tending to the
development and betterment of the city and make recommendations to the Council
as it may deem advisable concerning the adoption thereof, and make or cause to
be made surveys, maps and plans for that purpose. Before any expense is
incurred in making any surveys, maps or plans, the expense shall be submitted
to and authorized by the Council.
   (B)   The following matters shall be submitted to the Commission for
investigation, report, review or recommendation before final action is taken by
the City Council:
      (1)   On the location and design of any public building, statue, memorial
park, parkway, boulevard,
street, alley, playground, public grounds or bridges or the change in location
or vacation of any street or alley or the grade thereof;
      (2)   On all plans, plats or re-plats of land laid out in lots or plats,
and the streets, alleys or the portions of the same, intended to be dedicated
to public or private use within the city; and
      (3)   On all proposed ordinances amending or added to the provisions
contained in Title XV of this code.
   (C)   (1)   The Commission shall conduct biannually a review and update of
the comprehensive plan, its goals and policies, for the purpose of providing
guidance on future decisions pertaining to zoning and land use.
      (2)   The findings and recommendations of the Commission shall be
forwarded to the City Council for final action.
      (3)   The proceedings of the Commission shall comply with applicable
notice requirements.
   (D)   (1)   The Commission shall make an intensive study of the zoning
problems of the city for each and all the following enumerated purposes.
      (2)   For these purposes, the Commission shall divide the city into zones
and districts of the size, number, shape and area as it may deem best to carry
out the purposes and to define, with common certainty, and establish the
boundaries of each.
      (3)   All regulations and restrictions shall be uniform for each class or
kind of building throughout the district, but the regulations or restrictions
in one district may differ from those in another district. All regulations and
restrictions shall be made with reasonable consideration, among other things,
to the character of the district affected and its peculiar suitability for
particular uses, and with a view to conserve the value of buildings and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
         (a)   To lessen congestion in the streets;
         (b)   To secure safety from fires, panic and other dangers;
         (c)   To provide adequate light and air;
         (d)   To prevent the overcrowding of land;
         (e)   To avoid undue congestion of population;
         (f)   To facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water,
sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements;
         (g)   To regulate and restrict the creation, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of buildings, structures and lands;
         (h)   To regulate and restrict the location of oil and gas wells and
appurtenances thereof; and
         (i)   To establish restrictions and regulations in respect to each of
the above enumerated items.
   (E)   The Commission may adopt by resolution rules and procedures which it
deems necessary and proper to carry out the duties and functions of the
Commission, including but not limited to decorum of meetings and the processing
of applications for review. The rules and procedures shall not conflict with
any provision hereof.
   (F)   In addition to the powers and duties of this section, the Commission
shall have those conferred by state law or city ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 13-103)  (Ord. 1338, passed 8-20-85; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
Statutory reference:
   Platting, see 11 O.S. et seq.
   Subdivision regulations, powers, see 11 O.S. § 45-104
   Vacating streets, see 11 O.S. et seq.
   Zoning and planning powers, see 11 O.S. §§ 43-101 et seq.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 158.085  CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   There is hereby created within and for the city the Board of
Adjustment consisting of five members who shall be qualified electors of the
city.
   (B)   (1)   One member shall be appointed for each ward in the city and one
member shall be at large. Each ward member shall be appointed for a term of
three years by the Council.
      (2)   The member at large shall be appointed by the Mayor. They shall
serve until their successors are appointed and qualified unless sooner removed
for cause upon written complaint and public hearing.
      (3)   All vacancies in office shall be filled for the unexpired term.
      (4)   Before entering upon the duties of office, each member shall take
and subscribe to the oath of office as prescribed by law and ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 13-120)  (Ord. 1242, passed 7- -83; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
Statutory reference:
   Creation of board of adjustment, powers and the like, see 11 O.S. §§ 44-101
et seq.
§ 158.086  ORGANIZATION, MEETINGS AND THE LIKE.
   The concurring vote of at least three members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination being
appealed from, to decide in favor of the applicant or to decide any matter
which may properly come before it pursuant hereto of 11 O.S. § 44-104.
(Prior Code, § 13-121)  (Ord. 1478, passed 9-17-91; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 158.087  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
   (A)   Hear and decide appeals if it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement of any zoning regulation;
   (B)   Hear and decide special exceptions hereto to allow a use or a
specifically designated element associated with a use which is not permitted by
right of particular district because of potential adverse effect, but which if
controlled in the particular instance as to its relationship to the
neighborhood and to the general welfare, may be permitted by the Board of
Adjustment, where specifically authorized by this chapter, and in accordance
with the substantive and procedural standards of the zoning code;
   (C)   Authorize in specific cases a variance from the terms, standards and
criteria that pertain to an allowed use category within a zoning district as
authorized by this chapter when such cases are shown not to be contrary to the
public interest if, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions hereof will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of
the regulations shall be observed and substantial justice, done; and (The Board
shall have no power to authorize variances as to use, except as provided by
division (D) below.)
   (D)   Hear and decide oil and/ or gas applications or appeals unless
prohibited throughout the city by ordinance. The Board of Adjustment shall be
required to make the findings prescribed by §
158.092 in order to grant a variance as to use with respect to any application
or appeal.
(Prior Code, § 13-122)  (Ord. 1478, passed 9-17-91; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 158.088  APPLICANTS TO THE BOARD.
   (A)   Any aggrieved person, officer or unit of government may make
application to the Board
requesting relief for the purposes stated in §
158.087. The application must be submitted to the Board, along with all
required documents and fees, at least 21 days prior to the next scheduled Board
meeting in order to be considered at that meeting.
   (B)   Applications for an appeal shall be made as follows:
      (1)   The appeal shall be taken within 30 days from the date of the
decision of the administrative official.
      (2)   The application shall be filed in writing with the official and the
City Clerk. The application shall specify the grounds for the appeal.
   (C)   Applications for a special exception shall be made as follows:
      (1)   The application shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk. The
application shall indicate the section under which the exception is sought and
state the grounds upon which it is requested.
      (2)   The applicant shall submit with each application a current list of
names and addresses of all record property owners within a 300-foot radius of
the exterior boundary of the subject property.
      (3)   The list shall be current and certified by a bonded abstractor or
the County Assessor of Oklahoma County.
   (D)   Applications for a variance shall be made as follows:
      (1)   The application shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk. The
application shall indicate how the subject property meets the requirements of §
158.091(D).
      (2)   The applicant shall submit with each application a list of names
and addresses of all record property owners within a 300-foot radius of the
exterior boundary of the subject property.
      (3)   Where the applicant requests a minor variance, he or she shall
submit a list of names and addresses of only those owners of property adjacent
to the subject property.
      (4)   The lists shall be current and certified by a bonded abstractor or
the County Assessor of Oklahoma County.
   (E)   The applicant shall deposit with the City Clerk a fee as may be
established by resolution of the City Council.
   (F)   Upon receipt of a properly filed application, it shall be placed on
the Board agenda for hearing within 60 days, and an administrative official
shall transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the
application is made.
(Prior Code, § 13-123)  (Ord. 1353, passed 10-15-85; Am. Ord. 1880, passed 6-
17-14; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.089  STAY OF PROCEEDINGS ON APPEAL.
   An appeal to the Board from a decision of an administrative official stays
all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer
from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board, after the notice of
appeal is filed with him or her, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by a court of competent
jurisdiction upon application, upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal
is taken, and upon due cause being shown.
(Prior Code, § 13-124)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.090  TIME AND NOTICE OF HEARINGS; MINOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Not less than ten days before the meeting of the Board, notice of
public hearing of the Board shall be given as follows:
      (1)   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city;
and
      (2)   By mail in writing to all owners of property within a 300-foot
radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property; provided, that on
hearings involving minor variances, the notice shall be mailed to only those
owners of property adjacent to the subject property.
   (B)   The notices required in division (A) above shall contain:
      (1)   Legal description of the property and the street address or
approximate location in the city;
      (2)   Present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the
application requested; and
      (3)   Date, time and place of hearing.
   (C)   For minor variances, as hereinafter defined, the following notice and
application procedures shall apply:
      (1)   Minor variances are:
         (a)   Any variance requested where the total completed value of the
structure or improvement does not exceed $2,000; and
         (b)   Any application for variance from the district regulation
pertaining to setbacks, required yards, building height, minimum lot areas and
lot width and depth, lot coverage or off-street parking requirements where the
requested variance does not exceed 10% of the amount required by the district
regulation.
      (2)   For minor variances the following special application and notice
procedures shall apply:
         (a)   The application shall be accompanied by a list of the names and
addresses of all owners of property abutting the exterior boundaries of the
property for which a variance is sought. The list shall be taken from the
current year's tax rolls maintained by the State County Treasurer's office and
shall be certified as accurate by the applicant.
         (b)   The written notice of hearing as described in division (B) above
shall be mailed to the owners of all property adjacent to the subject property
at least ten days prior to the hearing. No publication of notice is required
for hearing a minor variance.
         (c)   In all other respects, the procedures applicable to a regular
variance shall apply to minor variances.
(Prior Code, § 13-125)  (Ord. 1622, passed 11-2-99; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-
19)
§ 158.091  RULES OF DECISION.
   (A)   In granting any appeal, the Board, in conformity with the provisions
of this subchapter, may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirements, decision or determination appealed from and may make the
order, requirements, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to
that end shall have all the power of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
   (B)   The Board may grant special exceptions restricting the use of
residential structures for commercial purposes under the following conditions:
      (1)   Only the following uses shall be eligible for consideration for
special exceptions by the Board:
         (a)   All uses permitted in C-O, commercial office use district;
         (b)   All uses permitted in C-R, commercial restricted use district;
         (c)   Assembly halls for non-profit organizations;
      (2)   The proposed use of the structure conforms with the use regulations
of the zoning district in which it is located;
      (3)   No further residential use of the premises shall be permitted;
      (4)   No change shall be made in the use of a structure for which a
special exception is granted until an additional special exception is granted
for the proposed use under the provisions of this subchapter;
      (5)   The structure shall be located a minimum of five feet from all
property lines;
      (6)   There shall be a minimum of five off-street parking spaces
provided, or the amount specified herein, for the proposed use, whichever is
greater. The required spaces shall comply with the application regulations
governing locations, access, development, maintenance and screening contained
herein;
      (7)   The granting of a special exception shall not confer upon the
applicant an exemption from any applicable electrical, plumbing, sewage
disposal codes or life safety codes adopted by the city;
      (8)   The structure for which a special exception is sought may be
enlarged, provided that the enlargement is in conformity with the requirements
of the City Building Code;
      (9)   Should the structure for which a special exception is granted be
removed or destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50% of its
replacement cost at the time of destruction, as determined by the city building
inspector, it shall not be reconstructed, except in conformity with the City
Building Code;
      (10)   Should the structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatsoever, it shall either be removed completely from the lot on which it is
situated or brought into conformance with the City Building Code;
      (11)   The applicant for a special exception shall allow the city
building inspector to enter the subject premises for inspection prior to the
hearing date of the Board of Adjustment;
      (12)   The Board shall find that the proposed use or structure does not
constitute a fire or health hazard and will not adversely affect the public
interest;
      (13)   These requirements shall not apply to any legally established and
operated home occupation, as defined herein, so long as the home occupation is
in full compliance with all the applicable regulations contained herein.
   (C)   The Board may grant special exceptions pursuant hereto restricting the
location and use of property for oil, gas or mineral production under the
following conditions:
      (1)   The well, storage tank, and production facility location must be in
conformance with the provisions of §§
151.01 et seq., provided the Board may vary the location requirements under
appropriate circumstances and conditions. The Board of Adjustment shall have no
authority to grant a well location which would be located closer than 150 feet
to any school, church, business or dwelling.
      (2)   The applicant shall provide the following information:
         (a)   A survey drawn by a registered surveyor showing location of any
portion of any dwelling, building or other structure located within 300 feet of
the well site;
         (b)   Certification of approval from the State Corporation Commission
to commence drilling; and
         (c)   All other information required by §§
151.01 et seq. and regulations adopted thereunder.
      (3)   The Board shall find that the proposed use does not constitute a
fire or health hazard or a nuisance to the surrounding neighbors, that the
proposed use does not pose a threat to the surface or groundwater in the city
or adjacent areas, and will not adversely affect the public interest.
      (4)   In granting a special exception for oil and gas wells, the Board of
Adjustment shall have the authority to impose the conditions upon the granting
of the special exception as it deems are necessary for the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the city and in order to carry out the general
interest and purpose hereof. In deciding on the granting of special exceptions
and in determining appropriate conditions to be imposed, the Board of
Adjustment shall consider and specifically address the following factors:
         (a)   Danger of fire and explosion;
         (b)   Adequacy of streets and roads to serve the drilling site;
         (c)   Impact of truck traffic on surrounding neighborhood;
         (d)   Impact of drilling activity on quality of life and environment
in area of proposed well;
         (e)   Feasibility of proposed site as contrasted with other available
sites;
         (f)   Density of population in area surrounding proposed well site;
         (g)   Accessibility of proposed site to fire, police, and other
emergency vehicles;
         (h)   Proximity of proposed site to dwelling, schools, churches and
other buildings; and
         (i)   Other public health, safety, welfare or zoning considerations.
   (D)   The Board may grant special exceptions as provided herein to allow the
erection of carports, as defined in §
158.002, in the front yard setback under the following conditions:
      (1)   The granting of the special exception will be in harmony with the
general intent and purpose hereof.
      (2)   The granting of the special exception will not adversely affect the
immediate neighborhood.
   (E)   The Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception hereto to allow
the sale of used licensed motor vehicles as an accessory use under the
following conditions.
      (1)   The sale of used licensed motor vehicles shall be an accessory use
which is customarily associated with the primary use of the primary business,
and the accessory use shall be located on the same lot as the primary business.
      (2)   The special exception shall only be granted in the C-H, commercial
highway, or C-G, commercial general zoning districts.
      (3)   A license shall be obtained in accordance with the provisions
hereof, except the following additional conditions shall be met:
         (a)   There shall be no more than three used licensed motor vehicles
offered for sale of which no more than one shall be displayed on the property
of the primary business at any given time.
         (b)   The conditions concerning the open display of merchandise in C-
G district, as required hereby, shall be met.
         (c)   Signs advertising the sale of used licensed motor vehicles shall
be limited to wall signs complying with the sign regulations found in this
title, but in no event shall the sign be larger than four feet by eight feet.
   (F)   In order to grant any variance from the terms hereof, the Board must
find that all the following conditions are met:
      (1)   Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to
the land, structure or building in the same zoning district;
      (2)   The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant;
      (3)   Granting the variance requested will not convey on the applicant
any special privilege that is denied by ordinance to other lands, buildings or
structures in the same zoning district;
      (4)   Literal interpretation of the provisions of the code would deprive
the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning
district under the terms hereof and would work unnecessary and undue hardship
on the applicant;
      (5)   The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make
possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure;
      (6)   The grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general
intent and purpose hereof; and
      (7)   In granting any special exception or variance, the Board may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity herewith.
      (8)   Violation of the conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the
terms under which the special exception or variance is granted, shall be deemed
a violation hereof.
(Prior Code, § 13-126)  (Am. Ord. 1372, passed 5-6-86; Am. Ord. 1426, passed 8-
16-88; Am. Ord. 1452, passed 10-3-89; Am. Ord. 1498, passed 3-2-93; Am. Ord.
1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.092  HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   All deliberations of the Board shall be conducted, and all its
decisions shall be made, at a meeting that is open to the public.
   (B)   At the time of the hearing, any person may appear in his or her own
behalf or be represented by agent or attorney.
   (C)   (1)   All decisions of the Board shall be made after motion has been
made and seconded.
      (2)   The motion which decides the issue shall be in the form of findings
of fact and shall state the reasons for the findings by the Board.
      (3)   If conditions are imposed in the granting of a special exception or
variance, the conditions shall be included in the motion.
   (D)   In reaching a decision on any motion, the Board shall record the vote
of each member or the absence or failure to vote.
   (E)   (1)   The minutes of all deliberations by the Board shall be
acknowledged as to accuracy by the Chairperson and shall be a part of the
public record of the Board.
      (2)   The minutes of the meeting at which a variance or special exception
was granted shall show that each element of a variance or special exception was
established at the public hearing on the questions.
(Prior Code, § 13-127)  (Am. Ord. 1310, passed 11-6-84; Am. Ord. 1478, passed
9-17-91; Am. Ord. 1498, passed 3-2-93; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.093  REHEARINGS.
   No application which has been heard and decided by the Board shall be set
for rehearing within six months from the date of decision, and then only where
the applicant can show material change in the facts of the case or where new
evidence which might affect the decision can be produced, and then only upon
proper filing of a new application.
(Prior Code, § 13-128)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 158.094  APPEALS TO THE DISTRICT COURT.
   (A)   An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the
Board may be taken by any person or persons, jointly or severally, or any
taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality to the
district court by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk and with the
Board within 30 days from the date the decision of the Board is rendered, which
notice shall specify the grounds of the appeal. Upon filing of the notice of
appeal, as herein provided, the Board shall forthwith transmit to the Court
Clerk the original or certified copies of all the papers constituting the
record in the case, together with the order, decision or ruling of the Board.
(Prior Code, § 13-129)
   (B)   An appeal to the District Court from the Board stays all proceedings
in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Chairperson of the Board
from which the appeal is taken, certifies to the Court Clerk, after notice of
appeal shall have been filed that by reason of facts stated in the certificate
a stay would in his or her opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In
such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
order which may be granted by the District Court, upon application or notice to
the administrative officer in charge of the enforcement of the terms and
provisions of the zoning code, upon notice to the Chairperson of the Board from
which the appeal is taken and upon due cause being shown, the Court may reverse
or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the decision brought up for review.
(Prior Code, § 13-130)  (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
APPENDIX A:  PERMITTED USE TABLE
 
PERMITTED R-1 R-2 R-M MHP PRD C-O C-R C-G C-H CBD I-L I-H A E-1 MUD PUD PUB
USES
Accessory Building (over 240  SP SP                               SP
sq.)
Adult Business                                              X  X
Adult day care center                           X  X  X
Agriculture                                                       X
Airport or landing field                              X     X  X           X
Alcoholic beverage                                 X  X  X  X  X        X  X
establishments
Amusement, commercial indoor                       X  X  X  X  X  SP    X  X
Amusement, commercial outdoor                         X  X  X  X  SP    X  X
Art gallery                                  X  X  X  X  X           X  X  X X
Auto storage or auto auction                                X  X
Automobile repair garage                                    X  X
Bed and Breakfast Inn            X  X     X  X  X  X  X                    X
Brewery (Craft brew)                                  X  X  X           X
Brewery (large scale)                        X  X  X  X                 X
Building and landscaping                                       X
material sales yard
Bus station or terminal                         X  X        X  X           X
Caretaker or employee housing                      SP       SP SP    SP
Catering establishment                          X  X  X  X
Charitable or Philanthropic                                          X       X
Institutions
Church                        X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X X
College or university                                                X
Community center              X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X X
Country club, private         SP SP                               SP
Crematory                                                      SP
Day camp for children                                             X  X       X
Day-care center                              X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X     X  X
Dispensary store                             X  X  X  X                 X
Dormitory                                                            X
Dwelling, multi-family              X  X                                X  X
Dwelling, single-family       X  X  X  X  X                       X     X  X X
residential
Dwelling, two-family             X  X     X                             X  X
Equestrian Educational                                            SP
Facility
Equipment storage/rental yard                                  X
Family day-care homes         X  X  X                                   X
Financial Institutions                       X  X  X  X                 X
Fraternity or sorority lodge                                         X
or assembly hall
Freighting yard/terminal                                       X
Funeral Home and Mortuary                          X  X     X  X
Gasoline service stations                          X  X  X              X  X
Golf course, commercial                         SP X  X     X  X  SP
Greenhouse and plant nursery                       X  X  X  X  X  X     X  X
Grocery store or supermarket                    X  X     X              X  X X
Group House                   SP SP SP SP SP             SP       SP    SP
Halfway House                 SP
Hazardous Waste Collection,                                 SP SP
Processing, or Disposal
Home occupations              X  X                                X        X
Hospital                                                                     X
Hotel or motel                                     X  X  X  X  X     X  X  X
Inmate pre-release center                                      SP
Inmate transitional living                                     SP
centers
Inmate Work Center                                             SP
Impatient Treatment                          SP SP SP                SP SP
Itinerant vendor                                         SP          SP SP   SP
Jail and Correctional                                          SP
Facility
Kennel                                                X     X     SP       X
Laboratory, scientific or                    X  X  X  X  X  X  X
research
Library                                                                      X
Manufacturing, heavy                                           X           X
Manufacturing, light                                        X  X           X
Massage Clinic                               X  X  X     X              X  X
Media broadcast                              X              X  X
Medical or dental facility                   X  X  X                 X  X  X
Mobile and Manufactured Home           X                          SP
Mobile and Manufactured Home           X                          SP
Park
Museum                                                                  X    X
Night club/dance hall                              X  X  X  X  X        X  X
Nursing care facility,                                               X
convalescent, or rest home
Open display, commercial                     SP             SP SP
Pest Control Services                                       X  X
Petroleum products, Oil field
equipment, storage yard and                                    X  SP
wholesale
Pharmacy                                     X  X  X  X                 X
Professional offices                      X  X  X  X                    X
Public park and playground    X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X X
Public Safety Facilities      X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X X
Public Utility Station                                         X             X
Publisher                                          X  X     X  X           X
Recreational vehicle or                                        X
vehicle storage
Recreational Vehicle Park                                   X  X           X
Recycling Collection Facility                               X  X           X
Restaurant Eating
Establishment (Not drive-in                  X  X  X  X  X              X  X
type)
Restaurant or Eating                         X  X  X  X  X  X           X  X
Establishment (Drive- in)
Retail, general                              X  X  X  X                 X
Retail, specialty                            X  X  X     X              X
Sale barn                                                      X  X
Salvage yards                                                  X
School, Business                                                     X
School, Commercial Trade                                             X
School, Private, Elementary,                                         X
or Secondary
School, Public or                                                    X
Denominational
Self-service laundry or dry-                    X  X  X     X           X  X
cleaning establishment
Shelter                                                              X     X X
Shooting range, indoor                                X     X  X  SP       X
Swap meet, flea market, and                                       SP SP      SP
other similar uses
Swim or tennis club           X  X  X                                X  X
Swimming pool, commercial                 X     X  X                       X
Tattoo and/or Body Piercing                                 SP SP
Shop
Telecommunication Facilities  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X X
Temporary Employment                               X  X  X              X  X
Services, Day Labor Business
Theater, drive-in                                  X  X     X     SP       X
Transitional Living Facility  SP SP SP
Treatment Facility                           SP SP SP SP SP          SP SP
Unlighted private tennis      SP SP SP                                  SP
courts
Vehicle Storage                                                X
Veterinary hospital                          X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X
Warehouse                                                   X  X
Warehouse, mini                                             X  X
Wastewater treatment plant                                                   X
Wholesale or warehouse                                      X  X
enterprise
Zoo                                                               SP SP      X
 
(Am. Ord. 1269, passed 1-17-84; Am. Ord. 1277, passed 1-17-84; Am. Ord. 1389,
passed 11-18-86; Am. Ord. 1412, passed 10-6-87; Am. Ord. 1476, passed 9-3-91;
Am. Ord. 1609, passed 3-16-99; Am. Ord. 1678, passed 9-3-02; Am. Ord. 1687,
passed 11-5-02; Am. Ord. 1757, passed 1-17-06; Am. Ord. 1758, passed 1-17-06;
Am. Ord. 1759A, passed 2-7-06; Am. Ord. 1776, passed 12-5-06; Am. Ord. 1974,
passed 8-6-19)
CHAPTER 159:   PORTABLE TEMPORARY STORAGE UNITS
Section
   
159.01   Definition
   
159.02   Permit required; application; fee
   
159.03   Duration
   
159.04   Prohibited
   
159.05   Location
   
159.06   Contents of PTSU
 
   
159.99   Penalty
§ 159.01  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PORTABLE TEMPORARY STORAGE UNIT. Portable, temporary storage units
hereinafter referred to as PTSU, are an allowed temporary accessory uses that
are intended or used for the purpose of storing materials on a temporary basis
on residential property used for single family or two-family use.
(Ord. 1866, passed 9-4-12; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 159.02  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE.
   Before placing a PTSU unit on property in the city, an application shall be
filed and the owner of property where the PTSU is to be located or the person,
firm or a company furnishing the PTSU shall receive a permit from the city. No
permits shall be required unless the unit will be at the site for more than one
week. Fees for the permits shall be established by resolution of the City
Council.
(Ord. 1866, passed 9-4-12; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 159.03  DURATION.
   Permits will be granted for a period of 90 days. However, in cases where a
dwelling has been damaged by natural disaster or casualty, the Community
Development Director or City Manager is authorized to allow a temporary
portable storage container for a longer period. At the expiration of the
initial period, applicants may seek an extension from the Community Development
Director or City Manager if needed.
(Ord. 1866, passed 9-4-12; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 159.04  PROHIBITED.
   (A)   A PTSU is not allowed on a vacant residential property unless a house
is under construction.
   (B)   A PTSU at a residence may not exceed 8.5 feet in height or more than
260 square feet in floor area.
   (C)   Rail cars, semi-trailers, and similar structures may not be used for
temporary or permanent storage on parcels containing a dwelling.
   (D)   A PTSU may not be converted to permanent structures.
   (E)   Signs on a PTSU may not violate any applicable sign regulations.
(Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 159.05  LOCATION.
   PTSU units are prohibited from being placed in streets or the front yard of
a property. PTSU units must be kept in the driveway of the property at the
furthest accessible point from the street. All locations must be on paved off-
street surfaces. The applicant must obtain preapproval of the location by the
Community Development Director or City Manager if the property does not have a
driveway or if necessity requires location off a paved driveway.
(Ord. 1866, passed 9-4-12; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 159.06  CONTENTS OF PTSU.
   No PTSU shall be used to store solid waste, or any other illegal or
hazardous material. Upon reasonable notice to the applicant, the city may
inspect the contents of any PTSU at any reasonable time to ensure that it is
not being used to store said materials.
(Ord. 1866, passed 9-4-12; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
§ 159.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or
corporation to locate a PTSU on property or deliver a PTSU to property in the
city without the necessary permit required under this chapter.
   (B)   A violation of this chapter shall constitute an offense punishable by
a fine, not to exceed $500 plus court costs. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1866, passed 9-4-12; Am. Ord. 1974, passed 8-6-19)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ZONING AMENDMENTS
TABLE I:  ZONING AMENDMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1662 11-20-01 Including in the C-H district the property described as a part of the
              northeast corner of block nine, Forest Highland Addition
1665 2-5-02   Including in C-R district the property described as lot one, block one of
              Lakewood Addition
1666 3-5-02   Including in C-G district the properties located in the city described as:
              7013 NW 36th Street, 7008 NW 39th Street, 3300 N Rockwell Avenue, 3302 N
            Rockwell Avenue, 3411 N Rockwell Avenue, 3408 N Rockwell Avenue, 3920 N
              Rockwell Avenue, 4607 N Rockwell Avenue, 5002 N Rockwell Avenue, 5106 N
              Rockwell Avenue, 4108 N Rockwell Avenue
1667 5-7-02   Including in C-G district the property described as a part of the southwest
              quarter of section twenty-one, township twelve north, range 4 west
1668 4-2-02   Including in C-G district the property described as lot twelve, block 000,
              Riker Subaddition block 20
1669 6-18-02  Including in C-G district the property described as lots thirty-nine and
              forty, block five, Woods Garden Terrace Second Addition
1674 8-6-02   Including in C-G district the property described as lot one, in Airport View
              Addition
1675 8-6-02   Including in C-G district the property described as lots three and four, block
              one, of Bednar Addition
1679 9-3-02   Including in C-G district the property described as part of lot eight, block
              one, in Holloway Acres Addition
1680 9-17-02  Including in C-G district the property described as the southeast corner of
              N.W. 23rd Street and N. Council Road
1682 10-1-02  Including in PUD district the property described as the west half of the east
              half of the west half of block twenty-two, in Fruitland Gardens Addition
1686 11-5-02  Including in R-2 district the property described as lot two, block zero, in
              English Acres
              Including in C-G district the properties described as:
              a. part of unplatted section twenty-one, township twelve north, range four
1691 12-17-02 west,
              b. lots six and seven, block one, Holloway Acres, and
              c. lots fifteen and sixteen, block zero, Denham lots nine through sixteen
1695 3-4-03   Including in C-G district the property described as the west 410 feet of block
              three, of Hickey Acres Addition
1704 9-16-03  Including in C-R district the property described as lot ten, block one, of
              Airport View Addition
1721 4-6-04   Including in E-I district the property described as:
            a. a part of block 9 of State School Acreage Tracts,
            b. block 2 of East Side Addition, and
            c. blocks 7, 10, and 11 of Cockrell Place Addition
              Including in PUD district the property described as lying in the northwest
1722 3-9-04   quarter of the southeast quarter of section eighteen, township twelve north,
              range four west of Indian Meridian
              Vacating building set-back line covering south 30 feet of lots six, seven,
1723 5-4-04   eight, nine, and ten of block 13 established by plat recorded at Book 13, Page
              75 of the records of Oklahoma County
1726 6-15-04  Including in E-I district the  property described as lot five and the south 40
              feet of lot six of block three in East Side Addition
              Including in PUD district the property described as lying in the northwest
1727 6-15-04  quarter of the southeast quarter of section eighteen, township twelve north,
              range four west of Indian Meridian
1735 10-5-04  Including in C-G district the north 509 feet of lot 15, Schafers Suburbs
              Addition, less and except the north 28.5 feet
1743 1-18-05  Including in C-G district lots 2 and 3, Airport View Addition
              Including in PUD district part of the west half of the southwest quarter of
1747 5-3-05   the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of section 9, township 12
              north, range 4 west of the Indian Meridian
1748 5-3-05   Including in C-G district lot 5, block 0, McCray Sub Addition
              Including in PUD district the east half of the west half of the east half of
1750 6-7-05   the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of section 20, township 12
              north, range 4 west of the Indian Meridian
1755 10-18-05 Including in the E-I educational institutional use district Lot Five (5),
              Block One (1) Payne Carson Addition
              Including in the C-O commercial office use district Lots Fifteen (15) and
1760 3-7-06   Sixteen (16) in Sisk Subdivision of Blocks Three (3) and Four (4), West Park 
              Addition
1769 7-18-06  Including in the E-1 educational institution use district the properties
              described as:
              a. The east half of the east half of the southeast  quarter of the southeast
            quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 21, Township 12 north, Range 4
              west of the Indian Meridian, Oklahoma County; and
              b. Lots 1-11, both inclusive, in Block 1, and Lots 1-10, both inclusive, in
            Block 2, all in Woods Garden Terrace, now vacated and being a part of the
              southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 21, Township 12 north,
              Range 4 west of the Indian Meridian in Oklahoma County.
              Including in the C-G, commercial general use district part of Block 17,
1785 6-19-07  beginning 102 feet south of the northwest corner of Block 17, east 165 feet,
              south 79.84 feet, west 130.63 feet northwesterly 165.5 feet north to
              beginning, Schafers Suburbs Addition
1786 7-17-07  Including in the C-O, commercial office use district the west half of the west
              half of Lots 1 and 2 in Block 1 in Holloway Acres.
              Including in the C-G, commercial general use district a part of Block 9 in
              Forest Highland, a subdivision of  the southeast quarter of Section 17,
              Township 12 north, Range 4 west of the Indian Meridian, Oklahoma County, more
              particularly described  as part of Lot 9, in Forest Highland Addition, a
1787 7-17-07  subdivision of the southeast quarter of Section 17, Township 12 north, Range 4
              west of the Indian Meridian, more particularly described as follows: Beginning
              45 feet west and 240 feet south of the northeast corner of Block 9, Forest
              Highland Addition; thence west 135 feet; thence south 60 feet, thence east 135
              feet; thence north 60 feet to the point of beginning. (4205 N. Divis Ave.)
              Including in the C-G, commercial general use district the property described
              as part of the northwest quarter of Section 29, Township 12 north, Range 4
              west of the Indian Meridian, Bethany, Oklahoma County, Oklahoma, more
              particularly described as follows: Commencing at the northwest corner of the
              NW/4; thence south along the west line of the NW/4 a distance of 233.00 feet
1808 9-16-08  to the point or place of beginning; thence east and parallel to the north line
              of the NW/4 a distance of 243.00 feet; thence south and parallel to the west
              line of the NW/4 a distance of 145.00 feet; thence west and parallel to the
              north line of the NW/4 a distance of 243.00 feet to a point on the west line
              of the NW/4; thence north along the west line of the NW/4 a distance of 145.00
              feet to the point or place of beginning; less and except an easement over the
              west 50.00 feet for road and utility purposes.
              Including in the A, agricultural use district the property described as part
1811 11-18-08 of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 20, Township 12
              north, Range 4 west of the Indian Meridian, Bethany, Oklahoma County,
              Oklahoma.
              Including in the Planned Unit Development (PUD) zoning district property
1818 4-7-09   described as Lot 1, Fritts Subdivision of the northwest quarter of Block 2 of
              northwest addition to Bethany, Oklahoma county, Oklahoma.
              Including in the Planned Unit Development (PUD) zoning district property
1821 5-19-09  described as Lot 4, Block 1, Street’s Addition to Bethany, Oklahoma County,
              Oklahoma.
              Including in C-G, commercial general use district, property described as a
1830 10-6-09  tract of land lying in the southeast quarter of Section 16, Township 12 North,
              Range 4 West, of the Indian Meridian, Oklahoma County, Oklahoma, also being a
              part of West Park Addition.
1835 1-5-10   Including in the E-I, educational-institutional use district, property
              described as Lot 1, Plainview Addition.
1836 1-5-10   Including in C-G, commercial general use district, property described as Lots
              1 through 9 of Block 1 in Roberts Subdivision of a part of Block 21.
              Including in the Planned Unit Development (PUD) zoning district property
1841 9-7-10   described as unplatted part of Section 21, Township 12 North, Range 4 West, to
              be developed for a facility for manufacture of parts for fishing lures and
              incidental retail sales of such parts. Repealed by Ord.  1842.  See below.
1842 10-19-10 Repealing Ord. 1841.  See above.
              Including in C-R, commercial-restricted use district, property described as
1853 7-19-11  Lot 9, Block 2, in Beverly’s Subdivision of Block 11 of the northwest addition
              to the city.
              Included in, added to, and made a part of C-G, commercial-general use
1859 3-6-12   district, property described as east 128 feet of Lot 14 in Schafers Suburbs
              Addition to the city.
              Including in C-G, commercial-general use district, the property described as
1867 9-21-12  west 200.6 feet of Lot 14, less and except the north 200 feet of the east 75
              feet in Schafers Suburbs Addition to the city.
1873 6-4-13   Including in C-R, commercial-restricted use district, the property described
              as Lot 2, Block 1, Beverly’s Second Addition to the city.
              Including in C-R, commercial-restricted use district, the property described
1876 11-5-13  as parts of the Northwest Quarter of Section 29, Township 12 North, Range 4
              West of the Indian Meridian.
              Including in C-G, commercial-general use district, the property described as
1884 9-2-14   part of the north half of the southeast quarter of Section 18, Township 12
              North, Range 4 West, of the Indian Meridian.
              Including in C-H, commercial-highway use district the property described as
1889 12-2-14  the west 20 feet of Lot 1 and the east 79 feet of Lot 2, block 2 of the West
              Park Addition to the city.
              Including property described as unplatted part of Section 20, Township 12
1891 2-3-15   North, Range 4 West of the city into the planned unit development zoning
              district.
1911 12-1-15  Including property described as Lot 1, Block 1, Sandlian Addition.
1938 7-18-17  Including in R-1, single-family use district, the property described as Lot 3,
              Block 1, Don Brown’s Western Oaks 3rd Addition.
1939 9-5-17   Including in CBD, central business district, the property described as part of
              Block 19 Original Town.
              Including in C-G, commercial general zoning district, the property described
1958 7-3-18   as PT. SE4, SEC. 17, 12N, 4W, BEG. 346.5' W OF NE/C OF SE4 TH. S. 132', E.
              52.5' TO BEG. EX. N. 25'.
1962 11-6-18  Including in C-G, commercial general zoning district, the property described
              as 4100 Block North Council Road.
1964 11-6-18  Including in PUD, planned unit development, the property described as 3411
              North Rockwell Avenue.
1965 1-3-     Including in PUD, planned unit development, the property described as Block 3,
     19    West Avenue Addition.
              Including in C-G, commercial general zoning district, the property described
1967 2-5-19   as East 110.01 feet of the west 274.01 feet of Block Thirteen in Fruitland
              Gardens Addition.
1985 1-7-     Including in R-M, multi-family use district, the property described as Oak
     20    Hill Sub Forest Hghlnd 003 016.
1988 2-4-     Including in MUD, mixed use district, the property described as 3200 Council
     20    Road.
             
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Oklahoma Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OKLAHOMA STATUTES
 
References to O.S. Code Section
2 O.S. § 16-26            90.09
4 O.S. §§ 501–508      95.064
10 O.S.                    132.092
10 O.S. §§ 401 et seq.   110.02,
                           112.02
10 O.S. § 620.6           33.068
10 O.S. § 7003-2.1        33.066
10 O.S. § 7005-1.1        33.068
                           33.065,
10 O.S. § 7303-1.2        33.067,
                           132.092
10 O.S. § 7307-1.7        33.068
11 O.S. et seq.            158.072
11 O.S.                    154.02
11 O.S. § 1-402           10.19
                           10.01–
11 O.S. §§ 14-101 et seq.10.18,
                           10.99
11 O.S. § 14-107          150.001
11 O.S. § 14-108          10.01
11 O.S. §§ 14-108–14-1133.002
11 O.S. § 14-109          10.01
11 O.S. § 14-111          10.99
11 O.S. § 17-110          94.06
11 O.S. § 20-101          11.01
                           10.01–
11 O.S. §§ 22-101 et seq.10.18,
                           10.99
                           110.01,
11 O.S. § 22-106          116.01-
                           116.05,
                           116.15
11 O.S. § 22-107          110.01
11 O.S. § 22-109          132.075
11 O.S. § 22-110          132.005
11 O.S. § 22-111          93.38
11 O.S. § 22-112          93.39
11 O.S. § 22-112.1        93.05
11 O.S. § 22-115          95.001
11 O.S. § 22-118          117.01
11 O.S. § 22-121          93.36
11 O.S. § 22-123          132.090
11 O.S. § 22-138          33.056
11 O.S. §§ 26-101 et seq.94.01
11 O.S. § 26-103          94.02
11 O.S. §§ 26-201–26-2094.06
11 O.S. §§ 27-101–27-1333.003
11 O.S. § 27-117          70.043
11 O.S. § 27-117.1        70.043
11 O.S. § 27-119          10.99
11 O.S. § 27-123          33.045
11 O.S. § 27-124          33.045
11 O.S. §§ 29-101 et seq.34.04
11 O.S. § 29-102          34.02
11 O.S. § 29-103          34.02,
                           90.08
11 O.S. § 29-106          90.08
11 O.S. § 29-108          34.05
11 O.S. §§ 29-201–29-2034.20
11 O.S. §§ 30-101 et seq.32.001
11 O.S. §§ 33-101 et seq.32.015
11 O.S. §§ 34-101 et seq.35.01,
                           37.40
11 O.S. § 36-107          92.22
11 O.S. § 36-108          92.22
11 O.S. §§ 41-101 et seq.154.25
11 O.S. §§ 43-101 et seq.158.072
11 O.S. §§ 44-101 et seq.158.085
11 O.S. § 44-104          158.086
11 O.S. § 45-104          154.02, 
                           158.072
11 O.S. § 48-101          37.25
11 O.S. §§ 50-101 et seq.37.40
18 O.S.                    35.07
20 O.S. § 1313.2          33.037,
                           33.053
21 O.S. § 1247            132.050
21 O.S. § 1550.1          132.106
21 O.S. § 1704            131.01
21 O.S. § 1706            131.01
21 O.S. § 1713            131.17
22 O.S. § 979(a)          33.054
22 O.S. §§ 1115–1115.5 70.043
25 O.S. § 82.1            37.07
25 O.S. § 82.2            37.07
25 O.S. §§ 301 et seq.   30.16
37 O.S. §§ 501 et seq.   111.01,
                           132.035
37 O.S. § 516             111.06
37 O.S. § 518             110.02
37 O.S. § 537             71.049
37 O.S. §§ 600.1–600.12132.053
43 O.S. § 3-403           112.20
43A O.S. § 3-403          158.002,
                           158.056
                           70.095,
                           70.097,
47 O.S.                    70.099,
                           70.150,
                           118.04
47 O.S. §§ 1-101–1-186 70.002
47 O.S. § 1-105           70.105
47 O.S. § 1-174           70.105
47 O.S. §§ 6-101–6-117 71.040
47 O.S. § 6-204           70.049
47 O.S. § 6-206           70.049
47 O.S. § 6-303           71.041
47 O.S. § 6-305           71.042
47 O.S. § 7-601.1         70.024
47 O.S. § 7-607           70.024
47 O.S. § 10-104          70.020
47 O.S. § 10-107          70.021
47 O.S. § 10-108          70.021
47 O.S. § 10-115          70.022
47 O.S. §§ 11-101 et seq.71.045
47 O.S. § 11-104          70.006
47 O.S. § 11-106          70.005
47 O.S. § 11-201          70.065,
                           71.047
47 O.S. § 11-202          70.066,
                           70.072
47 O.S. § 11-203          70.081
47 O.S. § 11-204          70.073
47 O.S. § 11-206          70.084
47 O.S. § 11-207          70.085
47 O.S. § 11-301          71.054,
                           71.057
47 O.S. § 11-303          71.080
47 O.S. § 11-304          71.082
47 O.S. § 11-305          71.081
47 O.S. § 11-307          70.071
47 O.S. § 11-308          70.070
47 O.S. § 11-309          70.067
47 O.S. § 11-311          71.055
47 O.S. § 11-312          71.052
47 O.S. § 11-401          71.001
47 O.S. § 11-402          71.002
47 O.S. § 11-403          71.003
47 O.S. § 11-404          71.005
47 O.S. §§ 11-501–11-5074.01-
                           74.12
47 O.S. § 11-601          71.020,
                           71.024
47 O.S. § 11-604          71.023
47 O.S. § 11-605          71.025
47 O.S. § 11-606          71.026
47 O.S. § 11-705          71.084
47 O.S. § 11-705.1        70.099
47 O.S. § 11-801          71.135
47 O.S. § 11-803          70.063,
                           71.137
47 O.S. § 11-804          71.136
47 O.S. § 11-805          71.066
47 O.S. § 11-902          118.28,
                           118.30
47 O.S. § 11-1003         72.04,
                           72.18
47 O.S. § 11-1004         72.11,
                           72.14
47 O.S. § 11-1102         71.050
47 O.S. § 11-1104         71.121
47 O.S. § 11-1105         72.16
47 O.S. § 11-1108         71.086
47 O.S. § 11-1109         71.053
47 O.S. § 11-1110         71.119
47 O.S. § 11-1112         70.114
47 O.S. §§ 11-1201–11-173.01
47 O.S. §§ 12-201 et seq.70.095
47 O.S. § 12-203          70.097
47 O.S. § 12-204          70.097
47 O.S. § 12-206          70.100
47 O.S. § 12-218          71.008,
                           71.085
47 O.S. § 12-219          70.100
47 O.S. §§ 12-301–12-3170.102
47 O.S. § 12-402          70.107
47 O.S. § 12-403          70.106,
                           70.108
47 O.S. § 12-404          70.104
47 O.S. § 12-422          70.105
47 O.S. § 13-102          70.095
47 O.S. § 13-103          70.095
47 O.S. §§ 14-101–14-1171.102
47 O.S. §§ 14-105–14-1071.117
47 O.S. § 14-113          70.080
                           70.035,
                           70.061,
                           70.063,
                           70.070,
                           70.075,
47 O.S. § 15-102          70.076,
                           71.061,
                           71.137,
                           72.01,
                           72.02,
                           73.01
47 O.S. § 15-104          70.060
47 O.S. § 15-105          70.061
47 O.S. § 15-106          70.061
47 O.S. § 15-108          70.076
47 O.S. § 16-103          70.004
47 O.S. § 16-109.1        70.007,
                           70.042
47 O.S. § 16-112          70.045
                           116.01–
47 O.S. §§ 421 et seq.   116.05,
                           116.15
47 O.S. § 955             70.024
47 O.S. §§ 1101 et seq.  70.096,
                           70.137
47 O.S. § 1102            70.113
47 O.S. § 1134            70.113
47 O.S. 1137.1             70.024
47 O.S. 1137.3             70.024
51 O.S. §§ 121 et seq.   37.55
51 O.S. § 125             37.55
52 O.S. §§ 420.1 et seq. 150.009
57 O.S.                    158.002,
                           158.044
59 O.S. § 353.1           38.08
59 O.S. §§ 1001 et seq.  110.02
59 O.S. §§ 1006 et seq.  150.072
59 O.S. § 1015            150.070
59 O.S. § 1020            150.070
59 O.S. § 1512            132.109
59 O.S. § 1515            132.109
59 O.S. §§ 1680 et seq.  110.02
59 O.S. §§ 1680–1697   150.025
59 O.S. §§ 1750.1 et seq.115.01
59 O.S. §§ 1800.1 et seq.91.04
60 O.S.                    158.002
60 O.S. §§ 1 et seq.     93.36
61 O.S. §§ 101 et seq.   31.19
63 O.S. §§ 1-801 et seq. 112.21
63 O.S. § 1-909A          53.042
63 O.S. §§ 1-1011–1-10193.37
63 O.S. §§ 1-1013 et seq.150.145
63 O.S. §§ 1-1902 et seq.112.20,
                           158.002
63 O.S. §§ 2-101 et seq. 118.28,
                           118.30
63 O.S. § 2-101 et seq.   132.020 ,
                           132.022
63 O.S. § 421A            158.002
63 O.S. § 683.11          36.01
63 O.S. § 683.12          36.01
63 O.S. §§2851 et seq.   38.36
65 O.S. §§ 1-101 et seq. 32.030
                           38.17,
68 O.S. § 205             38.55,
                           38.80
68 O.S. § 217             38.13,
                           38.52
68 O.S. § 220             38.13,
                           38.52
                           38.15,
68 O.S. § 227             38.52,
                           38.53
68 O.S. §§ 1350 et seq.  38.01
68 O.S. § 1352            38.02
68 O.S. § 1401            38.56
68 O.S. § 1408            38.50
68 O.S. §§ 1621 et seq.  132.005
68 O.S. § 1624            132.005
68 O.S. §§ 2601 et seq.  38.30
68 O.S. § 2701            38.01,
                           38.78
68 O.S. §2704             38.78
68 O.S. § 2813            134.09
70 O.S.                    158.
                           158.044
70 O.S. §§ 10-105 et seq.132.065,
                           132.066
                           116.01-
72 O.S. § 1               116.05,
                           116.15
74 O.S. § 314             90.01
74 O.S. § 324.8           150.001
82 O.S. §§ 1601 - 1618   156.45
82 O.S. §§ 1601 - 1620.1 156.01
                           
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
 
Prior Code Section 2002 Code Section
1-107     10.99
1-201     11.01
1-202     11.02
2-101     31.15
2-102     31.16
2-103     31.17
2-104     31.18
2-105     31.19
2-106     31.19
2-106.1   31.19
2-107     31.20
2-108     31.21
2-201     37.01
2-202     37.02
2-203     37.03
2-204     37.04
2-205     37.05
2-206     37.06
2-208     37.07
2-209     37.08
2-210     37.08
2-211     37.09
2-213     37.10
2-214     37.11
2-215     32.090
2-216     32.091
2-217     32.092
2-301     37.25
2-302     37.26
2-303     37.27
2-304     37.28
2-305     37.30
2-310     37.40
2-311     37.41
2-401     37.55
2-402     37.56
2-403     37.57
2-404     37.58
2-405     37.59
2-501     31.01
2-502     31.02
2-503     31.03
2-601     30.15
2-602     30.01
2-603     30.02
2-604     30.16
2-605     30.17
2-606     30.18
2-607     30.19
2-608     30.20
2-609     30.21
2-610     30.22
2-611     30.23
2-612     30.24
2-613     30.25
2-614     30.24
2-615     30.26
2-616     30.26
2-617     30.27
2-618     30.28
2-619     30.29
2-620     30.30
2-621     30.31
2-622     30.32
2-701     11.15
2-702     11.16
2-703     11.17
3-101     111.01
3-102     111.02
3-103     111.03
3-104     111.04
3-106     111.06
3-107     Repealed
3-108     Repealed
3-109     Repealed
3-110     Repealed
3-111     Repealed
3-112     111.08
3-113     Repealed
3-114     Repealed
3-115     Repealed
3-116     Repealed
3-117     Repealed
3-118     Repealed
3-119     Repealed
3-201     Repealed
3-202     Repealed
3-203     Repealed
3-204     Repealed
3-205     Repealed
3-206     Repealed
3-207     Repealed
3-208     Repealed
3-209     Repealed
3-501     150.070
3-502     150.071
3-503     150.072
3-504     150.073
3-505     150.074
3-506     150.075
3-507     150.076
3-508     150.077
3-509     150.078
3-511     150.079
3-513     150.080
4-101     95.001
4-102     95.002
4-103     95.003
4-104     95.004
4-105     95.005
4-106     95.006
4-107     95.008
4-108     95.009
4-109     95.020
4-110     95.021
4-111     95.022
4-112     95.023
4-113     95.024
4-114     95.025
4-201     95.035
4-207     95.036
4-208     95.037
4-209     95.038
4-210     95.039
4-211     95.040
4-212     95.041
4-213     95.041
4-214     95.041
4-301     95.060
4-302     95.061
4-303     95.062
4-304     95.063
4-305     95.064
4-306     95.065
4-307     95.066
4-401     95.080
4-402     95.081
4-403     95.082
4-404     95.083
5-101     32.045
5-102     32.046
5-103     32.047
5-201     150.001
5-202     150.002
5-203     150.003
5-204     150.004
5-205     150.005
5-206     150.006
5-207     150.007
5-208     150.008
5-209     150.009
5-210     150.010
5-211     150.011
5-212     150.012
5-301     150.025
5-302     150.026
5-303     150.027
5-304     150.028
5-305     150.029
5-306     150.030
5-307     Repealed
5-308     Repealed
5-401     150.045
5-403     150.046
5-404     150.047
5-405     150.048
5-416     150.049
5-601     150.095
5-602     150.096
5-603     150.097
5-604     150.098
5-605     150.099
5-606     150.100
5-607     150.101
5-608     150.102
5-609     150.103
5-610     150.104
5-701     151.01
5-702     151.02
5-703     151.03
5-704     151.04
5-705     151.05
5-706     151.06
5-707     151.07
5-708     151.08
5-709     151.09
5-710     151.10
5-711     151.11
5-712     151.12
5-713     151.13
5-801     151.25
5-802     151.26
5-803     151.27
5-804     151.28
5-805     151.29
5-806     151.30
5-901     150.115
5-902     150.116
5-903     150.117
5-904     150.118
5-905     150.119
5-1001    150.130
5-1002    150.131
5-1003    150.132
5-1004    150.133
6-101     123.001
6-103     123.002
6-108     123.003
6-201     123.020
6-203     123.021
6-204     123.004
6-206     123.023
6-207     123.024
6-210     123.025
6-211     123.026
6-212     123.027
6-213     123.028
6-301     123.045
6-302     123.046
6-303     123.047
6-305     123.048
6-306     123.049
6-401     123.060
6-404     123.061
6-405     123.022
6-407     123.062
6-408     123.063
6-502     123.075
6-503     123.076
6-504     123.077
6-505     123.078
6-510     123.079
6-512     123.080
6-518     123.081
6-520     123.082
7-101     33.001
7-102     33.002
7-103     33.003
7-104     33.015
7-105     33.016
7-107     33.018
7-108     33.019
7-109     33.030
7-110     33.031
7-111     33.032
7-112     33.033
7-113     33.034
7-114     33.035
7-115     33.036
7-116     33.037
7-117     33.038
7-118     33.039
7-119     33.040
7-122     33.042
7-123     33.043
7-124     33.044
7-125     33.045
7-126     33.046
7-127     33.047
7-128     33.048
7-129     33.049
7-130     33.050
7-131     33.051
7-132     33.052
7-133     33.053
7-134     33.054
7-201     33.065
7-202     33.066
7-203     33.067
7-204     33.068
7-205     33.069
7-206     33.070
7-207     33.071
7-208     33.072
7-209     33.073
7-301     33.085
7-302     33.086
7-303     33.087
7-304     33.088
7-305     33.089
7-306     33.090
7-307     33.091
7-308     33.092
7-309     33.093
7-310     33.094
8-101     38.01
8-102     38.02
8-103     38.03
8-104     38.04
8-105     38.05
8-106     38.06
8-106A    38.07
8-106B    38.07
8-107     38.08
8-108     38.08
8-109     38.08
8-110     38.08
8-111     38.08
8-112     38.08
8-113     38.09
8-114     38.10
8-115     38.11
8-116     38.12
8-117     38.13
8-118     38.13
8-119     38.14
8-120     38.15
8-121     38.16
8-122     38.17
8-201     38.30
8-202     38.31
8-203     38.32
8-204     38.33
8-205     38.34
8-206     38.35
8-301     38.45
8-302     38.46
8-303     38.47
8-304     38.48
8-305     38.49
8-306     38.49
8-307     38.50
8-308     38.51
8-309     38.52
8-310     38.52
8-311     38.53
8-312     38.54
8-313     38.55
8-316     38.56
8-317     38.57
8-318     38.58
8-319     38.59
8-320     38.60
9-101     32.001
9-102     32.002
9-103     32.003
9-201     51.01
9-202     51.02
9-203     51.03
9-204     51.04
9-205     51.05
9-206     51.06
9-207     51.07
9-208     51.08
9-209     51.09
9-210     51.10
9-211     51.11
9-212     51.12
9-301     93.01
9-302     93.02
9-303     93.03
9-304     93.04
9-305     93.05
9-306     93.06
9-307     93.07
9-310     93.35
9-311     93.36
9-312     93.36
9-313     93.37
9-314     93.38
9-315     93.39
9-316     93.40
9-317     93.41
9-501     96.01
9-502     96.02
9-601     97.01
9-602     97.02
9-603     97.03
9-604     97.15
9-605     97.16
9-606     97.17
9-607     97.18
9-608     97.19
9-609     97.20
9-610     97.21
9-611     97.22
9-612     97.35
9-613     97.36
9-614     97.37
9-615     97.38
9-616     97.39
9-617     97.40
9-618     97.41
9-619     97.42
9-620     97.43
9-621     97.44
9-701     93.20
9-702     93.21
9-703     93.22
9-801     122.01
9-901     150.145
10-101    110.01
10-102    110.02;
          Ch. 110, App. A
10-103    110.03;
          Ch. 110, App. B
10-104    110.04
10-105    110.05
10-106    110.06
10-107    110.07
10-108    110.08
10-201    Repealed
10-202    Repealed
10-203    Repealed
10-204    Repealed
10-205    Repealed
10-206    Repealed
10-301    112.01
10-302    112.02
10-303    112.03
10-304    112.04
10-305    112.05
10-306    112.06
10-307    112.07
10-501    114.01
10-502    114.02
10-503    114.03
10-504    114.04
10-601    112.20
10-602    112.21
10-603    112.22
10-604    112.23
10-605    112.24
10-606    112.25
10-607    112.26
10-608    112.27
10-701    115.01
10-801    116.01
10-802    116.02
10-803    116.03
10-804    116.04
10-805    116.05
10-901    117.01
10-902    117.02
10-903    117.03
10-904    117.04
10-905    117.05
10-906    117.06
10-1001   118.01
10-1002   118.02
10-1003   118.03
10-1004   118.04
10-1006   118.06
10-1007   118.07
10-1008   118.08
10-1009   118.09
10-1010   118.10
10-1011   118.11
10-1012   118.12
10-1020   118.25
10-1021   118.26
10-1022   118.27
10-1023   118.28
10-1024   118.29
10-1025   118.30
10-1901   118.40
10-1902   120.01
10-1903   121.01
10-1904   119.15
10-1905   116.15
11-101    130.01
11-102    130.02
11-201    131.01
11-201A   131.02
11-202    131.17
11-203    131.03
11-204    131.04
11-205    131.05
11-206    131.06
11-207    131.07
11-208    131.08
11-209    131.09
11-210    131.10
11-211    131.11
11-212    131.12
11-213    131.13
11-214    131.14
11-215    131.15
11-301    132.001
11-302    132.002
11-303    132.002
11-304    132.003
11-305    132.004
11-306    132.005
11-320    132.006
11-322    132.007
11-323    132.008
11-324    132.009
11-401    132.090
11-402    132.091
11-403    132.092
11-404    132.065
11-405    132.066
11-406    132.067
11-407    132.050
11-407.1  132.051
11-407.2  132.052
11-408    132.075
11-409    132.076
11-410    132.077
11-411    132.035
11-412    132.036
11-413    132.037
11-414    132.038
11-415    132.039
11-416    132.105
11-417    132.106
11-418    132.107
11-419    132.107
11-420    132.108
11-423    132.020
11-424    132.021
11-425    132.022
11-426    132.023
11-427    132.024
11-430    132.135
11-431    132.136
11-432    132.137
11-501    133.01
11-503    133.02
11-601    134.01
11-601.1  134.03
11-602    134.04
11-603    134.05
11-604    134.06
11-605    134.07
11-606    134.08
11-607    134.09
11-608    134.10
11-609    134.11
11-610    134.12
11-611    134.13
11-612    134.14
11-613    134.15
11-614    134.16
11-615    134.17
11-701    132.150
11-702    132.151
11-703    132.152
11-704    132.153
11-705    132.154
11-706    132.155
11-707    132.156
11-708    132.157
11-709    132.157
11-710    132.156
11-711    132.156
11-712    132.156
11-713    132.158
11-714    132.159
11-715    132.160
12-101    32.015
12-102    32.016
12-103    32.017
12-105    32.018
12-106    32.018
12-107    32.018
12-108    32.018
12-109    32.018
12-201    32.030
12-202    32.031
12-301    94.01
12-302    94.02
12-303    94.03
12-304    94.03
12-305    94.03
12-306    94.04
12-307    94.05
12-308    94.06
12-309    94.07
13-101    158.070
13-102    158.071
13-103    158.072
13-120    158.085
13-121    158.086
13-122    158.087
13-123    158.088
13-124    158.089
13-125    158.090
13-126    158.091
13-127    158.092
13-128    158.093
13-129    158.094
13-130    158.094
13-201    Repealed
13-202    Repealed
13-203    Repealed
13-204    Repealed
13-205    Repealed
13-206    Repealed
13-207    Repealed
13-208    Repealed
13-301    152.01
13-302    152.02
13-303    152.03
13-304    152.04
13-305    152.05
13-306    152.08
13-307    152.09
13-308    152.10
13-309    152.11
13-310    152.20
13-311    152.21
13-312    152.22
13-313    152.23
13-314    152.24
13-401    153.01
13-402    153.02
13-403    153.03
13-404    153.04
13-410    Repealed
13-411    Repealed
13-412    Repealed
13-413    Repealed
13-414    153.05
13-420    153.16
13-421    153.17
13-422    153.18
13-423    153.19
13-430    153.20
13-431    153.20
13-432    153.20
13-433    153.07
13-501    154.01
13-502    154.02
13-503    154.03
13-504    154.04
13-505    154.05
13-506    154.06
13-507    154.07
13-510    154.20
13-511    154.21
13-513    154.23
13-514    154.24
13-515    154.25
13-516    154.26
13-518    154.27
13-519    154.28
13-520    154.29
13-521    154.30
13-522    154.31
13-523    154.32
13-525    154.33
13-526    154.34
13-527    154.35
13-530    154.45
13-531    154.46
13-532    154.47
13-533    154.48
13-534    154.49
13-535    154.50
13-536    154.51
13-537    154.52
13-538    154.53
13-539    154.54
13-540    154.55
13-541    154.56
13-542    154.57
13-543    154.58
13-544    154.59
13-545    154.60
13-546    154.61
13-547    154.75
13-548    154.76
13-549    154.77
13-550    154.78
13-551    154.79
13-601    158.001
13-602    158.002
13-603    158.003
13-604    158.004
13-610    158.010
13-611    Repealed
13-612    158.020
13-613    Repealed
13-614    Repealed
13-615    158.021
13-616    158.021
13-617    158.022
13-618    158.023
13-619    158.025
13-620    158.035
13-621    158.036.1
13-622    Repealed
13-623    158.037
13-624    158.038
13-645    158.039
13-646    Repealed
13-647    158.041
13-648    Repealed
13-649    Repealed
13-650    Repealed
13-651    Repealed
13-652    158.042
13-653    158.043
13-654    158.055
13-655    Repealed
13-656    158.056
13-657    158.057
13-658    158.058
13-701    156.01
13-702    156.02
13-703    156.03
13-704    156.15
13-705    156.26
13-706    156.27
13-707    156.28
13-708    156.29
13-709    156.30
13-710    156.31
13-715    156.04
13-716    156.60
13-717    156.61
13-718    156.62
13-720    156.63
13-721    156.45
13-722    156.45
13-723    156.46
13-724    156.47
13-725    156.47
13-801    155.01
13-802    155.02
13-803    155.03
13-804    155.05
13-805    155.08
14-101    34.01
14-102    34.02
14-103    34.03
14-104    34.04
14-105    34.05
14-106    34.05
14-107    34.06
14-108    34.07
14-109    34.08
14-121    34.20
14-122    34.21
14-123    34.22
14-124    34.23
14-125    34.24
14-131    90.01
14-132    90.02
14-133    90.03
14-134    90.04
14-135    90.05
14-136    90.06
14-137    90.06
14-138    90.07
14-139    90.08
14-201    35.01
14-202    35.02
14-203    35.03
14-204    35.04
14-205    35.05
14-206    35.06
14-207    35.07
14-220    91.01
14-221    91.02
14-222    91.03
14-223    91.04
14-224    91.05
14-225    91.06
14-226    91.07
14-301    36.15
14-302    36.16
14-303    36.17
14-304    36.18
14-305    36.19
14-310    36.01
14-311    36.02
14-312    36.03
14-313    36.04
14-470    53.075
14-471    53.076
14-472    53.077
14-473    53.078
14-474    53.079
14-475    53.080
15-101    32.060
15-102    32.061
15-103    32.062
15-104    32.063
15-201    157.01
15-202    157.02
15-203    157.02
15-204    157.03
15-205    157.03
15-206    157.15
15-207    157.16
15-208    157.17
15-209    157.18
15-210    157.19
15-211    157.20
15-212    157.21
15-213    157.22
15-214    157.23
15-215    157.24
15-216    157.25
15-217    157.26
15-218    157.27
15-219    157.28
15-220    157.29
15-221    157.30
15-222    157.31
15-223    157.32
15-301    72.50
15-302    72.51
15-303    72.52
15-304    72.53
15-305    72.54
15-306    72.55
15-401    92.01
15-402    92.02
15-403    92.03
15-404    92.04
15-405    92.05
15-406    92.06
15-407    92.06
15-408    92.06
15-501    92.20
15-502    92.21
15-503    92.22
15-504    92.22
15-505    92.23
15-506    92.24
15-507    92.25
15-508    92.26
15-601    92.40
15-602    92.41
15-603    92.42
16-101    70.001
16-102    70.002
16-103    70.003
16-104    70.004
16-105    70.005
16-106    70.006
16-107    70.007
16-201    70.060
16-202    70.061
16-203    70.062
16-204    70.063
16-205    70.064
16-206    70.065
16-207    70.066
16-208    70.067
16-209    70.068
16-210    70.069
16-211    70.070
16-212    70.071
16-213    70.072
16-214    70.073
16-215    70.074
16-216    70.075
16-217    70.076
16-218    70.077
16-219    70.078
16-220    70.079,
          70.085
16-221    70.080
16-222    70.081
16-223    70.082
16-224    70.083
16-225    70.084
16-301    70.035
16-302    70.036
16-303    70.037
16-304    70.038
16-305    70.039
16-306    70.040
16-307    70.041
16-308    70.042
16-309    70.043
16-310    70.044
16-311    70.045
16-312    70.046
16-313    70.047
16-314    70.048
16-315    70.049
16-316    70.050
16-401    70.125
16-402    70.126
16-403    70.127
16-404    70.128
16-405    70.129
16-406    70.130
16-407    70.131
16-408    70.132
16-409    70.133
16-410    70.134
16-411    70.135
16-412    70.136
16-501    71.135
16-502    71.136
16-503    71.137
16-504    71.138
16-505    71.139
16-506    71.140
16-601    71.001
16-602    71.002
16-603    71.003
16-604    71.004
16-605    71.005,
          71.006
16-606    71.007
16-607    71.008
16-613    71.009
16-701    71.020
16-702    71.021
16-703    71.022
16-704    71.023
16-705    71.024
16-706    71.025
16-707    71.026
16-801    71.040
16-802    71.041
16-803    71.042
16-804    71.043
16-805    71.044
16-806    71.045
16-807    71.046
16-808    71.047
16-809    71.048
16-812    71.050
16-813    71.051
16-814    71.052
16-815    71.053
16-816    71.054
16-817    71.055
16-818    71.056
16-819    71.057
16-820    71.080
16-821    71.081
16-822    71.082
16-823    71.083
16-824    71.084
16-824.1  71.085
16-825    71.086
16-826    71.087
16-827    71.058
16-828    71.059
16-829    71.060
16-830    71.061
16-831    71.062
16-832    71.063
16-833    71.064
16-834    71.065
16-835    71.066
16-836    71.067
16-901    72.01
16-902    72.02
16-903    72.03
16-904    72.04
16-905    72.05
16-906    72.06
16-907    72.07
16-908    72.08
16-909    72.09
16-910    72.10
16-911    72.11
16-912    72.12
16-913    72.13
16-914    72.14
16-915    72.15
16-916    72.16
16-917    72.17
16-918    72.18
16-919    72.19
16-1001   72.30
16-1002   72.31
16-1003   72.32
16-1004   72.33
16-1005   72.34
16-1006   72.35
16-1007   72.36
16-1101   71.100
16-1102   71.101
16-1103   71.102
16-1201   70.095
16-1202   70.096
16-1203   70.097
16-1204   70.098
16-1205   70.099
16-1206   70.100
16-1207   70.101
16-1208   70.102
16-1209   70.103
16-1210   70.104
16-1210.1 70.105
16-1211   70.106
16-1212   70.107
16-1213   70.108
16-1214   70.109
16-1215   70.110
16-1216   70.111
16-1217   70.112
16-1218   70.113
16-1219   70.114
16-1301   70.020
16-1302   70.021
16-1303   70.022
16-1304   70.023
16-1305   70.024
16-1306   70.024
16-1307   70.024
16-1308   70.024
16-1401   71.115
16-1402   71.116
16-1403   71.117
16-1404   71.118
16-1405   71.119
16-1406   71.120
16-1407   71.121
16-1501   73.01
16-1502   73.01
16-1503   73.02
16-1504   73.03
16-1505   73.04
16-1506   73.05
16-1507   73.06
16-1508   73.07
16-1509   73.08
16-1510   73.09
16-1511   73.10
16-1512   73.11
16-1513   73.12
16-1601   74.01
16-1602   74.02
16-1603   74.03
16-1604   74.04
16-1605   74.05
16-1606   74.06
16-1607   74.07
16-1608   74.08
16-1609   74.09
16-1610   74.10
16-1611   74.11
16-1612   74.12
16-1701   70.999
17-101    32.075
17-102    32.076
17-103    32.077
17-201    50.01
17-202    50.02
17-203    50.03
17-204    50.04
17-205    50.05
17-207    50.07
17-301    52.01
17-302    52.02
17-303    52.03
17-304    52.04
17-305    52.05
17-306    52.05
17-307    52.05
17-310    52.07
17-311    52.08
17-312    52.09
17-313    52.09
17-314    52.10
17-315    52.10
17-401    53.001
17-402    53.002
17-403    53.003
17-404    53.004
17-405    53.005
17-406    53.006
17-410    53.020
17-411    53.021
17-412    53.022
17-413    53.023
17-414    53.024
17-415    53.025
17-416    53.026
17-417    53.027
17-418    53.028
17-419    53.029
17-420    53.030
17-430    53.040
17-431    53.041
17-432    53.042
17-433    53.043
17-434    53.044
17-435    53.045
17-436    53.046
17-450    53.055
17-451    53.056
17-452    53.057
17-453    53.058
17-454    53.059
17-455    53.060
17-456    53.061
17-457    53.062
17-458    53.063
17-460    53.064
17-461    53.065
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
–       - -          Ch. 110, Appendix B
–       - -          Ch. 110, Appendix A
679       1-7-69       33.003
1098      6-20-78      Repealed
1170      12-9-80      33.049
1211      4-20-82      158.002
1223      10-11-82     150.045,
                       150.070
1224      9-21-82      154.58
1225      9-21-82      158.010
1228      10-19-82     154.53
1229      12-7-82      153.06,
                       153.19
1230      1-4-83       95.041
1231      1-4-83       131.01,
                       132.108
1232      2-13-83      150.029
                       152.01–
1234      4-19-83      152.11,
                       152.20-
                       152.24
1235      4-10-83      155.01
1237      5-17-83      70.024
1240      7-19-83      158.056,
                       158.057
1241      7-19-83      158.070,
                       158.071
1242      7- -83       158.085
                       93.01–
1243      7-19-83      93.07,
                       93.38
1248      9-6-83       52.04
1249      9-6-83       150.115–
                       150.119
1250      10-4-83      Ch. 110, Appendix B
                       123.078,
1251      9-6-83       150.096,
                       157.20
1252      11-15-83     158.070
1253      10-4-83      158.002
                       33.044,
1255      10-4-83      33.047,
                       150.001
1258      10-18-83     132.035,
                       132.036
1262      11-15-83     158.071
1269      1-17-84      Ch. 158, Appendix A
1274      2-7-84       155.01,
                       155.05
1275      2-7-84       Repealed
1277      1-17-84      Ch. 158, Appendix A
1278      2-7-84       35.01–
                       35.07
1279      2-21-84      95.001
1280      3-6-84       31.19
1285      4-17-84      118.30
1286      4-17-87      Ch. 110, Appendix A
1288      5-15-84      38.08
1291      6-5-84       154.33
                       154.60,
                       154.61,
1292      6-19-84      154.75-
                       157.77,
                       158.03,
                       158.18
1294      6-19-84      37.06
1297      8-7-84       95.001
1298      8-7-84       150.002
1304      10-2-84      118.28,
                       118.30
1305      10-16-84     93.39
1306      10-16-84     118.28,
                       118.30
1310      11-6-84      159.070,
                       159.092
1311      11-6-84      110.05,
                       118.12
1314      12-4-84      31.15,
                       31.17
1317      1-8-85       72.50–
                       72.55
1326      4-16-85      95.041,
                       95.064
1329      5-21-85      32.002
                       32.091,
                       32.092,
1333      6-18-85      37.04-
                       37.07,
                       37.11
1338      8-20-85      158.072
1339      8-20-85      93.07
                       111.01,
                       111.03–
1340      8-20-85      111.04,
                       111.06–
                       111.08
1341      8-20-85      Repealed
1342      8-20-85      Ch. 110, Appendix A
1343      8-20-85      38.06
1346      9-17-85      132.150–
                       132.160
1347      10-1-85      154.52
                       156.01–
                       156.04,
                       156.15,
                       156.26–
1350      10-15-85     156.31,
                       156.45–
                       156.47,
                       156.60–
                       156.63
1351      10-15-85     150.130–
                       150.133
                       154.33,
1353      10-15-85     154.35,
                       158.088
1354      10-15-85     35.02
1355      10-15-85     132.135
1359      1-7-86       150.096
1361      2-4-86       110.08
1362      2-17-86      154.33
1365      4-1-86       50.07
1371      5-6-86       158.036.1
1372      5-6-86       158.091
1375      5-6-86       70.095
1376      5-20-86      93.07
1377      6-3-86       153.19
1379      7-1-86       118.03
1383      9-16-86      Ch. 110, Appendix A
1388      1-21-86      93.38
1389      11-18-86     Ch. 158, Appendix A
1391      12-16-86     33.037,
                       33.053
1396      3-3-87       31.19
1398      4-21-87      Repealed
1402      7-7-87       70.043,
                       70.044
1408      8-18-87      158.035
1410      9-5-87       150.007
1412      11-6-87      116.15;
                       Ch. 158, Appendix A
1413      11-6-87      Ch. 110, Appendix A
1414      11-6-87      Repealed
                       95.001–
1415      11-18-87     95.006,
                       95.008,
                       95.009
1416      12-1-87      70.113,
                       70.114
1417      12-15-87     158.039
1419      1-19-88      31.19
                       150.001–
                       150.012,
1420      2-26-88      150.025-
                       150.032,
                       150.045,
                       150.072
1421      4-19-88      158.010
1424      7-5-88       70.007
                       151.01–
1426      8-16-88      151.13,
                       158.091
1428      9-6-88       35.02
1432      11-18-88     150.096
1437      2-7-89       93.38,
                       93.39
1442      4-18-89      33.015
1443      4-18-89      91.07
1445      6-20-89      Ch. 110, Appendix A
1447      8-1-89       114.04
1448      8-1-89       Ch. 110, Appendix A
1449      9-5-89       70.096
1450      9-5-89       132.024
                       158.002,
1452      10-3-89      158.025,
                       158.091
1454      10-17-89     Ch. 110, Appendix A
1456      11-30-90     156.62
1460      6-5-90       38.06,
                       38.07
                       33.034,
1461      6-19-90      33.044,
                       33.048
1462      7-3-90       33.037,
                       33.053
1465      9-4-90       116.01,
                       116.05
1467      9-7-90       38.60
                       150.001,
1468      12-18-90     150.028,
                       150.045,
                       150.070
1469      12-18-90     95.061,
                       95.064
1470      1-5-91       51.09
1472      6-4-91       38.30
1473A     5-25-91      70.046
1473      8-6-91       153.01,
                       153.19
1474      8-6-91       52.04
1475      8-6-91       33.016
1476      9-3-91       Ch. 158, Appendix A
1477      9-3-91       150.095
                       158.086,
1478      9-17-91      158.087,
                       158.092
1480      10-15-91     37.07
1481      10-15-91     31.15,
                       31.17
1482      11-19-91     93.21
1484      1-7-92       95.041
1487      3-3-92       95.005
1489      5-5-92       52.10
1491      7-7-92       156.03
1493      10-6-92      158.071
1494      10-20-92     93.41
1495      11-3-92      154.34,
                       134.35
1498      3-2-93       158.091,
                       158.092
                       53.001–
                       53.006,
                       53.020-
                       53.030,
1505      7-6-93       53.040-
                       53.046,
                       53.055-
                       53.065,
                       53.075-
                       53.080
1506      8-3-93       132.051
1508      1-18-94      158.002,
                       158.025
1509      2-15-94      131.04
1510      2-15-94      70.113,
                       70.114
1511      4-5-94       152.01,
                       152.02
1514      5-7-94       94.05
                       51.01,
1515      7-18-94      51.03,
                       51.04,
                       51.07
1516      7-19-94      131.15
1517      8-8-94       Repealed
1522      10-4-94      132.003,
                       132.106
1523      10-4-94      132.107
1526      11-1-94      132.007–
                       132.009
1529      1-17-95      71.008
1530      1-25-95      132.092
1531      2-7-95       33.065–
                       33.073
1532      5-2-95       156.26
1535      5-16-95      95.005
1538      9-5-95       33.066
1539      9-5-95       Repealed
                       132.151–
                       132.153,
1540      9-5-95       132.156,
                       132.158,
                       132.159
1541      9-19-95      93.38
1544      9-19-95      33.048
1548      1-16-96      31.01–
                       31.03
1549      2-19-96      32.090
1551      4-2-96       32.090
1553      4-16-95      32.091
1556      8-6-96       31.19
1560      11-5-96      132.052
1561      11-5-96      132.065–
                       132.067
1571      7-15-97      32.018
1572      7-15-97      132.035
1575      10-21-97     131.02
1577      10-21-97     93.05
1578      10-21-97     35.01–
                       35.07
1593      5-8-98       116.15
1595      5-19-98      154.33
1600      10-6-98      33.037,
                       33.053
1604      1-19-99      94.06
1605      2-2-99       116.15
                       118.03,
1606      2-2-99       118.04,
                       118.06
                       118.03,
1607      2-16-99      118.04,
                       118.06
1609      3-16-99      158.021;
                       Ch. 158, Appendix A
                       94.02,
1612      5-4-99       94.05,
                       94.07
1613      5-4-99       118.03,
                       118.04
1614      6-1-99       32.018
1615      7-6-99       31.19
                       134.01,
                       134.03,
1617      8-17-99      134.06,
                       134.10,
                       134.16,
                       134.17
                       70.041,
                       70.085,
                       70.096,
                       70.097,
                       70.099,
                       70.100,
                       70.105,
                       70.127,
                       71.006,
1618      8-17-99      71.008,
                       71.009,
                       71.023,
                       71.051,
                       71.067,
                       71.085,
                       71.086,
                       71.118,
                       71.119,
                       74.12
1621      11-2-99      153.18
1622      11-2-99      158.090
1623      5-4-99       118.06
                       33.044,
1624      11-16-99     33.048,
                       33.085-
                       33.094
                       30.01,
1632      3-7-00       30.02,
                       30.15-
                       30.32
1633      4-4-00       112.01
1635      5-2-00       33.054
1638      6-6-00       38.60
1639      6-6-00       38.06,
                       38.07
1642      10-3-00      150.007
1644      10-3-00      31.19
1645      10-3-00      33.037,
                       33.053
1646      11-7-00      150.155–
                       150.160
1648      11-21-00     95.035
1649      1-16-01      91.06
1650      2-6-01       37.03,
                       37.05
1651      4-17-01      33.016
1652      5-1-01       70.113
1657      8-7-01       33.053
1659      10-2-01      119.01
                       70.095,
1660      10-2-01      70.127,
                       71.116
                       131.01,
1661      10-16-01     131.16,
                       132.106-
                       132.108
1662      11-20-01     T.S.O. I
1663      12-18-01     33.041
1664      1-8-02       11.01
1665      2-5-02       T.S.O. I
1666      3-5-02       T.S.O. I
1667      5-7-02       T.S.O. I
1668      4-2-02       T.S.O. I
1669      6-18-02      T.S.O. I
1670      5-7-02       158.044
1671      5-21-02      112.20–
                       112.27
1672      5-21-02      95.010
1673      7-2-02       158.002
1674      8-6-02       T.S.O. I
1675      8-6-02       T.S.O. I
1677      9-3-02       Repealed
                       158.002;
1678      9-3-02       158.021;
                       158.044;
                       Ch. 158, Appendix A
1679      9-3-02       T.S.O. I
1680      9-17-02      T.S.O. I
1681      9-17-02      70.114
1682      10-1-02      T.S.O. I
1683      10-1-02      96.01
1684      10-1-02      33.110-
                       33.112
1686      11-5-02      T.S.O. I
                       158.002;
1687      11-5-02      158.021;
                       158.035;
                       Ch. 158, Appendix A
1688      11-19-02     Adopting Ordinance
1689      11-5-02      Not Included
1690      12-3-02      Not Included
1691      12-17-02     T.S.O. I
1692      1-7-03       70.113
1693      2-18-03      Not Included
1694      2-18-03      Not Included
1695      3-4-03       T.S.O. I
1696      3-18-03      123.004,
                       123.022
1697      6-3-03       132.040
1698      6-17-03      37.06
1699      7-15-03      132.041
1700      7-15-03      151.03
1701      7-22-03      Not Included
1703      9-2-03       71.119
1704      9-16-03      T.S.O. I
1705      10-21-03     132.053
1706      10-21-03     154.23
1707      11-4-03      Adopting Ordinance
1709      11-4-03      Ch. 110, Appendix A
1710      11-18-03     Repealed
1718      12-16-03     72.03
1721      4-6-04       T.S.O. I
1722      3-9-04       T.S.O. I
1723      5-4-04       T.S.O. I
1724      5-18-04      150.010
1725      5-18-04      70.114
1726      6-15-04      T.S.O. I
1727      6-15-04      T.S.O. I
1728      6-15-04      33.053
1730      7-6-04       155.03
1731      7-20-04      33.048
1732      8-3-04       31.19
                       Charter, §§
                       2-1–
                       2-3,
                       2-9,
                       2-10,
Res. 1183 8-12-03      2-12,
                       6-3–
                       6-5,
                       6-7,
                       6-9,
                       7-9.1
1733      9-7-04       10.99,
                       33.044
1734      9-21-04      Adopting Ordinance
1735      10-5-04      T.S.O. I
1736      11-2-04      33.037,
                       33.053
1737      12-7-04      70.002,
                       71.066
1740      12-7-04      38.06,
                       38.07
1740A     11-16-04     93.39
1741      12-7-04      Not Included
1743      1-18-05      T.S.O. I
1744      3-1-05       132.066
                       95.061,
1745      3-15-05      95.064,
                       95.067
Res. 1229 3-15-05      Not Included
1747      5-3-05       T.S.O. I
1748      5-3-05       T.S.O. I
1749      5-3-05       158.036
1750      6-7-05       T.S.O. I
                       118.01,
                       118.03,
1751      5-17-05      118.07-
                       118.09,
                       118.30
1752      5-17-05      Repealed
1753      6-21-05      159.002
1754      6-21-05      95.042
1755      10-18-05     T.S.O. I
1756      11-1-05      37.25,
                       37.30
1757      2-27-06      Ch. 158, Appendix A
                       158.002,
1758      1-17-06      158.035,
                       Ch. 158, Appendix A
1759      1-17-06      10.99,
                       90.09
1759A     2-7-06       158.002,
                       Ch. 158, Appendix A
1760      3-7-06       T.S.O. I
1762      4-18-06      132.138
1763      5-2-06       10.99,
                       132.070
1764      6-6-06       158.044
                       Ch. 110, Appendices A and
                       B,
1765      6-20-06      150.001,
                       150.028,
                       150.045,
                       150.070
1766      6-20-06      55.01,
                       55.02
1767      6-20-06      54.01,
                       54.02
1768      6-20-06      91.03
Res. 1253 8-1-06       Adopting Ordinance
1769      7-18-06      T.S.O. I
1770      8-15-06      91.03
1771      10-3-06      37.25
                       10.99,
1772      10-3-06      33.044,
                       33.085
1773      11-7-06      33.055,
                       Ch. 33, Appendix A
1774      11-21-06     38.61-
                       38.84
1775      11-21-06     38.36
                       158.036.1,
1776      12-5-06      158.042,
                       158.044,
                       Ch. 158, Appendix A
                       Charter §§
Res. 1259 12-12-06     6-3 -
                       6-5
1777      12-19-06     37.06
                       94.02,
1778      12-19-06     94.03,
                       94.05
1779      1-4-07       37.07
1780      2-6-07       132.161
1781      2-6-07       150.100
1782      2-20-07      134.02
1784      5-15-07      154.22
1785      6-19-07      T.S.O. I
1786      7-17-07      T.S.O. I
1787      7-17-07      T.S.O. I
1788      7-17-07      95.007
1789      8-7-07       132.050
1790      8-21-07      95.010
Res. 1281 11-6-07      Adopting Ordinance
                       123.001 -
                       123.004,
                       123.020 -
                       123.028,
1791      12-18-07     123.045 -
                       123.049,
                       123.060 -
                       123.063,
                       123.075 -
                       123.082
1792      12-18-07     150.001 -
                       150.012
1793      12-18-07     150.045 -
                       150.049
1794      12-18-07     150.070 -
                       150.080
                       150.025 -
1795      12-18-07     150.027,
                       150.029
1796      12-18-07     134.09
1797      12-18-07     70.096
1798                  did not pass
1799                  did not pass
1800      4-1-08       134.16
1801      5-6-08       31.19
1802      5-20-08      71.010
1803      6-3-08       Not Included
1804      6-3-08       70.008
1806      7-15-08      51.01,
                       51.05
1808      9-16-08      T.S.O. I
1810      11-18-08     158.010
1811      11-18-08     T.S.O. I
1812      12-2-08      70.137 -
                       70.140
1813      1-6-09       70.137
1814      1-6-09       33.049,
                       33.053
1815      1-20-09      31.17
                       99.01 -
1816      2-17-09      99.12,
                       99.25 -
                       99.30
1818      4-7-09       T.S.O. I
1819      3-3-09       157.29
1820      3-3-09       37.25
1821      5-19-09      T.S.O. I
1822      5-19-09      132.022
1823      6-16-09      158.044
1824      6-16-09      33.048
1825      8-18-09      150.013
1826      8-4-09       150.161
1827      8-4-09       158.056
1828      8-4-09       70.137 -
                       70.139
1829      9-1-09       35.07
1830      10-6-09      T.S.O. I
1831      10-20-09     37.25
1832      11-3-09      70.150
1833      11-3-09      135.01
                       156.01–
                       156.04,
                       156.15,
                       156.25–
1834      11-17-09     156.31,
                       156.45–
                       156.47,
                       156.60–
                       156.64,
                       156.99
1835      1-5-10       T.S.O. I
1836      1-5-10       T.S.O. I
1837      1-19-10      157.19
1838      4-6-10       37.07
1839      did not pass  
1840      did not pass  
1841      9-7-10       T.S.O. I
1842      10-19-10     T.S.O. I
                       70.024,
1843      11-2-10      70.137,
                       70.139
                       37.25,
1844      11-16-10     37.27 -
                       37.29
1845      2-15-11      93.23 -
                       93.30
1846      3-1-11       Not Included
1847      4-19-11      158.002,
                       158.025
1848      4-19-11      158.044
1849      4-19-11      116.15
1850      4-19-11      90.09
1851      6-7-11       37.25
1852      6-21-11      158.044
1853      7-19-11      T.S.O. I
1854      7-19-11      132.003
1855      9-20-11      150.001
1856      10-18-11     96.01
1857      12-6-11      111.02,
                       111.07
1858      12-20-11     93.05
1859      3-6-12       T.S.O. I
1860      4-17-12      Not Included
1861      4-17-12      158.044
1862      4-17-12      158.002,
                       158.025
1863      6-5-12       113.01–
                       113.03
1864      7-3-12       110.04
1865      8-21-12      54.01–
                       54.11
                       159.01 -
1866      9-4-12       159.06,
                       159.99
1867      9-21-12      T.S.O. I
1868      10-2-12      98.01
                       132.151–
                       132.156,
1869      11-6-12      132.158,
                       132.159,
                       132.161
1870      1-8-13       35.08
1871      2-19-13      95.012–
                       95.014
1872      5-21-13      37.25
1873      6-4-13       T.S.O. I
1874      6-4-13       Not Included
1875      6-4-13       158.33
1876      11-5-13      T.S.O. I
1877      11-19-13     155.09
1878      12-17-13     70.138
1879      1-21-14      35.07
                       150.156,
1880      6-17-14      154.26,
                       158.056,
                       158.088
1881      6-17-14      116.15
1882      7-17-14      Not Included
1883      8-19-14      95.012–
                       95.014
1884      9-2-14       T.S.O. I
1885      10-7-14      157.29,
                       157.30
                       37.25,
1886      12-16-14     37.27,
                       37.28,
                       37.30
1887      11-4-14      37.08
1888      11-18-14     97.01
1889      12-2-14      T.S.O. I
1890      1-20-15      31.19
1891      2-3-15       T.S.O. I
1892      6-3-15       132.051,
                       132.052
1894      4-21-15      71.057
1895      4-21-15      71.087
1896      4-21-15      158.057
1897      5-19-15      71.045.1
1898      5-19-15      132.151
1899      5-19-15      33.055
1900      5-19-15      33.054
                       37.25,
1902      6-2-15       37.27,
                       37.28,
                       37.30
1903      6-23-15      50.08
1904      7-21-15      70.114
1907      10-6-15      33.017
1909      11-17-15     33.056
1910      12-1-15      158.035
1911      12-1-15      T.S.O. I
1912      2-16-16      155.10
1914      5-3-16       155.10
                       Charter §§
                       6-3–
–       5-18-16      6-5,
                       6-10,
                       8-1.1
1916      7-5-16       50.08 -
                       50.10
1918      10-4-16      12.01
1919      9-20-16      71.049
1923      10-18-16     33.048
1925      12-20-16     50.09
1926      1-17-17      37.25
1927      1-17-17      37.25
1928      2-21-17      12.10
1929      4-4-17       116.15,
                       116.16
1930      5-16-17      52.05
1931      5-16-17      53.004
1932      5-16-17      150.015
1933      5-16-17      153.06
                       98.01,
                       150.006,
1934      6-20-17      150.026,
                       150.048,
                       150.073
1935      6-20-17      118.06
1936      6-6-17       31.19
1937      did not pass  
1938      7-18-17      T.S.O. I
1939      9-5-17       T.S.O. I
1940      9-5-17       Not Included
                       155.01 -
1941      9-5-17       155.05,
                       155.08 - 155.12
1942      did not pass  
1943      11-7-17      Repealed 39.01 - 39.16, 39.99
1944      11-7-17      39.01,
                       39.99
1945      11-7-17      132.108
1946      11-7-17      132.106
1947      11-7-17      131.17
1948      11-7-17      132.109
1949      11-7-17      132.107
1950      11-7-17      131.01
1951      12-19-17     Not Included
1952      1-16-18      Not Included
1953      2-6-18       Not Included
1954      did not pass  
1955      4-3-18       Ch. 110, Appendix A
1956      4-17-18      132.050
1957      6-19-18      158.025
1958      7-3-18       T.S.O. I
                       131.10,
1959      7-17-18      157.01,
                       157.32
1960      10-2-18      110.02,
                       Ch. 110, Appendix A
                       Charter, §§
                       2-1,
Res. 1527 12-11-18     2-3,
                       5-1,
                       5-2,
                       8-1
1961      10-2-18      111.01 -
                       111.08
1962      11-6-18      T.S.O. I
1963      11-6-18      37.29
1964      11-6-18      T.S.O. I
1965      1-3-19    T.S.O. I
1966      1-15-19      Not Included
1967      2-5-19    T.S.O. I
1968      2-4-20       Not Included
1969      2-19-19      37.07
1970      5-7-19       Not Included
1971      4-16-19      Not Included
1972      4-16-19      Repealed 157.01 - 157.08
1973      7-2-19       33.048,
                       33.053
                       150.001 -
                       150.015,
                       150.025 -
                       150.030,
                       150.045 -
                       150.049,
                       150.070 -
                       150.080,
                       150.095 -
                       150.104,
                       150.115 -
                       150.119,
                       150.130 -
                       150.133,
                       150.145,
                       150.155 -
                       150.160,
                       151.01 -
                       151.13,
                       151.25 -
                       151.30,
                       152.01 -
                       152.11,
                       152.20 -
                       152.24,
                       153.01 -
                       153.07,
                       153.15 -
                       153.22,
                       154.01 -
                       154.07,
                       154.20 -
                       154.36,
                       154.45 -
1974      8-6-19       154.61,
                       154.75 -
                       154.79,
                       155.01 -
                       155.10,
                       156.01 -
                       156.04,
                       156.15,
                       156.25 -
                       156.31,
                       156.45 -
                       156.47,
                       156.60 -
                       156.64,
                       156.99,
                       157.01 -
                       157.03,
                       157.15 -
                       157.35,
                       158.001 -
                       158.010,
                       158.020 -
                       158.025,
                       158.035 -
                       158.044,
                       158.055 -
                       158.058,
                       158.070 -
                       158.072,
                       158.085 -
                       158.094,
                       Ch. 158,  Appendix A,
                       159.01 -
                       159.06,
                       159.99
                       71.049,
1975      8-20-19      132.035 -
                       132.041
1976      9-3-19    Not Included
1977      9-3-19       132.020 -
                       132.022
1978      9-16-19      31.21
1979      9-16-19      31.19
1981      10-7-19      37.29
1982      10-7-19      37.25 -
                       37.30
                       37.25,
1983      10-7-19      37.27,
                       37.28,
                       37.30
1984      12-3-19      33.048,
                       33.053
1985      1-7-20       T.S.O. I
1986      2-4-20       30.01
1987      2-4-20       158.071
1988      2-4-20       T.S.O. I
                      
 
