TABLE OF CONTENTS
Adopting Ordinance
Charter
Part 1 General Provisions
Part 2 Administration and Government
Part 3 Alcoholic Beverages
Part 4 Animals
Part 5 Building Regulations and Codes
Part 6 Court
Part 7 Finance and Taxation
Part 8 Health and Sanitation
Part 9 Licensing and Business Regulations
Part 10 Offenses and Crimes
Part 11 Parks, Recreation and Cultural Affairs
Part 12 Planning, Zoning and Development
Part 13 Public Safety
Part 14 Streets and Public Works
Part 15 Traffic and Vehicles
Part 16 Transportation
Part 17 Utilities
Appendices
Statutory References
Tables
Index
PREFACE
The Bristow Municipal Code is a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Bristow, Oklahoma.
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by Oklahoma Municipal
League under the direction of the mayor and city council and has been kept current by regular supplementation
by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest.
This volume covers ordinances through Ordinance 90-091806, passed September 18, 2006.
In parentheses following each section, as amended, is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for
the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following
the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification.
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section
numbers.
LexisNexis Municipal Codes
Matthew Bender & Company, Inc.
701 East Water Street
Charlottesville, VA 22902
866-501-5155
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF
BRISTOW, OKLAHOMA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT
INCLUDED THEREIN, EXCEPT AS HEREAFTER PROVIDED; PROVIDING WHEN THIS ORDINANCE
SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE; PROVIDING FOR SALE AND COPIES IN THE CLERK’S OFFICE;
PROVIDING FOR SUPPLEMENTS OR CHANGES TO CODE; AND PROVIDING FOR AN EMERGENCY.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BRISTOW,
OKLAHOMA:
SECTION 1 TITLE.
A code and revision of the ordinances of the City of Bristow is hereby adopted as the “Code of Ordinances,
City of Bristow, Oklahoma,” or by any other properly identifying designation.
SECTION 2 CODE SUPERSEDES OTHER ORDINANCES.
This code shall be treated and considered as a new and comprehensive ordinance of the city which shall supersede
all other general and permanent ordinances enacted by the council prior to May 1, 1984, except such as
by reference thereto are expressly saved from repeal or continued in force and effect for any purpose.
SECTION 3 EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE, REPEAL.
All provisions of this code shall be in full force and effect from the date this ordinance becomes law. All ordinances
of a general and permanent nature of the city in effect on or before May 1, 1984, and not in the code or
recognized and continued in force by reference herein and which are in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed
from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
SECTION 4 ORDINANCES NOT REPEALED.
The repeal provided for in Section 3 hereof shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty
or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance;
nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city’s indebtedness, or any
contract or obligation assumed by the city; nor shall the repeal affect the administrative regulations or resolution
of the city council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of the code; nor shall the repeal affect any
right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the city council to any person, firm or corporation;
nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, vacating,
etc., any street or public way in the city; nor shall the repeal affect any annual budget or salary ordinance; nor
shall the repeal affect any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance establishing
and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance providing
for local improvements and assessing charges therefor; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance dedicating or
accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; nor shall the repeal affect any ordinance extending the limits of the
city; nor shall the repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent
ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. The continuance in effect of temporary and/or special ordinances
and parts of ordinances, although omitted from the code, shall not be affected by such omission therefrom;
and the adoption of the code shall not repeal or amend any such ordinance or part of any such ordinance.
SECTION 5 CODE NOT NEW ENACTMENT.
The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those ordinances existing at the time of
the effective date of this code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
SECTION 6 ORDINANCES ADOPTED AFTER EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE.
Ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature passed or adopted on and after the effective
date of this code may be passed or adopted either:
1. In the form of amendments to the code or ordinances adopted by this ordinance; or
2. Without specific reference to the code.
In either case, all such ordinances and parts of ordinances shall be deemed amendments to the code. All of the
substantive permanent and general parts of such ordinances and changes made thereby in the code, shall be inserted
and made in the code whenever authorized or directed by motion, resolution or ordinance of the city
council, as provided hereinafter.
SECTION 7 SUPPLEMENTS TO CODE.
By contract or by city personnel, a change, or supplement, to the code or ordinances adopted by this ordinance
shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the mayor and city council. A change to the
code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council or adopted by
initiative and referendum during the period covered by the change and all changes made thereby in the code. The
pages of a change shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and, where necessary, replace
pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they
have been inserted, the code will be up to date to the date to which the code is being brought up to date. Each
change shall include a new Title page for the code; and the title page shall include a notation below the title indicating
that the code contains all permanent and general ordinances and parts of ordinances passed prior to the
date to which the code is brought up to date and still in effect. The words “as amended” and the date, may be
added to the title after the year. After every change has been prepared and printed, a number of copies of the
change equal at least to the number of copies of the code still in existence, shall be deposited in the office of the
city clerk. The city clerk, if possible, shall notify each holder of a copy of the original code about the availability
of the change or supplement.
SECTION 8 SALE OF COPIES OF THE CODE.
The city clerk is hereby authorized and directed to sell copies of the code of ordinances to the public at a price
determined from time to time by the city.
SECTION 9 COPY OF CODE IN CLERK’S OFFICE.
A copy of the current code as amended or supplemented from time to time shall be kept on file in the office of
the city clerk. This copy of the code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it; it shall be considered
the official code of ordinances of the city, and may be so certified by the city clerk as may be required.
SECTION 10 PREPARATION OF CODE.
The code of ordinances hereby adopted was prepared by the Oklahoma Municipal League and consists of
Seventeen (17) Parts, all of which have been examined, considered and approved by the council of trustees of the
City of Bristow and adopted by compliance with Sections 14-109 et seq. of Title II of the Oklahoma Statutes.
SECTION 11 EMERGENCY.
Reference being made to “Section 3” hereinbefore set out, whereas, it being immediately necessary for the
preservation of the peace, health and safety of the City of Bristow, Oklahoma, and the inhabitants thereof, that
the provisions of this Ordinance and the new provisions of the Code not heretofore enacted be put into full force
and effect, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, by reason whereof this Ordinance shall take effect and be in
full force from and after its passage, as provided by law.
YEAS: 8
NAYS: 0
ABSENT: 0
Passed and approved this 7th day of May, 1984.
/s/ Marvin L. Veit
Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/ Sharie Long
Clerk
CHARTER
PREAMBLE
ARTICLE I
INCORPORATION; FORM OF GOVERNMENT; POWERS
Section 1-1 Incorporation.
Section 1-2 Form of government.
Section 1-3 Powers of the city.
Section 1-4 Powers to be construed liberally.
Section 1-5 Intergovernmental relations.
ARTICLE II
THE COUNCIL
Section 2-1 Councilmen; number; qualifications.
Section 2-2 Presiding officer of the council.
Section 2-3 Mayor and councilmen; compensation; expenses.
Section 2-4 Council; powers.
Section 2-5 City clerk; appointment; powers and duties.
Section 2-6 Council; meetings.
Section 2-7 Mayor and councilmen; absences to terminate membership.
Section 2-8 Mayor and councilmen; removal.
Section 2-9 Mayor and councilmen; vacancies.
Section 2-10 Council; quorum; rules; roll call; vote required.
Section 2-11 Ordinances; enacting clause.
Section 2-12 Ordinances; passage; notice of consideration.
Section 2-13 Ordinances; veto by mayor.
Section 2-14 Ordinances; publication; when in effect.
Section 2-15 Ordinances; emergency.
Section 2-16 Ordinances; adoption by reference.
Section 2-17 Ordinances; codification.
Section 2-18 Initiative and referendum.
ARTICLE III
MAYOR AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 3-1 Mayor; office created; qualifications.
Section 3-2 Mayor to be chief executive officer; powers and duties.
Section 3-3 Vice mayor; election; powers and duties.
Section 3-4 Administrative departments, offices, and agencies.
ARTICLE IV
OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND AGENCIES
Section 4-1 City attorney.
Section 4-2 Library board.
Section 4-3 Hospitals and certain other institutions.
ARTICLE V
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE; FISCAL AFFAIRS
Section 5-1 Department of finance; city treasurer.
Section 5-2 Purchases and sales.
Section 5-3 Sale of property valued at more than $25,000.00
Section 5-4 Public improvements.
Section 5-5 Fiscal year.
Section 5-6 Independent annual audit.
ARTICLE VI
MUNICIPAL COURT
Section 6-1 Municipal court.
ARTICLE VII
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
Section 7-1 Merit system created; appointments; removals; personnel rules.
Section 7-2 Personnel board created.
Section 7-3 Classified and unclassified services.
Section 7-4 Removal of officers and employees.
Section 7-5 Removal; hearing before the personnel board.
Section 7-6 Nepotism.
Section 7-7 Bonds of officers and employees.
Section 7-8 Oath or affirmation of office.
Section 7-9 Who may administer oaths and affirmations.
Section 7-10 Conviction of a felony to terminate office or employment.
Section 7-11 Acting officers and employees; temporary appointments.
Section 7-12 Regular appointive officers and employees; term.
Section 7-13 Officers to continue until successors are elected or appointed and qualify.
Section 7-14 Feminine gender.
ARTICLE VIII
ELECTIONS
Section 8-1 Elections; terms; nonpartisan elections.
Section 8-2 Wards; number; equal.
Section 8-3 Primary election; filing.
Section 8-4 Primary election; time; voting.
Section 8-5 Primary election; who nominated or elected.
Section 8-6 General election; time; who elected.
Section 8-7 Registered qualified electors.
Section 8-8 Elections; when not held.
Section 8-9 State constitution and law to govern.
ARTICLE IX
RECALL
Section 9-1 Recall authorized.
Section 9-2 Recall petition.
Section 9-3 Recall election; council to order.
Section 9-4 Same; how held.
Section 9-5 Person recalled or resigning.
ARTICLE X
AMENDMENT AND SEPARABILITY OF CHARTER
Section 10-1 Amendment; proposal; ratification; approval.
Section 10-2 Separability.
ARTICLE XI
SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT
Section 11-1 When charter goes into effect.
Section 11-2 Officers and employees to continue.
Section 11-3 Ordinances continued.
Section 11-4 Pending actions and proceedings.
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF BRISTOW, OKLAHOMA
PREAMBLE
We, the people of the City of Bristow, exercising the powers of home rule granted to us by the Constitution
and laws of the State of Oklahoma, in order to provide for more efficient, adequate, and economical government,
do hereby ordain, ratify, and establish this Charter of the City of Bristow, Oklahoma.
ARTICLE I
INCORPORATION; FORM OF GOVERNMENT; POWERS
Section 1-1 Incorporation.
The City of Bristow, Oklahoma, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter may be established,
shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of “City of Bristow”.
It shall succeed to and possess all the property, rights, privileges, franchises, powers, and immunities now
belonging to the corporation known as the City of Bristow; and shall be liable for all debts and other obligations
for which the corporation is legally bound at the time this charter goes into effect.
Section 1-2 Form of government.
The municipal government provided by this charter shall be a “mayor-council government”. All powers of the
city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter, or, if the manner is not thus prescribed, then in
such manner as the council may prescribe by ordinance.
Section 1-3 Powers of the city.
The city shall have all powers possible for a city operating under a home-rule charter to have under the constitution
and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter.
Section 1-4 Powers to be construed liberally.
The powers of the city under this charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the city, and the specific mention
of particular powers in the charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power stated in
this article.
Section 1-5 Intergovernmental relations.
The city, to the extent allowed by law, may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and may
participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with any one or more
states or civil divisions or agencies of this or other states, or the United States or any agency thereof.
ARTICLE II
THE COUNCIL
Section 2-1 Councilmen; number; qualifications.
A. There shall be a city council of eight (8) members, which shall consist of two (2) councilmen from each
of the four (4) wards of the city.
B. Only qualified electors of the city who reside in the respective wards from which they are elected or appointed
to fill a vacancy, and who have resided within the city for at least one year at the time of their election or
appointment to fill a vacancy, shall be qualified for the offices of councilmen.
C. A councilman may not hold any administrative office or position in the city government (other than vice
mayor); provided, that nothing in this charter shall prohibit councilmen who are already volunteer firemen when
elected or appointed from continuing to serve as volunteer firemen and being paid as such.
Section 2-2 Presiding officer of the council.
The mayor, or, in his absence, the vice mayor, shall preside at meetings of the council. In the absence of both
the mayor and the vice mayor, the council may elect a president pro tem to preside over a meeting of the council.
Section 2-3 Mayor and councilmen; compensation; expenses.
A. The compensation of the mayor and councilmen shall continue as it is at the time this charter goes into
effect until the compensation of the mayor and/or councilmen is changed by ordinance other than an emergency
ordinance.
B. An ordinance changing the compensation of the mayor and/or councilmen shall not change the compensation
of any such officer:
1. For his current term of office during which the ordinance is adopted, nor;
2. For the succeeding term of the office when such succeeding term begins within less than three (3)
months after adoption of the ordinance.
Such an ordinance, unless it is an initiated ordinance, shall be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city within ten (10) days after its final passage.
C. The mayor and councilmen may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred in the discharge of their
official duties.
Section 2-4 Council; powers.
Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in the council. Without
limitation of the foregoing, the council shall have power, subject to the state constitution, law, and this charter:
1. By ordinance to enact municipal legislation on any and all subjects and matters within the competence of
the city to legislate;
2. To adopt the budget, raise revenue, and make appropriations, and to regulate bond elections, the issuance
of bonds, sinking funds, the refunding of indebtedness, salaries, wages, and other compensation of officers
and employees, and all other fiscal and business affairs of the city;
3. To inquire into the conduct of any office, department, or agency of the city government, and to investigate
municipal affairs, and for this purpose, to subpoena witnesses, take testimony, and require the production of
evidence; and when making such an inquiry or investigation, to elect one of its members president pro tem to
preside during such time, if it chooses to do so;
4. To appoint or elect and remove its own subordinates, the members of the personnel board, the members
of the planning commission, the members of the board of adjustment, and other quasi-legislative, quasi-judicial,
or advisory personnel, now or when and if established; or to prescribe the method of appointing or electing and
removing them;
5. To regulate elections and the recall; and
6. To create, change, and abolish all offices, departments, and agencies of the city government other than
the offices, departments, and agencies created by this charter; and to assign additional powers and duties consistent
with this charter to offices, departments, and agencies created by this charter.
Section 2-5 City clerk; appointment; powers and duties.
A. The mayor, with approval of the council, shall appoint, and may remove, the city clerk, unless the council
by ordinance provides that the city treasurer shall be city clerk ex officio. The city clerk serves for an indefinite
term, and unless his services are sooner terminated, until his successor is appointed and qualifies.
B. The city clerk shall serve as clerical officer of the council. He shall keep the journal of its proceedings,
and shall enroll in a book or books kept for the purpose all ordinances and resolutions passed by it; shall be custodian
of such documents, records, and archives as may be provided by applicable law or ordinance; shall be
custodian of the seal of the city, and shall attest, and affix the seal to, documents when required in accordance
with applicable law or ordinance; and shall have such other powers and duties consistent with this charter as may
be prescribed by ordinance or applicable law.
Section 2-6 Council; meetings.
The council shall hold at least one regular meeting every month, at such time and place as it may prescribe by
ordinance or otherwise. The mayor or any five (5) councilmen may call special meetings. All meetings of the
council, except as otherwise authorized by law, shall be open to public inspection.
Section 2-7 Mayor and councilmen; absences to terminate membership.
If the mayor or any councilman is absent from more than one-half (½) of all the meetings of the council, regular
and special, held within any period of four (4) consecutive calendar months, he shall thereupon cease to hold
office.
Section 2-8 Mayor and councilmen; removal.
The mayor or any councilman may be removed from office for any cause specified by applicable state law for
the removal of officers, and by the method or methods prescribed thereby; and may be removed by recall as provided
in this charter.
Section 2-9 Mayor and councilmen; vacancies.
A. The council, by majority vote of its remaining members, shall fill vacancies in its own membership and
in the office of mayor, for the unexpired terms or until successors are elected as provided in this section.
B. If a vacancy occurs before the beginning of a regular filing period for candidates for councilmen, and the
unexpired term extends beyond the time when the terms of councilmen elected that year begin, then a mayor or a
councilman for that office, as the case may be, shall be elected at the elections of that year to serve the rest of the
unexpired term beginning at the time when he is elected and certified.
Section 2-10 Council; quorum; rules; roll call; vote required.
A majority of all the members of the council shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn or
recess from time to time. The council may determine its own rules. On the request of the mayor or of any councilman,
the vote on any question shall be by roll call, and shall be entered in the journal. The mayor may vote
only in case of a tie. Except in cases where the charter or applicable law provides otherwise, an affirmative vote
of a majority of those voting on a question shall be sufficient to pass or adopt any resolution, motion, or other
action of the council.
Section 2-11 Ordinances; enacting clause.
The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the council shall be, “Be it ordained by the Council of the
City of Bristow, Oklahoma”, and of all ordinances proposed by the voters under their power of initiative, “Be it
ordained by the People of the City of Bristow, Oklahoma”.
Section 2-12 Ordinances; passage; notice of consideration.
A. Every proposed ordinance shall be read in full or by Title. At least five (5) affirmative votes are required
for the passage of an ordinance; and the five (5) votes may be the affirmative votes of five (5) councilmen or,
when the councilmen are all present and voting and there is a tie, of four (4) councilmen and the mayor. The vote
on passage of every ordinance shall be by roll call, and shall be entered in the journal.
B. No ordinance except an emergency ordinance passed by unanimous vote of the councilmen present in
accordance with Section 2-15 C., shall be passed by the council unless a notice of a time and place of consideration
of the proposed ordinance has appeared in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least twentyfour
(24) hours before the consideration.
Section 2-13 Ordinances; veto by mayor.
A. The mayor shall have power to veto ordinances. Within seven (7) days after the council passes an ordinance,
the mayor shall return it to the council or to the city clerk for transmittal to the council, with or without
his approval or with his veto.
If he vetoes an ordinance, he shall return with the ordinance and his veto a written statement of the reasons for
his veto.
B. If the mayor approves an ordinance within such seven (7) days, it is deemed to be finally passed as of
the time he approves it.
C. If the mayor vetoes an ordinance, the council may reconsider it; and the council, within not more than
five (5) weeks after the mayor returns the ordinance with his veto and the statement of the reasons for his veto to
the council or to the city clerk, may pass the ordinance, notwithstanding the mayor’s veto, by a vote of at least
six (6) councilmen. An ordinance passed over the mayor’s veto is deemed to be finally passed when the council
passes it over his veto.
D. If the mayor neither approves nor vetoes an ordinance within seven (7) days after the council passes it, it
is deemed to be finally passed as of the time of expiration of the seven (7) days or as of the time when he returns
the ordinance to the council or to the city clerk, whichever occurs first.
Section 2-14 Ordinances; publication; when in effect.
A. Within ten (10) days after its final passage, every ordinance shall be published in full or by number and
title in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
B. Every ordinance except an emergency ordinance, so published, shall become effective thirty (30) days
after its final passage unless it specifies a later time; provided, that a franchise for a public utility shall not go
into effect until the ordinance granting it has been published in full in a newspaper of general circulation within
the city and has been approved at an election by a vote of a majority of the qualified electors voting on the question.
Section 2-15 Ordinances; emergency.
A. An emergency ordinance is an ordinance which in the judgment of the council is necessary for the immediate
preservation of peace, health, or safety, and which should become effective prior to the time when an
ordinary ordinance would become effective.
B. Every such ordinance shall contain, as a part of its title, the words, “and declaring an emergency”; and in
a separate section, herein called the emergency section, shall declare the emergency.
C. An affirmative vote of at least six (6) councilmen shall be required for the passage of an emergency ordinance;
provided, that, if notice of consideration of an emergency ordinance has not been published as provided
in section 2-12 B., the ordinance must also receive the affirmative vote of each councilman present.
D. An emergency ordinance shall take effect upon its final passage and publication unless it specifies a later
time.
Section 2-16 Ordinances; adoption by reference.
The council by ordinance may adopt by reference, with or without modification, codes, standards, and regulations
relating to building, plumbing, electrical installations, milk and milk products, and other matters which it
has power to regulate otherwise. Such code, standard, or regulation so adopted need not be enrolled in the book
of ordinances; but a copy shall be filed and kept in the office of the city clerk.
Section 2-17 Ordinances; codification.
The permanent, general ordinances of the city shall be codified and published in book or pamphlet form at
least every ten (10) years unless the council, by use of a loose-leaf or supplement system, provides for keeping
the code up-to-date. The ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the code may be revised, rearranged, and
reorganized; and the code may contain new matter and this charter. A copy of the published code shall be filed in
the office of the city clerk after the council adopts the code by ordinance, but the code need not be enrolled in the
book of ordinances.
Section 2-18 Initiative and referendum.
The powers of the initiative and referendum are reserved to the people of the city. In the exercise of these
powers, the requirements of the state constitution and law shall be observed.
ARTICLE III
MAYOR AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 3-1 Mayor; office created; qualifications.
A. There shall be a mayor of the city, who shall be elected by the qualified electors of the city.
B. Only qualified electors of the city who have resided within the city for at least one year at the time of
their election or appointment to fill a vacancy, shall be qualified for the office of mayor.
Section 3-2 Mayor to be chief executive officer; powers and duties.
The mayor shall be chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the city government. He
shall execute the laws and ordinances, and administer the government of the city. He shall be recognized as the
head of the city government for ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law. He shall:
1. Appoint with approval of the council, and when deemed necessary for the good of the service, but without
council approval, lay off, suspend, demote, or remove all directors, or heads, of administrative departments
and all other administrative officers and employees of the city (except as provided by Article 4); provided, that
the council by ordinance or personnel rules may authorize the mayor to make designated appointments without
council approval, and that the mayor may appoint his secretary (if any) without council approval;
2. Supervise and control, directly or indirectly, all administrative departments, agencies, officers, and employees
(except as modified by article 4);
3. Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the council, be responsible for the administration of the
budget after it goes into effect, and recommend to the council any changes in the budget which he deems desirable;
4. Submit to the council a report as of the end of the fiscal year on the finances and administrative activities
of the city for the preceding year;
5. Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations
to the council on matters of policy and other matters as may seem to him desirable; and
6. Have such other powers and duties as this charter prescribes, and such powers and duties consistent with
this charter as the council may prescribe.
Section 3-3 Vice mayor; election; powers and duties.
At the first meeting after the time prescribed for the beginning of the terms of newly elected councilmen, or as
soon thereafter as practicable, the council shall elect from its membership a vice mayor, who shall serve as such
until the next such first meeting. The vice mayor shall act as mayor during the absence, disability, or suspension
of the mayor, or, if a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor, until another mayor is chosen and qualifies. If the
office of vice mayor becomes vacant, the council shall elect from its membership another vice mayor for completion
of the unexpired term.
Section 3-4 Administrative departments, offices, and agencies.
There shall be a department of finance and such other administrative departments, offices, and agencies as this
charter establishes and as the council may establish.
ARTICLE IV
OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND AGENCIES
Section 4-1 City attorney.
There shall be a city attorney, who shall be appointed, and may be removed, by the mayor with approval of
the council. The city attorney serves for an indefinite term, and unless his services are sooner terminated, until
his successor is appointed and qualifies.
Section 4-2 Library board.
A. There shall be a library board. It shall consist of six (6) members appointed by the mayor with approval
of the council for overlapping terms of three (3) years. The terms of two (2) members shall begin May 1 in every
year. The mayor with approval of the council may remove a member for the good of the service, and may fill
vacancies for unexpired terms. Members shall serve without compensation.
B. Every year, at the time prescribed for the beginning of the terms of new members or as soon thereafter as
practicable, the library board shall elect a chairman, a vice chairman, and a secretary; and the secretary need not
be a member of the board. It shall determine the time and place of its regular meetings; and the chairman or any
four (4) members may call special meetings of the board.
C. The library board shall have administrative supervision and control of the public library or libraries of
the city, and shall appoint the librarian or librarians and all other library personnel; provided, that the board may
authorize a librarian to appoint his subordinates. The library board may adopt regulations for the operation of the
library or libraries, subject to ordinance which the council may enact.
D. Nothing in this charter shall prohibit the city from participating in a county or other area library service.
Section 4-3 Hospitals and certain other institutions.
If and when the city itself operates a hospital, other institution for the care and/or custody of persons, a museum,
or other cultural or educational institution or agency, the hospital or other such institution or agency shall
be governed, administered, and operated as the council may provide by ordinance, notwithstanding any other
provision of this charter. This section does not affect the foundation which now operates the hospital.
ARTICLE V
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE; FISCAL AFFAIRS
Section 5-1 Department of finance; city treasurer.
A. There shall be a department of finance, the head of which shall be the city treasurer. The city treasurer
shall be appointed, and may be removed, as provided by this charter.
B. Subject to and in accordance with this charter, applicable law, and such ordinances as the council may
adopt, the city treasurer shall collect or receive revenue and other money for the city; shall be responsible for its
custody, safekeeping, deposit, and disbursement; shall maintain a general accounting system for the city government;
and shall have such other powers and duties consistent with this charter as may be prescribed by ordinance
or applicable law.
Section 5-2 Purchases and sales.
A. The mayor, subject to any regulations which the council may adopt, shall contract for and purchase, or
issue purchase authorizations for, all supplies, materials, and equipment for the offices, departments, and agencies
of the city government. Every such contract or purchase exceeding an amount to be established by ordinance,
shall require the prior approval of the council. The mayor also may transfer to or between offices, departments,
and agencies, or sell, surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, and equipment, subject to such regulations
as the council may adopt.
B. Before the purchase, or contract for purchase, of any supplies, materials, or equipment, or the sale of any
surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, or equipment, ample opportunity for competitive bidding, under such
regulations and with such exceptions, as the council may prescribe, shall be given; but the council shall not except
an individual contract, purchase, or sale from the requirement of competitive bidding.
C. The council by ordinance may transfer some or all of the power granted to the mayor by this section to
an administrative officer appointed as provided in section 3-2(1).
Section 5-3 Sale of property valued at more than $25,000.00.
The sale of any city property, real or personal, including public utilities, or of any interest therein, the value of
which is more than Twenty-five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) may be made only:
1. By authority of an affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors of the city who vote on the
question of approving or authorizing the sale at an election; or
2. By authority of a special non-emergency ordinance.
Such ordinance shall be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation within the city within ten (10)
days after its final passage, and shall include a section reading substantially as follows; “Section _______. This
ordinance shall be referred to a vote of the electors of the city if a sufficient and lawful referendum petition is
properly filed within thirty (30) days after its final passage.” The sale of an entire public utility may be authorized
only as provided in (1) hereinabove.
Section 5-4 Public improvements.
Public improvements may be made by the city government itself or by contract. The council shall award all
contracts for such improvements. A contract for public improvements of more than Two Thousand Dollars
($2,000.00) may be awarded only to the lowest and best responsible bidder after such notice and opportunity for
competitive bidding as the council may prescribe. All bids may be rejected, and further notice and opportunity
for competitive bidding may be given.
Section 5-5 Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of July and shall end on the last day of June
of every calendar year.
Section 5-6 Independent annual audit.
The council shall designate a qualified public accountant or firm of such accountants who shall make an independent
audit of the accounts and evidences of financial transactions of the department of finance and of all
other departments, offices, and agencies keeping separate or subordinate accounts or making financial transactions,
as of the end of every fiscal year at least, and who shall report to the mayor and to the council. The mayor
shall neither suggest nor recommend the accountant or accountants.
ARTICLE VI
MUNICIPAL COURT
Section 6-1 Municipal court.
Cases arising out of violations of the ordinances of the city shall be tried by the existing municipal court created
by state law or a lawful successor of such court created by state law; provided, that the council by ordinance
shall have power to create a municipal court to hear and determine such cases if and when it deems it necessary
or desirable to do so.
ARTICLE VII
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
Section 7-1 Merit system created; appointments; removals; personnel rules.
A merit system is hereby established for personnel in the city service. Appointments and promotions in the
service of the city shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness; and removals, demotions, suspensions,
and layoffs shall be made solely for the good of the service. The council, consistently with this charter, by ordinance
or personnel rules, may regulate personnel matters and provide for proper personnel administration.
Section 7-2 Personnel board created.
A. There shall be a personnel board consisting of three (3) members appointed by the council for overlapping
six-year terms. The term of one member shall begin July 1 in every odd-numbered year. The council shall
appoint the original members so that the term of one will expire at that time in each of the first three (3) succeeding
odd-numbered years. A member may not hold any other office or position of employment in the city government.
The council, after adequate opportunity for a hearing, may remove a member of the personnel
board for the good of the service; and the vote shall be by roll call and shall be entered in the journal. The council
shall fill vacancies for the unexpired terms. Members shall serve without compensation unless the council
provides otherwise.
B. At the time prescribed for the beginning of the term of a newly appointed member or as soon thereafter
as practicable, the board shall elect a chairman, a vice chairman, and a secretary; and the secretary need not be a
member of the board. The board shall determine the time and place of its regular meetings, and the chairman or
two (2) members may call special meetings.
C. The personnel board shall have power to subpoena officers and employees of the city and other persons
to testify and to produce documents and other effects as evidence.
Section 7-3 Classified and unclassified services.
A. All officers and employees of the city shall be divided into the classified and the unclassified service.
B. The following shall constitute the unclassified service:
1. The mayor and councilmen, the municipal judge or judges, the city clerk when appointed by the mayor
with approval of the council, one secretary to the mayor (if any), and the city attorney;
2. Members and secretary of each board, commission, or other plural authority;
3. All personnel who serve without compensation;
4. All temporary and all part-time officers and employees, except those whom the council may place in the
classified service by ordinance or personnel rules; and
5. Not to exceed five (5) additional officers and/or employees whom the council may place in the unclassified
service by ordinance or personnel rules.
C. All other officers and employees shall be in the classified service.
D. Nothing herein shall prohibit including unclassified personnel in the classification plan for pay purposes.
Section 7-4 Removal of officers and employees.
Unless otherwise provided by this charter, any officer or employee of the city may be laid off, suspended, demoted,
or removed by the same authority who has power to appoint or elect a successor of the officer or employee.
Section 7-5 Removal; hearing before the personnel board.
A. The mayor or any other authority who lays off, suspends without pay, demotes, or removes any officer
or employee in the classified service after a probationary period of six (6) months, shall, at that time or within
two
(2) days thereafter, deliver, or have delivered, or mail by registered, certified, or similar special mail, to the officer
or employee a written statement of the reason or reasons for the layoff, suspension, demotion, or removal.
B. Such officer or employee may appeal in writing to the personnel board. The appeal must be filed with
the secretary of the board, or with the city clerk for transmittal to the board, within ten (10) days after receipt of
notice of the layoff, suspension, demotion, or removal.
C. As soon as practicable thereafter, the board shall hold a hearing on the appeal, or give an adequate opportunity
therefor, and shall report in writing its findings and recommendations to the mayor or other authority
who laid off, suspended, demoted, or removed the officer or employee. The mayor or other authority shall then
make a final decision in writing regarding the appellant’s layoff, suspension, demotion, or removal, as the case
may be; provided, that, if the board finds that the layoff, suspension, demotion, or removal was made for a political
reason or reasons or for any other reason or reasons than the good of the service, and the action by the
mayor or other authority shall be nullified thereby.
Section 7-6 Nepotism.
Neither the mayor, the council, nor any other authority of the city government, may appoint or elect any person
related to any councilman, to the mayor, or to himself, or, in the case of a plural authority, to one of its
members, by affinity or consanguinity within the third degree, to any office or position of profit in the city government;
but this shall not prohibit an officer or employee already in the service of the city from continuing and
being promoted therein.
Section 7-7 Bonds of officers and employees.
The mayor, the city treasurer, and such other officers and employees as the council may designate, before entering
upon their duties, shall provide bonds for the faithful performance of their respective duties, payable to the
city, in such form and in such amounts as the council may prescribe, with a surety company authorized to operate
within the state. The city shall pay the premiums on such bonds.
Section 7-8 Oath or affirmation of office.
Every officer of the city, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take and subscribe to the oath or
affirmation of office prescribed by the state constitution. The oath or affirmation shall be filed in the city clerk’s
office.
Section 7-9 Who may administer oaths and affirmations.
All officers authorized by federal or state law, the mayor, the city clerk, the municipal judge or judges, the
chairman of the personnel board, and such other officers as the council may authorize, may administer oaths and
affirmations in any matter pertaining to the affairs and government of the city.
Section 7-10 Conviction of a felony to terminate office or employment.
If the mayor, a councilman, or other officer, or any employee of the city is convicted of a felony, his office or
position shall become vacant immediately when the case is finally determined.
Section 7-11 Acting officers and employees; temporary appointments.
A. The appointing or electing authority who may appoint or elect the successor of an officer or employee,
may appoint or elect a person to act during the temporary absence, disability, or suspension of such officer or
employee, or, in case of a vacancy, until a successor is appointed or elected and qualifies, unless the council provides
by general ordinance that a particular superior or subordinate of such officer or employee shall act. The
council by general ordinance may provide for a deputy to act in such a case.
B. No temporary appointment made by the mayor shall require approval by the council, but the council by
ordinance or personnel rules may limit the time which temporary appointees may serve.
Section 7-12 Regular appointive officers and employees; term.
All regular (that is, nontemporary) appointive officers and employees of the city except members and secretaries
of boards, commissions, and other plural authorities, shall serve indefinite terms.
Section 7-13 Officers to continue until successors are elected or appointed and qualify.
Every officer who is elected or appointed for a term ending at a definite time, shall continue to serve thereafter
until his successor is elected or appointed and qualifies unless his services are sooner terminated by resignation,
removal, disqualification, death, abolition of the office, or other legal manner.
Section 7-14 Feminine gender.
When the masculine gender is used in this charter, it shall also include the feminine unless the masculine
alone is clearly indicated.
ARTICLE VIII
ELECTIONS
Section 8-1 Elections; terms; nonpartisan elections.
A. Only the mayor and the eight (8) councilmen shall be elected by the qualified electors of the city.
B. At the elections in 1976, one councilman from each of the four (4) wards of the city shall be elected for a
five-year term.
C. At the elections in 1979 and in every fourth year thereafter, the mayor and one councilman from each of
the four (4) wards of the city shall be elected for four-year terms.
D. At the elections in 1981 and in every fourth year thereafter, one councilman from each of the four (4)
wards of the city shall be elected for a four-year term.
E. The mayor and councilmen shall serve for the terms indicated, and until their respective successors are
elected and qualify. Their terms shall begin on the first Monday in May in the year in which elected. If a mayorelect
or a councilman-elect fails to qualify within one month after the beginning of his term, his office shall become
vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled as other vacancies in the office of mayor or councilman are filled.
F. The mayor shall be elected at large, by the qualified electors of the entire city. The councilmen shall be
elected by ward, by the qualified electors of their respective wards.
G. The elections shall be nonpartisan; and no party designation or emblem shall be placed on the ballots.
H. Nothing in this charter shall prohibit the use of voting machines.
Section 8-2 Wards; number; equal.
A. There shall be four (4) wards, which shall be numbered from one to four (4). The council by ordinance
may change the ward boundaries.
B. The wards shall be formed of compact, contiguous territory, and shall be substantially equal in population.
C. At intervals of not more than ten (10) years, the council shall review the wards and their boundaries, and
if necessary, shall revise them to achieve and maintain substantial equality in population among the wards.
Section 8-3 Primary election; filing.
Any person qualified for the office for which he is filing may have his name placed on the ballot for the primary
election as a candidate for mayor or councilman from his ward by filing, not more than four (4) weeks and
at least three (3) weeks prior to the primary election, with the secretary of the county election board, a declaration
of candidacy and a petition or a filing fee as may be required by law.
Section 8-4 Primary election; time; voting.
A primary election shall be held on the third Tuesday in March of 1976, 1979, and every odd-numbered year
thereafter to nominate candidates for mayor and/or councilmen to succeed those whose terms are expiring in the
respective year. If only one person is a candidate for an office to be filled, he shall be not only nominated, but
also elected ipso facto; and his name shall not appear on the primary or general election ballot. Every qualified
elector of the city shall be entitled to vote for one candidate for mayor, and every qualified elector of a ward
shall be entitled to vote for one candidate for councilman from his ward. (Amendment to Charter adopted March
15, 1983)
Section 8-5 Primary election; who nominated or elected.
A. In a primary election, the two (2) candidates for each office to be filled receiving the greatest number of
votes for that office, shall be nominated. If one of the candidates for an office receives a majority of all votes
cast for all candidates for that office, he alone shall be not only nominated, but also elected ipso facto; and his
name shall not appear on the ballot for the general election.
B. In case of failure to nominate because of a tie, the nominee or nominees (as the case may be) shall be
determined from among those tying in the manner provided by law.
C. If one of the two (2) candidates for an office nominated in a primary election dies or withdraws before
the general election, the remaining candidate shall be elected ipso facto; and his name need not appear on the
ballot for the general election.
Section 8-6 General election; time; who elected.
A general election shall be held in the city on the first Tuesday in April of 1976, 1979, and every oddnumbered
year thereafter to elect the mayor and/or councilmen to succeed those whose terms are expiring in the
respective year. Every qualified elector of the city may vote for one of the two (2) candidates for mayor, and
every qualified elector of a ward may vote for one of the two (2) candidates for councilman from his ward; but
electors may not vote for any person other than the two (2) nominees for an office. The candidate for each office
receiving the greatest number of votes, shall be elected. In case of failure to elect because of a tie, the election
shall be determined from among those tying, in the manner provided by law. (Amendment to Charter adopted
March 15, 1983)
Section 8-7 Registered qualified electors.
The term qualified elector as used in this charter means a person who has the qualifications prescribed for
electors by the state constitution and law, and who is registered as may be required by law.
Section 8-8 Elections; when not held.
If there are no candidates and no questions to be voted upon at a primary or general election, the election shall
not be held.
Section 8-9 State constitution and law to govern.
The provisions of the state constitution and law applicable to elections in cities operating under charters shall
govern such elections in this city insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by this charter.
ARTICLE IX
RECALL
Section 9-1 Recall authorized.
The mayor or any councilman may be recalled from office by the electors qualified to vote for the election of
a successor to the incumbent, in the manner provided in this article.
Section 9-2 Recall petition.
A. To initiate recall proceedings, a written statement proposing the recall of the mayor or a councilman
shall be signed by twenty (20) or more qualified electors of the city or ward concerned, as the case may be, and
shall be filed with the city clerk after the incumbent has held the office at least four (4) months. The statement
shall also contain the reason or reasons for which the recall is sought, in not more than two hundred (200) words.
Within five (5) days, the city clerk shall mail a copy of such statement by registered, certified, or similar special
mail to the officer at his residential address. Within ten (10) days after the statement is mailed to the officer, the
officer may make and file with the city clerk a written statement in duplicate justifying his conduct in office, in
not more than two hundred (200) words; and the city clerk on request shall deliver one copy to one of the persons
filing the statement proposing the recall.
B. The petition for recall shall include a demand that a successor to the incumbent sought to be recalled be
elected, and shall also include before the space where the signatures are to be written the statement giving the
reason or reasons for recall under the heading “STATEMENT FOR RECALL”, and if the officer has filed a
statement as authorized, the statement justifying his conduct in office under the heading “STATEMENT
AGAINST RECALL”. The two (2) statements shall be in letters of the same size. A copy of the petition shall be
filed with the city clerk within one month after recall proceedings are initiated by the filing of the first statement,
and before the petition is circulated.
C. A number of qualified electors of the city or ward concerned equal at least to twenty percent (20%) of
the total number of votes cast for governor in the city or ward at the last general state election at which a governor
was elected, must sign the petition. Each signer shall write after his name his address within the city, giving
street or avenue and number, if any. Not more than one hundred (100) signatures may appear on a single copy of
the petition. Petitions may be circulated only by qualified electors of the city or ward concerned; and the person
who circulates each copy of the petition shall sign an affidavit on the copy stating that each signer signed the
petition in his presence, that each signature on the petition is genuine, and that he believes each signer to be a
qualified elector of the city or ward concerned.
D. The circulated petition shall be filed with the city clerk not later than one month after the filing of a copy
as provided above. Within one month after date of filing of the circulated petition, the city clerk shall examine it
and ascertain whether it has been prepared and circulated as required, and whether the required number of qualified
electors of the city or ward concerned have signed it. He shall then attach his certificate to the petition. If his
certificate states that the petition has not been prepared and circulated as required and/or lacks a sufficient number
of signatures, the petition shall have no effect. But, if the city clerk’s certificate states that the petition has
been prepared and circulated as required and has a sufficient number of signatures, he shall submit the petition
and the certificate to the council at its next meeting.
Section 9-3 Recall election; council to order.
A. The council, by resolution or ordinance passed within one month after receiving the petition and certificate
of the city clerk, shall order and fix the date for a recall election, which shall be held not less than thirty (30)
days, nor more than fifty (50) days, after passage of the resolution or ordinance. The city clerk shall cause the
resolution or ordinance ordering the election to be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation within
ten (10) days after its passage; and such publication shall be sufficient notice of the election.
B. The qualified electors of the city may vote in a recall election on the election of successors to more than
one officer on the same day.
Section 9-4 Same; how held.
A. The recall election shall be an election to fill the office held by the incumbent sought to be recalled.
There shall be no primary. Any qualified person, including the incumbent, may file as a candidate for the office.
The candidate receiving the greatest number of votes in the recall election shall be elected. If a candidate other
than the incumbent is elected, the incumbent shall be recalled from office effective as of the time when the result
of the election is certified. The successful candidate must qualify within one month thereafter; and if he fails to
do so, the office shall be vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled as other vacancies in the office of mayor or
councilmen are filled. A candidate thus elected and qualifying shall serve for the unexpired term. If the incumbent
is a candidate and receives the greatest number of votes, he shall continue in office without interruption;
and recall proceedings may not again be initiated against him within one year after the election.
B. The provisions of this charter relating to city elections shall also govern recall elections insofar as they
are applicable and are not superseded by the provisions of this article.
Section 9-5 Person recalled or resigning.
A person who has been recalled from an office, or who has resigned from such office while recall proceedings
were pending against him, may not hold any office or position of employment in the city government within two
(2) years after his recall or resignation.
ARTICLE X
AMENDMENT AND SEPARABILITY OF CHARTER
Section 10-1 Amendment; proposal; ratification; approval.
This charter may be amended by proposals therefor submitted by the council, or by the mayor upon initiative
petition of the electors as provided by the state constitution, at a general or special election, ratified by a majority
of the qualified electors voting thereon, and approved by the governor as provided by the state constitution. If
more amendments than one are proposed, all of them except those which are so interrelated that they should be
ratified or rejected together, shall be submitted in such manner that the electors may vote on them separately. A
proposition to amend this charter may be either in the form of a proposed amendment to a part or parts of the
charter or of a proposed new charter.
Section 10-2 Separability.
A. If a part of this charter is invalid, all valid parts which are severable from the invalid parts remain in effect.
If a part of this charter is invalid in one or more of its applications, the part remains in effect in all valid applications
which are severable from the invalid applications.
B. If a part of this charter is invalid in its entirety or in one or more of its applications, the council by ordinance
may take such appropriate action as will enable the city government to function properly.
ARTICLE XI
SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT
Section 11-1 When charter goes into effect.
This charter shall go into effect immediately upon its ratification by a vote of a majority of the qualified electors
of the city voting upon the question at an election and its approval by the governor as provided by the state
constitution; and this charter shall supersede the law governing statutory aldermanic cities, under which the city
has been operating.
Section 11-2 Officers and employees to continue.
When this charter goes into effect:
1. The mayor and councilmen shall continue in their respective offices until the expiration of their respective
terms;
2. The city clerk, the city treasurer, the city marshal (chief of police), and the street commissioner shall
continue in their respective offices until the expiration of their respective terms. During such time, the incumbents
of these offices at the time this charter goes into effect may be removed only in a manner provided by law
applicable to statutory aldermanic cities (under which the city has operated heretofore); and during such time,
their salaries may not be decreased.
3. All other officers and employees of the city under the law applicable to statutory aldermanic cities (including
members of boards and commissions) shall continue in their respective offices and positions of employment
under this charter until their terms expire or until their services are terminated in accordance with the provisions
of this charter.
Section 11-3 Ordinances continued.
All ordinances, insofar as they are not inconsistent with this charter, shall continue in effect until they are repealed
or until they expire by their own limitation.
Section 11-4 Pending actions and proceedings.
The adoption of this charter shall not abate or otherwise affect any action or proceeding, civil or criminal,
pending when it takes effect, brought by or against the municipality or any department, agency, or officer
thereof.
PART 2
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
Chapters:
1 Form of Government
2 Mayor
3 Council
4 Department of Finance, Clerk and Treasurer
5 Other Officers and Employees
6 Social Security
7 Retirement and Pensions
Chapter 1
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
Sections:
2-101 Form of government.
2-102 Absentee ballots.
2-101 Form of government.
The form of municipal government for the city is a “mayor-council government.” All powers of the city shall
be exercised in the manner prescribed by the charter, or, if the manner is not thus prescribed, then in such manner
as the council may prescribe by ordinance.
Charter Reference: Similar provisions, Section 1-2 of the charter.
2-102 Absentee ballots.
Absentee ballots shall be provided for all mayoral and councilmen elections in the city. Absentee ballots and
absentee voting shall conform to applicable state law. (Ord. No. 1-24-89A)
Chapter 2
MAYOR
Sections:
2-201 Mayor: office created; qualifications.
2-202 Mayor to be chief executive officer; powers and duties.
2-203 Vice mayor: election; powers and duties.
2-204 Administrative departments, offices, and agencies.
2-201 Mayor: office created; qualifications.
A. There is a mayor of the city, who shall be elected by the qualified electors of the city.
B. Only qualified electors of the city who have resided within the city for at least one year at the time of
their election or appointment to fill a vacancy, shall be qualified for the office of mayor.
Charter Reference: Similar provisions, Section 3-1 of the charter.
2-202 Mayor to be chief executive officer; powers and duties.
The mayor is chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the city government. He shall
execute the laws and ordinances, and administer the government of the city. He shall be recognized as the head
of the city government for ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law. He shall:
1. Appoint with approval of the council, and when deemed necessary for the good of the service, but without
council approval, lay off, suspend, demote, or remove all directors, or heads, of administrative departments
and all other administrative officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided. The council by ordinance
or personnel rules may authorize the mayor to make designated appointments without council approval,
and that the mayor may appoint his secretary (if any) without council approval;
2. Supervise and control, directly or indirectly, all administrative departments, agencies, officers, and employees
except as otherwise provided;
3. Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the council, be responsible for the administration of the
budget after it goes into effect, and recommend to the council any changes in the budget which he deems desirable;
4. Submit to the council a report as of the end of the fiscal year on the finances and administrative activities
of the city for the preceding year;
5. Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations
to the council on matters of policy and other matters as may seem to him desirable; and
6. Have such other powers and duties as the charter prescribes, and such powers and duties consistent with
the charter as the council may prescribe.
Charter Reference: Similar provisions, Section 3-2 of the charter.
2-203 Vice mayor: election; powers and duties.
At the first meeting after the time prescribed for the beginning of the terms of the newly elected councilmen,
or as soon thereafter as practicable, the council shall elect from its membership a vice mayor, who shall serve as
such until the next such first meeting. The vice mayor shall act as mayor during the absence, disability, or suspension
of the mayor, or, if a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor, until another mayor is chosen and qualifies.
If the office of vice mayor becomes vacant, the council shall elect from its membership another vice mayor for
completion of the unexpired term.
2-204 Administrative departments, offices, and agencies.
There is a department of finance and such other administrative departments, offices, and agencies as this charter
establishes and as the council may establish.
Chapter 3
COUNCIL
Sections:
2-301 Councilmen, number, qualifications.
2-302 Presiding officer of the council.
2-303 Council, powers.
2-304 Regular meetings.
2-305 Special meetings.
2-306 Nonattendance at meetings.
2-307 Rules of procedure.
2-308 False statements to the city council.
2-301 Councilmen, number, qualifications.
A. There is a city council of eight (8) members, which shall consist of two (2) councilmen from each of the
four (4) wards of the city.
B. Only qualified electors of the city who reside in the respective wards from which they are elected or appointed
to fill a vacancy, and who have resided within the city for at least one year at the time of their election or
appointment to fill a vacancy, shall be qualified for the offices of councilmen.
C. A councilman may not hold any administrative office or position in the city government (other than vice
mayor); provided, that nothing in the charter shall prohibit councilmen who are already volunteer firemen when
elected or appointed from continuing to serve as volunteer firemen and being paid as such.
Charter Reference: Similar provisions, Section 2-1 of the charter.
Editor’s Note: Councilmen, one per ward, are elected for four (4) year terms in 1983, with the mayor. The
remaining councilmen are elected, one per ward, in 1985.
2-302 Presiding officer of the council.
The mayor, or, in his absence, the vice mayor, shall preside at meetings of the council. In the absence of both
the mayor and the vice mayor, the council may elect a president pro-tem to preside over a meeting of the council.
2-303 Council, powers.
Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in the council. Without
limitation of the foregoing, the council shall have power, subject to the state constitution, law, and this charter:
1. By ordinance to enact municipal legislation on any and all subjects and matters within the competence of
the city to legislate;
2. To adopt the budget, raise revenue, and make appropriations; and to regulate bond elections, the issuance
of bonds, sinking funds, the refunding of indebtedness, salaries, wages, and other compen-sation of officers
and employees, and all other fiscal and business affairs of the city;
3. To inquire into the conduct of any office, department, or agency of the city government, and to investigate
municipal affairs; and for this purpose, to subpoena witnesses, take testimony, and require the production of
evidence; and when making such an inquiry or investigation, to elect one of its members president pro-tem to
preside during such time, if it chooses to do so;
4. To appoint or elect and remove its own subordinates, the members of the personnel board, the members
of the planning commission, the members of the board of adjustment, and other quasi-legislative, quasi-judicial,
or advisory personnel, now or when and if established; or to prescribe the method of appointing or electing and
removing them;
5. To regulate elections and the recall; and
6. To create, change, and abolish all offices, departments, and agencies of the city government other than
the offices, departments, and agencies created by the charter; and to assign additional powers and duties consistent
with this charter to offices, departments, and agencies created by this charter.
2-304 Regular meetings.
The regular meetings of the mayor and council are held on the first and third Mondays of each month at the
hour of seven thirty p.m., and may be adjourned from time to time as they may direct. (Prior Code, Chapter 8)
2-305 Special meetings.
Special meetings of the council shall not be held without public notice being given at least forty-eight (48)
hours prior to the meetings. The city clerk also shall cause written notice of the date, time and place of the meeting
to be mailed or delivered to each person, newspaper, wire service, radio station, and television station that
has filed a written request for notice of meetings of the public body with the clerk. Such written notice shall be
mailed or delivered at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the special meeting. In addition, the city clerk shall, at
least twenty-four (24) hours prior to such special meetings, display public notice of the meeting, setting forth
thereon the date, time, place and agenda for the meeting. Only matters appearing on the posted agenda may be
considered at the special meeting. Such public notice shall be posted in prominent public view at the city hall if
no office exists. Twenty-four (24) hours prior public posting shall exclude Saturdays and Sundays and holidays
legally declared by the state. (Prior Code, Chapter 8; Ord. No. 6-20-94A)
2-306 Nonattendance at meetings.
Whenever a quorum of the council is not present for two (2) successive meetings, whether regular or special
or both, the mayor or acting mayor may at the second or any subsequent successive meeting where a quorum is
not present, compel the attendance of such absent members by issuing a warrant for their arrest to the police
chief or any city police officer who shall forthwith arrest such named members as can be found within the city
and are not incapacitated or prevented from attending by circumstances of an emergency nature, and shall bring
him or them to the council meeting and enforce his or their attendance for the duration of such meeting. (Prior
Code, Chapter 8)
Charter Reference: Removal from office for failure to attend more than one-half of the meetings held over a
four (4) month period, Section 2-7 of the charter.
2-307 Rules of procedure.
A. The council may determine its own rules, and may compel the attendance of absent members in the
manner and under penalties as the board may prescribe.
B. The order of business for each meeting of the council shall be as follows:
1. Call to order;
2. Determination of a quorum;
3. Reading and approval of the minutes;
4. Reading of communications;
5. Unfinished business;
6. New ordinances and resolutions or other actions to be taken or considered by the council;
7. Reports of committees; if any;
8. Remarks of personal privilege;
9. Announcements by the mayor or other officers; and
10. Claims and purchase orders.
C. The following rules of procedure shall apply to any regular or special meeting of the council unless three
(3) councilmen agree to waive the rule or rules:
1. At the request of the mayor or any councilman, all motions shall be reduced to writing;
2. A motion to reconsider any of the proceedings of the council shall not be entertained unless it be made
by a member who previously voted in the majority;
3. No motion shall be debated or put until it be seconded and stated by the mayor. It is then and not until
then in possession of the board and cannot be withdrawn but by leave of the council;
4. A motion to adjourn shall be in order at any time, except as follows:
a. When repeated without intervening business or discussion;
b. When made as an interruption of a member while speaking;
c. When the previous question has been ordered; or
d. While a vote is being taken;
A motion to adjourn is debatable only as to the time to which the meeting is adjourned;
5. When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received but
a. To adjourn;
b. To lay on the table;
c. For the previous question;
d. To postpone to a day certain;
e. To commit;
f. To amend; or
g. To postpone indefinitely,
which several motions shall have precedence in the order they stand arranged;
6. When a proper motion is made, but information is wanted, the motion is to postpone to a day certain;
7. Matters claiming present attention for which it is desired to reserve for more suitable occasion, the order
is a motion to lay on the table; the matter may then be called for at any time. If the proposition may need further
consideration at the hands of a committee, the motion is to refer to a committee, but if it need but a few and simple
amendments, the council shall proceed to consider and amend at once;
8. On an amendment’s being moved, a councilman who has spoken on the main question may speak again
to the amendment;
9. The question is to be put first on the affirmative and then on the negative side. After the affirmative part
of the question has been put, any councilman who has not spoken before to the question may arise and speak
before the negative be put;
10. When a question has been moved and seconded and has been put by the presiding officer in the affirmative
and negative, it cannot be debated unless under motion for reconsideration; and
11. On any matters not specifically covered herein, Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern the rules of procedure.
2-308 False statements to the city council.
It shall be an offense for any person, in any manner within any hearing in which an appeal to the city council
is made or an application is presented for action by the city council, to knowingly and wilfully falsify, conceal or
cover-up by any trick, scheme or device a material fact, make any false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or representation,
or make or use any false writing or document knowing the same to contain any false, fictitious or
fraudulent statement or entry. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense
and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), excluding costs
and assessments, or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than ten (10) days or by both such
fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 9-16-96 § 2)
Chapter 4
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE, CLERK AND TREASURER
Sections:
2-401 City clerk; appointment; powers and duties.
2-402 City treasurer.
2-403 Director of finance.
2-401 City clerk; appointment; powers and duties.
A. The mayor, with approval of the council, shall appoint, and may remove, the city clerk, unless the council
by ordinance provides that the city treasurer shall be city clerk ex-officio. The city clerk serves for an indefinite
term, and unless his services are sooner terminated, until his successor is appointed and qualifies.
B. The city clerk shall serve as clerical officer of the council. He shall keep the journal of its proceedings,
and shall enroll in a book or books kept for the purpose of all ordinances and resolutions passed by it; shall be
custodian of such documents, records, and archives as may be provided by applicable law or ordinance; shall be
custodian of the seal of the city, and shall attest, and affix the seal to, documents when required in accordance
with applicable law or ordinance; and shall have such other powers and duties consistent with this charter as may
be prescribed by ordinance or applicable law.
2-402 City treasurer.
A. There is a department of finance, the head of which shall be the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall be
appointed by the mayor with approval of council, and may be removed by the mayor.
B. Subject to and in accordance with the city charter, applicable law, and such ordinances as the council
may adopt, the city treasurer shall:
1. Collect or receive revenue and other money for the city;
2. Be responsible for its custody, safekeeping, deposit, and disbursement;
3. Maintain a general accounting system for the city government; and
4. Have such other powers and duties consistent with the charter and as may be prescribed by ordinance or
applicable law.
2-403 Director of finance.
A. The positions of the city clerk and city treasurer are combined in one office to be known as the director
of the deportment of finance.
B. The director shall serve ex-officio as both city clerk and city treasurer and shall exercise all the powers
and have all the responsibilities of both positions.
C. The director shall be hired and may be removed in the same manner as provided for the city clerk or city
treasurer.
D. In addition to the director’s other responsibilities and powers, he shall have such others as are provided
for by ordinance or delegation. (Ord. No. 2/18/80A)
Chapter 5
OTHER OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Sections:
2-501 City attorney.
2-502 Merit system created--Appointments, removals, personnel rules.
2-502.1 Merit system established.
2-502.2 Probation.
2-502.3 Evaluation.
2-502.4 Job classification.
2-502.5 Compensation table.
2-502.6 Probationary period rating report.
2-502.7 Employee performance appraisal.
2-503 Bonds of officers and employees.
2-504 Oath or affirmation of office.
2-505 Salaries of elected officers.
2-506 Maintenance allowance.
2-507 Salaries of employees.
2-508 Full time employees, compensation.
2-509 Personnel policies.
2-501 City attorney.
There is a city attorney, who shall be appointed, and may be removed, by the mayor with approval of the
council. The city attorney serves for an indefinite term, and unless his services are sooner terminated, until his
successor is appointed and qualifies.
Charter Reference: Similar provisions, Section 4-1 of the charter.
2-502 Merit system created--Appointments, removals, personnel rules.
Repealed by Ordinance Number 3-28-90.
Charter Reference: See also charter provisions creating personnel board, hiring and firing, Sections 7-2 et seq.
of the charter.
2-502.1 Merit system established.
A merit system is hereby established for personnel in the city service. All appointments and promotions in the
service of the city shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness. All removals, demotions, suspensions,
and lay-offs shall be made solely for the good of the service. (Ord. No. 3-28-90)
2-502.2 Probation.
A. All employees shall be hired at the probationary level of their classification as set forth in Section 2-
502.4 and 2-502.5; provided, however, in the event that the mayor determines that the prior experience and ability
of a prospective probationary employee merits such, the mayor may place such employee at the appropriate
merited step within the relevant classification level. During the probationary period, the employee shall have no
seniority status and may be demoted, laid off or terminated at the sole discretion of the mayor without regard to
the employee’s relative length of service.
B. At the end of six (6) months, unless previously terminated, each probationary employee shall be evaluated
using a “Probationary Period Rating Report” as set out in Section 2-502.6:
1. If the probationary employee’s evaluation is average or better, then subject to approval of the city council,
such employee moves up to the step Titled “entry” as a permanent (full-time) city employee;
2. If the probationary employee’s evaluation is below average, the employee shall be terminated with no
right of appeal. (Ord. No. 3-28-90; Ord. No. 7-2-90A)
2-502.3 Evaluation.
Each permanent (full-time) employee shall be evaluated by his or her supervisor/department head on the anniversary
date of his/her employment as a full-time (nonprobationary) employee with the city using the employment
performance appraisal set out in Section 2-502.7:
1. If the employee receives a grade of average or better, the employee shall move up a step as determined
by the provisions in Section 2-502.5;
2. If the employee receives a grade below “average,” the employee shall stay at the employee’s present step
until the next annual evaluation;
a. Each evaluation wherein an employee has received a grade of below “average” must be explained to
such employee;
b. An employee may appeal an evaluation to the mayor by delivering a written request for an appeal to the
city clerk within three (3) working days. Within seven (7) working days of receiving the appeal, the mayor shall
hear the appeal. Within five (5) working days of hearing the appeal, the mayor shall notify the employee in writing
of his decision; or
c. An employee may appeal the mayor’s decision by delivering a written request to the city clerk within
three (3) working days of receipt of the written notice of the mayor’s decision. This appeal shall be heard by the
personnel board within ten (10) working days of receipt of the request for an appeal. The personnel board shall
report recommendations and findings to the mayor. Mayor shall then make a final decision in writing. (Ord. No.
3-28-90; Ord. No. 7-2-90B)
2-502.4 Job classification.
A. The following job classifications shall apply for purposes of this merit system only:
Job Classification
Level Tier Job Description
1 1 Senior citizen coordinator
2 1 Laborer (Water Department, Street Department, Sewer Department
and Park)
2 1 Public works clerk B
Level Tier Job Description
3 1 Water/Collections Clerk A
3 1 Public Works Clerk A
3 1 Truck driver
4 1 Librarian
4 1 Meter reader
4 1 Assistant clerk
4 1 Assistant water billing/collections clerk
4 1 Civilian dispatcher
4 1 Animal control officer
4 1 Assistant foreman (Water/Street Department)
5 1 City inspector
5 1 Dispatcher/jailer
6 1 Assistant chief dispatcher
6 1 Auxiliary equipment operator/street sweeper
6 1 Mechanic
6 1 Park supervisor
7 1 City clerk
7 1 Chief dispatcher
7 1 Foreman (Water or Street Department)
8 2 Fire fighter
8 2 Patrolman 2nd Class
8 2 Chief clerk/water billing/collections
9 2 Driver -- Fire Department
9 2 Sgt. Police Department
10 2 Lt. Fire Department
10 2 Lt./Patrolman 1st. Class -- Police Department
11 2 Captain -- Fire Department
11 2 Captain -- Police Department
(Shift Supervisor)
12 3 Detective
12 3 Assistant fire chief
12 3 Assistant police chief
12 3 Sanitation supervisor
13 3 City treasurer
B. 1. Effective July 1, 1996, at 12:01 a.m., all references in the job classification table set forth in subsection
A of this section which pertain to employees covered by an agreement between the city of Bristow and the
International Association of Fire Fighters, Local #3613 shall refer to the merit compensation table set forth in
Section 2-502.5(E).
2. Effective March 1, 1996, at 12:01 a.m., all references in the job classification table set forth in subsection
A of this section which pertain to employees not included by an agreement between the city of Bristow and
the International Association of Fire Fighters, Local #3613, shall refer to the merit compensation table set forth
in Section 2-502.5(E).
C. The compensation of the:
1. Fire chief;
2. Police chief;
3. Sewer and water superintendent;
4. Street superintendent; and
5. Finance director
shall be reviewed annually by the city council and mayor on each individual’s annual date of hire. (Ord. 24-
102102 § 1)
2-502.5 Compensation table.
A. Repealed by Ordinance Number 8-19-96D § 1.
B. Repealed by Ordinance Number 8-19-96D § 2.
C. 1. Effective on March 1, 1996, at 12:01 a.m., all employees of the city of Bristow except for those employees
who are included under an agreement between the city of Bristow and the International Association of
Fire Fighters, Local #3613, to-wit: (1) firefighter; (2) drive-firefighter; (3) lieutenant-firefighter; and (4) captainfirefighter,
who are at the following levels and steps under the prior merit compensation table (subsection B of
this section) shall be changed in accordance with the realignment chart set forth in subsection (C)(2) of this section.
The levels and steps which are changed effective March 1, 1996, at 12:01 a.m., shall correspond to the
merit compensation table set forth in subsection (E)(3) of this section.
2. Realignment Table.
Level and Steps on February 29, 1996 shall be
changed to
Level and Step on March 1, 1996
Level Step Level Step
1 Prob 1 Prob
1 3 1 Entry
1 4 1 Entry
1 5 1 Entry
2 2 2 Entry
2 4 2 Entry
2 6 2 2
2 7 2 2
3 4 3 Entry
3 8 3 3
3 15 3 11
4 Entry 4 Entry
4 2 4 Entry
4 6 4 Entry
4 7 4 2
4 12 4 7
4 15 4 10
5 6 5 Entry
5 9 5 4
5 10 5 5
5 11 5 6
5 12 5 7
6 13 6 8
7 11 7 6
7 15 7 11
7 15 7 10
8 Prob 8 Prob
8 3 8 Entry
8 5 8 Entry
8 7 8 3
9 6 9 2
9 8 9 4
9 11 9 7
10 7 10 3
10 11 10 7
10 13 10 9
10 14 10 10
11 9 11 4
12 7 12 4
12 13 12 10
12 15 12 12
13 4 13 2
3. Effective July 1, 1996, at 12:01 a.m., all employees who are included under an agreement between the
city of Bristow and the International Association of Fire Fighters, Local #3613, to-wit: (1) firefighter; (2) drivefirefighter;
(3) lieutenant-firefighter and (4) captain-firefighter, who were at the following level and step on June
30, 1996, under the prior merit compensation table shall be changed in accordance with the realignment chart set
forth in Section 2-502.5(C)(4). The levels and steps which are changed effective July 1, 1996, at 12:01 a.m.,
shall correspond to the merit compensation table set forth in Section 2-502.5(E)(3).
4. Realignment Table.
Level and Steps on June 30, 1996, shall be changed to Level and Step on July 1, 1996
Level Step Rate Level Step Rate
8 3 5.97 8 Entry 6.38
8 6 6.57 8 2 6.59
9 7 6.98 9 3 7.01
9 7 6.98 9 3 7.01
9 12 8.19 9 8 8.23
10 8 7.44 10 4 7.46
10 14 9.01 10 10 9.04
D. The provisions of this section shall be effective March 1, 1996, at 12:01 a.m.
1. This section shall not apply to those employees included under an agreement between the city of Bristow
and the International Association of Fire Fighters, Local #3613, to-wit: (1) firefighter; (2) driver-firefighter; (3)
lieutenant-firefighter and (4) captain-firefighter;
2. The table set forth in Section 2-502.5(E) shall be utilized in determining the levels and steps of all employees
of the city of Bristow except those employees who are included under an agreement between the city of
Bristow and the International Association of Fire Fighters, Local #3613, to-wit: (1) firefighter; (2) driverfirefighter;
(3) lieutenant-firefighter and (4) captain-firefighter;
a. An employee’s level shall be determined by the provisions of Section 2-502.2, 2-502.3, 2-502.4 and 2-
502.5(C).
3. There shall be four (4) tiers as follows:
a. Tier I:
i. There shall be a three (3) percent difference between steps on the same level; and
ii. There shall be a three and one-tenths (3.1) percent difference between each succeeding level;
b. Tier II:
i. There shall be a three and twenty-five-hundredths (3.25) percent difference between steps on the same
level; and
ii. There shall be an eight (8) percent difference between each level;
E.1. Effective on March 1, 1996, at 12:01 a.m., the merit compensation table set forth in 2-502.5(E)(3) shall
apply to all employees of the city of Bristow except those employees who are included under an agreement between
the city of Bristow and the International Association of Fire Fighters, Local #3613, to-wit: (1) firefighter;
(2) drive-firefighter; (3) lieutenant-firefighter and (4) captain-firefighter.
2. Effective on July 1, 1996, at 12:01 a.m., the merit compensation table set forth in Section 2-502.5(E)(3)
shall apply to those employees who are included under an agreement between the city of Bristow and the International
Association of Fire Fighters, Local #3613, to-wit: (1) firefighter; (2) drive-firefighter; (3) lieutenantfirefighter
and (4) captain-firefighter.
3. Merit Compensation Table.
Tier 1
3% Between Steps
3.1% Between Levels
6 Month 12
Month
Leve
l
Probation
Entry 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
1 5.76 5.76 5.93 6.11 6.29 6.48 6.67 6.87 7.08 7.29 7.51 7.74 7.97 8.21
2 5.94 5.94 6.12 6.30 6.49 6.68 6.88 7.09 7.30 7.52 7.75 7.98 8.22 8.47
3 6.12 6.12 6.30 6.49 6.68 6.88 7.09 7.30 7.52 7.75 7.98 8.22 8.47 8.72
4 6.31 6.31 6.50 6.70 6.90 7.11 7.32 7.54 7.77 8.00 8.24 8.49 8.74 9.00
5 6.51 6.51 6.71 6.91 7.12 7.33 7.55 7.78 8.01 8.25 8.50 8.76 9.02 9.29
6 6.71 6.71 6.91 7.12 7.33 7.55 7.78 8.01 8.25 8.50 8.76 9.02 9.29 9.57
7 6.92 6.92 7.13 7.34 7.56 7.79 8.02 8.26 8.51 8.77 9.03 9.30 9.58 9.87
Tier 2
3.25% Between Steps
3.1% Between Levels
8 6.38 6.38 6.59 6.80 7.02 7.25 7.49 7.73 7.98 8.24 8.51 8.79 9.05 9.34
9 6.58 6.58 6.79 7.01 7.24 7.48 7.72 7.97 8.23 8.50 8.78 9.07 9.36 9.66
10 6.78 6.78 7.00 7.23 7.46 7.70 7.95 8.21 8.48 8.76 9.04 9.33 9.63 9.94
11 6.99 6.99 7.22 7.45 7.69 7.94 8.20 8.47 8.75 9.03 9.32 9.62 9.93 10.25
Tier 3
3% Between Steps
12 7.88 7.88 8.12 8.36 8.61 8.87 9.14 9.41 9.69 9.98 10.28 10.59 10.91 11.23
Tier 4
3% Between Steps
13 11.09 11.09 11.42 11.76 12.11 12.47 12.84 13.22 13.62 14.03 14.45 14.88 15.33 15.79
(Ord. 2-22-96 C § 1; Ord. 2-22-96D § 1; Ord. 2-22-96E § 1; Ord. 2-22-96F § 1; Ord. 8-19-96A § 1; Ord. 8-19-
96B § 1; Ord. 8-19-96D §§ 1, 2)
2-502.6 Probationary period rating report.
If for any reason an employee is unsatisfactory after he has been with the city six (6) months, the probationary
period rating form, as developed by the city, should be completed and sent to the personnel department. If an
employee is making satisfactory progress, an evaluation, as developed by the city, should be answered at the end
of the probation period and sent to the personnel department. (Ord. No. 3-28-90)
2-502.7 Employee performance appraisal.
Performance appraisals shall be completed on forms as developed by the city. (Ord. No. 3-28-90)
2-503 Bonds of officers and employees.
The city treasurer, and such other officers and employees as the council may designate, before entering upon
their duties, shall provide bonds for the faithful performance of their respective duties, payable to the city, in
such form and in such amounts as the council may prescribe, with a surety company authorized to operate within
the state. The city shall pay the premiums on such bonds.
State Law Reference: Bonds for officers and treasurer, 11 O.S. Section 8-105.
2-504 Oath or affirmation of office.
Every officer of the city, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take and subscribe to the oath or
affirmation of office prescribed by the state constitution. The oath or affirmation shall be filed in the city clerk’s
office.
2-505 Salaries of elected officers.
A. The salaries of the elective officials of the city shall be payable as provided by ordinance.
B. An ordinance changing the compensation of the mayor or councilmen shall not change the compensation
of any such officer:
1. For his current term of office during which the ordinance is adopted; nor
2. For the succeeding term of the office when such succeeding term begins within less than three (3)
months after adoption of the ordinance.
Such an ordinance, unless it is an initiated ordinance, shall be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city within ten (10) days after its final passage.
C. The mayor and councilmen may be reim-bursed for reasonable expenses incurred in the discharge of
their official duties. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
2-506 Maintenance allowance.
In addition to the salaries above stated, the elective officials may receive such maintenance allowance to reimburse
them for the expenses necessarily incurred by them in operating their private automobiles or other privately
owned equipment in furtherance of the business of this city as the council may from time to time determine
by resolution, entered upon the minutes. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
2-507 Salaries of employees.
The salaries of all the appointive officers of the city and all of the employees of the city in any of its departments
whatsoever, including the water department, may be fixed from time to time by the city council in such
sums and amount as the city council may determine from time to time and in conformity with the budget prepared
for the fiscal year in which such services are performed. Any person appointed to any office, or any person
or any employee of the city accepts the appointment and employment under the provisions of this section. The
salary and emoluments of such officers and employees may be changed from time to time as the budget and finances
of the city may demand and according to the best judgment of the city council for that purpose. (Prior
Code, Chapter 20)
2-508 Full time employees, compensation.
A. No full time employee of the city, including elected officials shall receive pay or compensation for services
or labor performed other than in the position he holds as full time employee.
B. A part time employee is hereby defined as an employee who draws less than the full salary per month
for the position in which he is serving, or who is employed on a seasonal job. (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
2-509 Personnel policies.
Specific policies and rules governing employment with the city shall be as established and adopted by the
mayor and approved by council from time to time.
Chapter 6
SOCIAL SECURITY
Sections:
2-601 Declaration of policy to come under coverage.
2-602 Execution of agreement with state agency.
2-603 Withholdings.
2-604 Contributions.
2-605 Records and reports.
2-606 Exclusions.
2-601 Declaration of policy to come under coverage.
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, at the earliest date, to the eligible employees
and officials of the city the benefits of the system of Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance as authorized
by the Federal Social Security Act and all amendments thereto, and Sections 121 et seq. of Title 51 of the
Oklahoma Statutes. In pursuance of this policy, the officers and employees of the city shall take such action as
may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
State Law Reference: Social security coverage for local governments, 51 O.S. Section 125.
2-602 Execution of agreement with state agency.
The mayor is authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments with the State Department
of Human Services to accomplish the provisions of Section 2-601 of this code.
2-603 Withholdings.
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purposes provided in Section 2-601 of
this code are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable
state and federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by the laws
and regulations.
2-604 Contributions.
Employer contributions shall be paid from amounts appropriated for these purposes from available funds to
the designated state or federal agency in accordance with applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
2-605 Records and reports.
The city shall keep such records and submit such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal
laws or regulations.
2-606 Exclusions.
Excluded from this chapter authorizing the extension of social security benefits to city officers and employees
are the following:
1. Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, employee or official now covered or
authorized to be covered by any other ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of
the city; or
2. Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, employee or official for which compensation
is on a fee basis, or any position, employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state
or federal laws or regulations.
Chapter 7
RETIREMENT AND PENSIONS
Sections:
Article A. Fire Pension System
2-710 Local fire pension and retirement board.
2-711 Fund to be operated in accordance with law.
2-712 Contributions to fund.
Article B. Police Pension System
2-720 Name of system.
2-721 Board of trustees.
2-722 State police pension and retirement provisions adopted.
Article C. Employee Retirement System
2-730 Employee retirement system created.
2-731 Administration.
2-732 Fund.
2-733 Appropriations.
2-734 Execution.
Article A. Fire Pension System
2-710 Local fire pension and retirement board.
There is hereby created a local firefighters’ pension and retirement board composed of the mayor, the clerk,
the treasurer and three (3) members from the fire department. The board shall have the membership, organization,
powers, duties and functions as prescribed by Sections 49-103 et seq. of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
State Law Reference: Firefighters’ retirement and pension law, 11 O.S. Sections 49-100.11 et seq.
2-711 Fund to be operated in accordance with law.
The city’s firefighters’ pension and retirement system and fund shall be operated in accordance with state law
relating to the fund and system.
2-712 Contributions to fund.
A. The clerk shall deduct from the salaries or wages of each paid member of the fire department the
amounts which are required by applicable state law. If the members of the fire department, by a majority vote of
its paid members, vote to increase the amount of the deductions, the amounts authorized by this subsection shall
be increased to reflect the amounts approved by the majority vote. The treasurer of the city shall deposit monthly
in the Oklahoma Firefighters’ Pension and Retirement Board the amounts deducted pursuant to this subsection.
Any amounts deducted from the salary or wages of a fire department member shall be made at the time of each
payroll. The deductions shall be set forth in the payroll so that each member may be able to ascertain the exact
amount which he is contributing.
B. The city treasurer shall deposit monthly with the Oklahoma Firefighters’ Pension and Retirement Board
the amounts of money which are required by applicable state law for each paid member of the fire department.
C. For each volunteer member of the fire department, the city treasurer shall deposit yearly with the Oklahoma
Firefighters’ Pension and Retirement Board the amounts of money which are required by applicable state
law. These amounts may be revised according to actuarial studies and amounts as set by the Oklahoma Firefighters’
Pension and Retirement Board.
D. All assets of the city firefighters’ pension and retirement fund shall be transferred to the Oklahoma Firefighters’
Pension and Retirement Board. Assets shall be transferred in the form of cash, negotiable securities and
such other specific assets as permitted by the State Board.
State Law Reference: Firefighters’ pension law, 11 O.S. Section 49-122, effective 1/1/81.
Cross Reference: Fire department and services, Section 13-101 of this code.
Article B. Police Pension System
2-720 Name of system.
The system herein established for the purpose of providing pension retirement allowances and other benefits
for police officers, their spouses and children, shall be designated and known as the “Police Pension and Retirement
System of the City of Bristow”, and by such name all of its business transacted, all of its funds handled,
and all of its cash and securities and other property be held.
2-721 Board of trustees.
There is hereby created a board of trustees which shall have the operation and management of the police pension
and retirement system of the city, which board of trustees shall consist of the city clerk, city treasurer, and
three (3) members of the police department of the city, which is designated and known as the board of trustees of
the pension and retirement system of the city.
2-722 State police pension and retirement provisions adopted.
The city hereby adopts the provisions of the state law governing the Oklahoma Police Pension and Retirement
System and amendments thereto for the purpose of providing the police officers of the city with a retirement
program. The city agrees to make contributions to the system in such amounts as are required by law.
State Law Reference: Police pension and retirement system, 11 O.S. Sections 50-101 et seq.; Option to establish
local board, 11 O.S. Section 50-106.1; Joining state system, 11 O.S. Section 50-106.3; Contributions to be
paid by municipality and police members, 11 O.S. Sections 50-109 and 50-110.
Article C. Employee Retirement System
2-730 Employee retirement system created.
A. As used in this chapter, “system” means the Employee Retirement System of Bristow, Oklahoma.
B. Pursuant to the authority conferred by the laws of the state and for the purpose of encouraging continuity
and meritorious service on the part of employees and thereby promote public efficiency, there is hereby authorized,
created, established, approved and adopted, effective as of July 1, 1992, the funded pension plan designated
“Employee Retirement System of the City of Bristow, Oklahoma”, and all amendments thereto, (hereinafter
called “system”), an executed counterpart of which is marked “Exhibit A” and attached hereto as a part hereof.
(Ord. No. 12-16-91)
2-731 Administration.
For the purpose of administration of the system there is hereby established a board of trustees, which shall be
the members of the city council of the city as now existing or as from time to time duly elected or appointed and
constituted. The powers and duties of the board of trustees shall be as set forth in the system instrument marked
“Exhibit A” as mentioned in Section 2-730. (Ord. No. 12-16-91)
2-732 Fund.
A fund is hereby provided for the exclusive use and benefit of the persons entitled to benefits under the system.
All contributions to such fund shall be paid over to and received in trust for such purpose by the treasurer,
who shall be the treasurer of the system. Such fund shall be pooled for purposes of management and investment
with similar funds of other incorporated cities, towns and municipal trusts in the state as a part of the Oklahoma
Municipal Retirement Fund, in accordance with a duly executed contract for such purpose which contract shall
be executed by city council as soon as feasible. The treasurer shall hold such contributions in the form received,
and from time to time pay over and transfer the same to the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund, as duly authorized
and directed by the board of trustees. The fund shall be nonfiscal. The fund and system shall be valued
every other year for actuarial soundness by a qualified actuarial firm. (Ord. No. 12-16-91)
2-733 Appropriations.
The city is hereby authorized to incur the necessary expenses for the establishment, operation and administration
of the system and to appropriate and pay the same. In addition, the city is hereby authorized to appropriate
annually such amounts as are required in addition to employee contributions, to maintain the system and the fund
on a sound actuarial basis in accordance with the respective annual actuarial valuation. Any appropriation so
made to maintain the system and fund shall be for deferred wages or salaries and for the payment of necessary
expenses of operation and administration, including separate annual appropriations to be transferred to the Oklahoma
Municipal Retirement Fund. (Ord. No. 12-16-91)
2-734 Execution.
A. The mayor and clerk are each hereby authorized and directed to execute (in counterparts, each of which
shall constitute an original) the system instrument, and to do all other acts and things necessary, advisable and
proper to put the system and related trust into full force and effect, and to make such changes therein as may be
necessary to qualify the same under Section 401(a) and 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United
States. The counterpart marked as Exhibit “A”, which has been duly executed as aforesaid simultaneously with
the passage of this chapter and made a part hereof, is hereby ratified and confirmed in all respects.
B. The city council hereby agrees to pool and combine the fund into the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement
Fund as a part thereof, with similar funds of such other cities and towns, for purposes of pooled management and
investment according to the terms of the Trust Indenture of Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund, a public
trust. (Ord. No. 12-16-91)
PART 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Chapters:
1 Alcoholic Beverages, Taxation and Regulation
2 Nonintoxicating Beverages
3 Private Clubs
Chapter 1
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, TAXATION
AND REGULATION
Sections:
Article A. Alcoholic Beverage Tax
3-101 Definitions.
3-102 Occupation tax levied.
3-103 Tax to be paid to city clerk; expiration; proration.
3-104 City clerk to make report.
3-105 To post tax receipt.
3-106 Payment of tax required; penalty.
3-107 Violation of state law.
Article B. Regulation of Sale of Alcoholic
Beverages
3-120 Purpose of article.
3-121 Definitions.
3-122 Signs.
3-123 Advertising.
3-124 Separate premises.
3-125 Passageway.
3-126 Sale in containers.
3-127 Not to drink on premises.
3-128 Sale only at retail store.
3-129 Zoning ordinance.
3-130 Location.
3-131 Not to sell to persons under twenty-one.
3-132 False documentation.
3-133 Not to sell to intoxicated person.
3-134 Person under twenty-one not to be employed.
3-135 Not to employ person under twenty-one.
3-136 Time of sale.
3-137 Not to sell on credit.
3-138 Not to furnish prizes.
3-139 Persons under twenty-one not to be permitted to enter.
3-140 Persons under twenty-one not to enter.
3-141 Time of delivery.
3-142 Not to permit drunkenness in cafe.
3-143 Separate offenses.
3-144 Transporting open container prohibited.
3-145 Penalty.
Article A. Alcoholic Beverage Tax
3-101 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
1. “Alcoholic beverage” means beverages controlled by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Board;
2. “Package store” means a retail alcoholic beverage store;
3. “State licensee” means any person, partnership, firm, corporation or association who holds a license issued
by the authority of the Oklahoma Beverage Control Act;
4. The following specific terms, are given the meanings defined for them by Section 6 of the Oklahoma
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (37 O.S. Sections 502 to 567): brewer, class B wholesaler, distiller, winemaker,
rectifier, Oklahoma winemaker, wholesaler, and package store; and
5. Words in the plural include the singular, and vice versa; and words imparting the masculine gender include
the feminine. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
State Law Reference: State Alcoholic Beverage Act, 37 O.S. Sections 501 et seq.
3-102 Occupation tax levied.
A. There is hereby levied an annual occupation tax upon each person, firm or corporation engaged within
this city in any of the following occupations hereinafter named, in the following sums respectively set opposite
the designation of each such occupation;
1. Brewer $ 1,250.00
2. Distiller $ 3,215.00
3. Winemaker 625.00
4. Oklahoma winemaker 75.00
5. Rectifier 3,125.00
6. Wholesaler 2,500.00
7. Class B wholesaler 625.00
8. Package store 500.00
B. These occupation taxes for brewer and class B wholesaler shall be reduced by seventy-five percent
(75%) if the licensee is also a holder of a state license to manufacture or wholesale, as the case may be, any nonintoxicating
malt beverages as provided in Title 37, Oklahoma Statutes. (Ord. 28-061603 § 1)
State Law Reference: City license fees, not to levy greater than state licenses, 37 O.S. Section 518.
3-103 Tax to be paid to city clerk; expiration; proration.
A. All occupation taxes herein provided shall be paid in advance, to the city clerk, who shall issue a receipt
therefor. The city clerk shall record the name of such licensee and the address where he engages in his occupation.
Such records shall be duly filed and kept in the permanent files of the city for at least five (5) years. Thereafter,
such records may be destroyed. Every person receiving such a receipt from the city clerk shall post the tax
receipt in a conspicuous place in the premises wherein he carries on his occupation.
B. All occupation taxes levied under the provisions of this article expire on June 30 of each year.
C. The amount of any occupation tax levied shall be computed prorata upon the months remaining in the
year ending June 30 following. Such taxes paid on or before the fifteenth day of any month shall be on the basis
of the first day of the month, and such taxes paid after the fifteenth day of any month shall be on the basis of the
first day of the next succeeding month. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-104 City clerk to make report.
The city clerk shall make and transmit to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Board an annual report
showing the number and class of licensees upon which occupation taxes were levied, and the amount of money
collected from such taxes. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-105 To post tax receipt.
Any state licensee shall post his tax receipt in a conspicuous place in the premises wherein he carries on his
occupation. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-106 Payment of tax required; penalty.
Any person who engages in any of the occupations taxed by this chapter without paying the occupation tax
imposed therefor is guilty of an offense against the city, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided
in Section 1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-107 Violation of state law.
Any violation of any law of the state of Oklahoma in connection with any of the matters covered by this article
shall be construed to be a specific violation of this article, whether specifically covered by the provisions of
this chapter or not. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
Article B. Regulation of Sale of Alcoholic
Beverages
3-120 Purpose of article.
This article is enacted as an exercise of the police power of the city to preserve the public peace, safety,
health, and good order thereof and to aid the enforcement of the policy of the state of Oklahoma as established
by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
State Law Reference: State alcoholic beverage regulations, 37 O.S. Sections 516, 537, and 501 et seq.
3-121 Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
1. “Retail alcoholic beverage store” means a package store;
2. “Wholesale alcoholic beverage store” means a store operated under the authority of a state wholesaler’s
license; and
3. The following specific terms are given the meanings defined for them in the appropriate sections of the
Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act: advertise the sale of alcoholic beverages, alcohol, brewery, distillery,
original package or original container, retail containers, sale, spirits, wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages,
and wine.
3-122 Signs.
No person owning, operating or maintaining a retail alcoholic beverage store shall cause or permit it to be designated
by more than one sign, which shall contain only the words “Retail Alcoholic Liquor Store,” or any combination
of such words or any of them, and which shall contain no letter or figure more than four (4) inches in
height or more than three (3) inches in width and in which the lines of words, if more than one, shall not be more
than one inch apart.
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 37 O.S. Section 516.
3-123 Advertising.
No person shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, in any manner, other than as authorized by Section 3-122
of this code, the sale of alcoholic beverages within the limits of this city.
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 37 O.S. Section 516.
3-124 Separate premises.
No person shall maintain, operate, or assist, in any manner, the maintenance or operation of a retail alcoholic
beverage store or package store in premises which are not separated from adjoining premises in which any other
goods, wares or merchandise are sold or services are rendered by nontransparent walls, broken only, if at all, by
a passageway to which the public is not admitted.
3-125 Passageway.
No person shall take any alcoholic beverage through any passageway described in Section 3-124 of this code,
for the purpose of delivery thereof in connection with a sale of such beverage.
3-126 Sale in containers.
No person shall sell or deliver alcoholic beverages at a retail alcoholic beverage store other than:
1. In retail containers;
2. At ordinary room temperatures;
3. In the original package; and
4. For consumption off the premises.
No person owning, employed in, or in any manner assisting in the maintenance and operation of such a store
shall suffer, or permit, any alcoholic beverage to be consumed, or any retail container of such beverage to be
opened on the premises of such a store.
3-127 Not to drink on premises.
No person shall drink or consume in any manner alcoholic beverages on the premises of a retail alcoholic
beverage store, nor shall any person open or break the seal of any original package or retail container containing
alcoholic beverages on the premises of any such retail alcoholic beverage store.
3-128 Sale only at retail store.
No person shall sell at retail, and no person shall deliver, in consequence or in completion of such a sale, any
alcoholic beverages at any place in the city except at a retail alcoholic beverage store in strict conformity with
this article and the laws of the state.
3-129 Zoning ordinance.
No retail alcoholic beverage store, and no wholesale alcoholic beverage store, warehouse, brewery, distillery,
winery or any other place, however described, for the manufacture or production or bottling of alcoholic beverages
of any kind shall be located, maintained, or operated by any person, at any place within the boundaries of
the city except at a location at which such an establishment is permitted by the zoning ordinance of the city as to
retail package stores, and the clear implication of the state law as to the other establishments.
3-130 Location.
A. No person shall own, operate, maintain or be interested in any establishment listed in Section 3-102 of
this code which is located at a place within this city which is forbidden as a location for such store by the laws of
the state or ordinances of the city.
B. The locations of a retail package store shall be prohibited within three hundred feet (300) from any
church property primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious activities, or public school, provided,
that if such church or school shall be established within three hundred feet (300) of any licensed retail
premises, after such premises have been licensed, this shall not be a bar to the renewal of such license so long as
it has been in continuous force and effect. The distance indicated in this section shall be measured from the nearest
property line of such church or school to the nearest public entrance door of the premises of such package
store along the street right of way line providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by pedestrians between
such points. For purposes of determining measured distance, property situated on the opposite side of the street
from such church or school shall be considered as if it were located on the same side of the street with such
church or school. A license shall not be issued for a location on any city or town block where a school or church
is located.
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 37 O.S. Section 534.
3-131 Not to sell to persons under twenty-one.
No person shall knowingly sell, deliver, or furnish alcoholic beverages at any place, within the city to any person
who is under twenty-one (21) years of age.
3-132 False documentation.
No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall misrepresent his age in writing or present false documentation
of age or otherwise for the purpose of inducing any person to sell him alcoholic beverages.
3-133 Not to sell to intoxicated person.
No person, at any place within this city, shall sell, deliver or knowingly furnish alcoholic beverages to an intoxicated
person or to any person who has been adjudged insane or mentally deficient.
3-134 Person under twenty-one not to be employed.
No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age shall be employed in the selling, manufacture, distribution
or other handling of alcoholic beverages at any place within this city.
3-135 Not to employ person under twenty-one.
No person shall employ or assist or aid in causing the employment of any person under the age of twenty-one
(21) years of age at any place within this city, in the selling, manufacture, distribution or other handling of alcoholic
beverages.
3-136 Time of sale.
No person shall open for business or keep open for business, or sell or deliver or receive deliveries of alcoholic
beverages to any person at a retail alcoholic beverage store in this city on any Sunday, New Year’s Day,
Memorial Day, the Fourth of July, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day, or, while the
polls are open, on the day of any general, primary, runoff primary or special election, whether national, state,
county, or city, or on any other day except between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
3-137 Not to sell on credit.
No person at any retail alcoholic beverage store in this city shall sell any alcoholic beverage on credit.
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 37 O.S. Section 537.
3-138 Not to furnish prizes.
No owner or proprietor of a retail alcoholic beverage store, and no person employed therein, shall offer or
furnish any prize, premium, gift or similar inducement to a consumer in connection with a sale of alcoholic beverages.
3-139 Persons under twenty-one not to be permitted to enter.
No owner or proprietor of a retail alcoholic beverage store in this city and no person employed therein, shall
permit any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to enter into, to remain within or to loiter about the premises
of such retail alcoholic beverage store.
3-140 Persons under twenty-one not to enter.
No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age shall enter into, remain within or loiter about the
premises of any retail alcoholic beverage store within this city.
3-141 Time of delivery.
No person shall sell or deliver to any retail alcoholic beverage store in this city any amount of spirits or wines
on Saturday of any week, on Sunday of any week, on New Year’s Day, on Memorial Day, on the Fourth of July,
on Labor Day, on Veterans Day, on Thanksgiving Day, on Christmas Day, or, while the polls are open, on the
day of any general, primary, runoff primary, or special election, whether national, state, county or city.
3-142 Not to permit drunkenness in cafe.
No person, whether as owner, manager, operator, or employee of a cafe, restaurant, club, or any place of recreation
within this city, and no employee engaged in connection with the operation of such a cafe, restaurant,
club or place of recreation, shall permit any person to be drunk or intoxicated in the place of business.
3-143 Separate offenses.
Each day’s violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, but nothing herein contained shall be
construed as determining that not more than any one such offense can be committed in any one day by the same
person.
3-144 Transporting open container prohibited.
No person within this city shall transport in any vehicle upon any public highway, street, alley or other public
way any alcoholic beverage unless such alcoholic beverage is:
1. In an unopened original container with seal unbroken and the original cap or cork not removed from the
container; and
2. In the trunk or other closed compartment or other container, out of public view and out of reach of the
driver or any occupant of the vehicle.
3-145 Penalty.
Any violation of any provision contained in this article is an offense against the city; upon conviction of any
such offense, the violator shall be punished by a fine as provided by Section 1-108 of this code, including costs.
Chapter 2
NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES
Sections:
3-201 Definitions.
3-202 Not to sell to minors.
3-203 Time of sale.
3-204 License fee.
3-205 License required.
3-206 Compliance with state law; not transferable.
3-207 Possession by minors and in public.
3-208 Drinking in public.
3-209 Transporting of nonintoxicating beverages except in original unopened container prohibited; exception.
3-210 Penalty.
3-201 Definitions.
The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
section:
1. “Minor” means a person who in accordance with applicable state law, has not yet attained the age at
which consumption of nonintoxicating beverages is permitted;
2. “Nonintoxicating beverages” means all beverages containing more than one-half of one percent (½ of
1%) alcohol by volume, and not more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight; and
3. “Retail dealer” means and includes any and all persons, firms, corporations, associations or concessionaires
who sell, distribute or dispense any nonintoxicating beverages, as herein defined, within the corporate limits
of the city without regard as to any place where such beverages may be consumed or used. (Prior Code, Chapter
5)
State Law Reference: See 37 O.S. Sections 163.1 et seq. for definitions and regulations applicable to nonintoxicating
beverages.
3-202 Not to sell to minors.
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly sell, barter, purchase for, deliver or furnish to any minor any nonintoxicating
beverage for purposes of consumption on or off premises. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-203 Time of sale.
It is unlawful for any retail dealer to sell, or offer for sale, any nonintoxicating beverages for consumption on
the premises between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 700 a.m. on any week day and between the hours of 12:00
midnight on Saturday and 7:00 a.m. of the following Monday. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-204 License fee.
A. There is hereby levied upon each retail dealer in nonintoxicating beverages for consumption on and off
the premises, an annual municipal license fee in an amount set by the city council by motion or resolution, and
upon each retail dealer in nonintoxicating beverages for consumption off the premises, a fee in an amount set by
the city council by motion or resolution.
B. All such municipal license fees shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of issuance and in the manner
herein prescribed. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
State Law Reference: State license fees, city not to levy greater fee, 37 O.S. Section 163.7.
3-205 License required.
It is unlawful for any retail dealer, whether permanent or temporary, at any place within the corporate limits
of the city to sell, distribute or dispense any nonintoxicating beverages without having first applied for and received
a municipal license as herein required. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-206 Compliance with state law; not transferable.
No municipal license shall be issued to any retail dealer by the city clerk without a satisfactory showing that
the applicant has obtained all state and county permits required by law, and has in all other respects complied
with the laws of the state relating to the sale and distribution of nonintoxicating beverages. All licenses levied
herein shall expire on September 30 of the year following issuance. No license shall be transferable. (Prior Code,
Chapter 5)
3-207 Possession by minors and in public.
A. It is unlawful for any minor to be in possession of any nonintoxicating alcoholic beverage or beer.
B. It is unlawful for any person to possess or have in his control an opened container of nonintoxicating
beverage while such person is upon any public street, highway, alley, thoroughfare, right-of-way, sidewalk, public
park or grounds, or upon, about or within any public building or public parking lot within the city. Possession
of an opened container of nonintoxicating beverage is allowed only within any duly licensed tavern, club or retail
dealer which is legally permitted to sell such nonintoxicating beverage for on-premises consumption. (Prior
Code, Chapter 5)
3-208 Drinking in public.
It is unlawful for any person, whether a minor or of age, to drink any nonintoxicating beverage while such
person is upon any public street, alley, or other public highway, or in any public building or other public place,
within the city. This section shall not prohibit a person who is of age from drinking such beverage in a place licensed
to sell it for consumption on the premises.
3-209 Transporting of nonintoxicating beverages except in original unopened container prohibited; exception.
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any moving vehicle upon a public highway, street or
alley any nonintoxicating beverage except in the original container which shall not have been opened and from
which the original cap or seal shall not have been removed, unless the opened container be in the rear trunk or
rear compartment, which shall include the spare tire compartment in a station wagon or panel truck, or any outside
compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle while it is in motion.
(Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-210 Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction,
shall be fined as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
Chapter 3
PRIVATE CLUBS
Sections:
3-301 Definitions.
3-302 Classes of clubs.
3-303 License review board; established.
3-304 Members; officers; vote; quorum.
3-305 License fee to be paid.
3-306 Documents to be filed.
3-307 Changes to be filed.
3-308 Chief of police to check.
3-309 Class B and C licenses.
3-310 Eligibility to serve as officers.
3-311 Not to violate law.
3-312 Renewal of license.
3-313 Rentals to be on fixed basis.
3-314 Location of private clubs; rentals.
3-315 Right to enter and inspect.
3-316 To have restaurant facilities.
3-317 To serve hot foods.
3-318 Subject to food handling ordinances.
3-319 Sanitary facilities.
3-320 Bylaws; membership.
3-321 Persons under twenty-one not permitted.
3-322 Expiration of license; proration of fee.
3-323 Free licenses; refund.
3-324 Separate licenses; not transferable.
3-325 To exhibit license.
3-326 Fee.
3-327 To inspect clubs.
3-328 Regulations for operation.
3-329 Time of operation.
3-330 Suspension or revocation of licenses; procedures.
3-331 Other laws applicable.
3-332 Penalty.
3-301 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the term “private club” means any association, person, firm or corporation,
key club, bottle club, locker club, pool club, or any other kind of club or association, excluding the general public
from its premises, place of meeting, congregating or operating or exercising control over any other place
where persons are permitted to drink alcoholic beverages other than in a private home. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
State Law Reference: Definition of private club, closing hours under state law, 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., 37 O.S.
Section 8.1.
3-302 Classes of clubs.
For the purpose of license and regulation, private clubs are divided into three (3) classes:
1. Class A includes private clubs maintained, supported and controlled by nationally recognized lodges,
fraternal societies, or veterans organizations for their members only;
2. Class B includes restaurants open to the general public but maintaining a private room opening into the
restaurant, which private room is used as a private club. No food may be served in the private room nor dancing
be permitted in the private room or in the adjacent restaurant; and
3. Class C includes any other private club. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-303 License review board; established.
A license review board is hereby established to review and pass upon qualifications of applicants or licensees
under this chapter. The license review board shall issue licenses to applicants qualified under this article and hear
complaints and determine revocations of licenses in proper cases. No license shall be issued by the board until
the application has been on file with the city clerk at least ten (10) days. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-304 Members; officers; vote; quorum.
The license review board shall be composed of five (5) members, the chief of police, the fire chief, the director
of the county health department, the city clerk, and the city attorney. The members shall elect a chairman of
the board and the city clerk shall be secretary. In the event of the absence of either the chairman or secretary at
any meeting of the license review board, the members present may elect a temporary chairman or secretary from
among their number. A simple majority of the members of the board present at any meeting shall be required for
any action. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-305 License fee to be paid.
No association, person, firm or corporation shall maintain or operate any private club in the city without first
paying in advance to the city clerk the license fee hereinafter prescribed, presenting the receipt for the same to
the clerk, making application for a license therefor on forms provided by the city clerk, and receiving a license
from the license review board. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-306 Documents to be filed.
In addition to the payment of the prescribed fee to the city clerk, an applicant for a license for a private club
shall file with the city clerk true copies of the articles of incorporation and bylaws if the applicant is an association;
and a list of the officers, directors, owners and managers of the club, and any stockholders who receive a
financial return on their stock. The copies shall be filed in duplicate. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-307 Changes to be filed.
If changes occur in the officers, directors, stockholders, owners or managers of any private club, after filing of
their names with the city clerk as aforesaid at any time during the year, the applicant shall furnish such changes
in writing in duplicate on the forms provided by the city clerk within one week after their occurrence. (Prior
Code, Chapter 5)
3-308 Chief of police to check.
The city clerk shall forward one copy of the list of officers, directors, stockholders, owners and managers to
the chief of police, who shall cause a check to be made of any criminal record of any persons named therein, and
report in writing thereafter to the city clerk as to his findings. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-309 Class B and C licenses.
Applicants for class B or class C licenses shall be either Oklahoma corporations or associations with written
articles of association and bylaws. The articles or bylaws shall provide for regular election of officers or directors.
(Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-310 Eligibility to serve as officers.
No person shall be eligible to election or to serve or act in any class B or class C private club as an officer,
director, stockholder or owner, nor direct any policy thereof, who has not been a continuous resident in good
faith of Creek County for a period of two (2) years immediately preceding the action or service in any of such
capacities. No person shall be eligible to election or to serve or act in any private club as an officer, director,
stockholder, owner or manager, nor direct any policy thereof, who has been convicted of any felony or of violating
any of the gambling or prohibitory laws of the state, any other state, or the United States, including those
heretofore in effect. Any person holding such a position in a private club operating at the time of initial enactment
of this chapter, shall not be subject to this section as to the position he holds as of the time of initial enactment
of this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-311 Not to violate law.
No private club nor any officer, director, stockholder, owner or manager thereof licensed pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter shall violate any of the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the state nor
any other law of the state, nor knowingly permit the violation thereof on any premises subject to the control of
any private club. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-312 Renewal of license.
Prior to the 30th day of June of each year, each applicant desiring a renewal of license for a private club hereunder
shall pay to the city clerk the annual fee for such license in the amount herein specified. All such licenses
shall expire on June 30th of each year unless so renewed. In the case of a renewal of license, the applicant shall
not be required to refile the formal application and other documents herein mentioned unless directed to do so by
the license review board. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-313 Rentals to be on fixed basis.
No private club licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall have or make any rental or lease
agreement with any other person, firm, trust, estate, corporation or other entity providing for any rentals based
upon percentage of profit of the private club, but any rentals paid or to be paid shall be on a fixed basis without
relation to any income, volume, or profit of the private club. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-314 Location of private clubs; rentals.
No private club as defined by this chapter shall be licensed to operate within three hundred (300) feet, excluding
streets and alleys, of any church or school property on which there is located a church building or school
building in normal use for such purposes, the distance to be measured from the boundary of such church or
school property to the nearest point of the building in which such private club is proposed to be operated. (Prior
Code, Chapter 5)
3-315 Right to enter and inspect.
The right of entry and inspection of any premises subject to the control of any private club by any uniformed
or nonuniformed officer or agent of any department charged with the enforcement of this chapter shall be a condition
on which every license is issued. The application for, and acceptance of, any license hereunder shall conclusively
be deemed to be consent of the applicant and licensee to such entry and inspection. (Prior Code, Chapter
5)
3-316 To have restaurant facilities.
No class C private club licensed pursuant to this chapter nor restaurant maintaining a class B private club licensed
pursuant to this chapter shall be operated or maintained without regular, constant, complete kitchen and
restaurant facilities including an adequate sized refrigerator, approved dishwashing equipment, an oven and a
range with at least four (4) burners. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-317 To serve hot foods.
No class C private club licensed pursuant to this chapter nor restaurant maintaining a class B private club licensed
pursuant to this chapter shall be operated or maintained without preparing and serving hot foods at all
hours while open for business, including meats, vegetables and dessert. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-318 Subject to food handling ordinances.
Every private club licensed pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to all ordinances regulating food handling
establishments. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-319 Sanitary facilities.
Every private club licensed pursuant to this chapter shall, as a minimum, provide sanitary and toilet facilities
as required by the ordinances permitted in the private health department regulations governing beer taverns.
(Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-320 Bylaws; membership.
Membership in any private club subject to this chapter shall be regulated by articles or bylaws. The articles or
bylaws of every class C private club shall provide that after application for membership at least one week shall
elapse before the applicant shall be eligible for election to membership. Upon election to membership in any private
club, a membership card shall be issued to the member, and his name and his age enrolled on a list of members,
which shall be kept on the premises of every private club and be subject to inspection at all times. The list
of members shall show the full name of the member, his age, his address and the dates of his application for
membership and election to membership. The bylaws or articles may provide for temporary membership for
nonresidents of the city, temporarily present in the city, as members of another organization holding a meeting in
the city. Temporary memberships shall extend to all members of the organization affected. Temporary membership
shall be effected by notice in writing to the presiding officer of the organization meeting in the city, limiting
the time of temporary membership to the time the organization shall meet in the city. A copy of the notice shall
be filed with the city clerk. Any convention badge or identification of membership in the visiting organization
selected by the private club shall serve as the temporary membership card. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-321 Persons under twenty-one not permitted.
No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall be permitted in or on that part of the premises subject
to the control of any private club where persons are permitted to drink alcoholic beverages unless accompanied
by and in custody of one of his parents or a guardian. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-322 Expiration of license; proration of fee.
All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall expire on June 30th of each year. License fees shall be prorated
in the following manner: Applicants filing applications more than six (6) months prior to the last day of
June of any year shall pay the license fee in full. Applicants filing applications less than six (6) months prior to
the last day of June of any year shall pay one-half (½) of the fee prescribed herein. No license shall be returned
or transferred from person to person or from place to place. Licenses shall be signed by the city clerk and countersigned
by the chairman of the license review board. The city clerk shall affix the corporate seal of the city
thereto. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-323 Free licenses; refund.
No free licenses shall be granted, nor rebates allowed, for any cause, nor any sum accepted less than the
amount herein specified, nor for a shorter period than therein required. In any case when an application for a license
is denied, there shall be refunded to the applicant an amount equal to ninety percent (90%) of the license
fee paid by the applicant to the city clerk at the time of making the application. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-324 Separate licenses; not transferable.
A separate license must be obtained for each branch established or separate place operated by any private
club, and each license shall authorize the operation of a private club only at the location described in the license,
and in conformity to the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state and of the United States. No license shall
be transferable to another person, firm, association or corporation or to any other location. (Prior Code, Chapter
5)
3-325 To exhibit license.
Every private club having a license under the provisions of this article shall place and exhibit the same at all
times while in force in some conspicuous place in the premises licensed, and shall produce or exhibit the same
when applying for a renewal thereof. The entrance of every private club shall be plainly marked “Private Club
Members Only.” (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-326 Fee.
An annual license tax or fee is hereby levied upon all persons, firms, associations or corporations operating a
private club within the city in an amount set by the city council by motion or resolution. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-327 To inspect clubs.
The police, fire and health departments shall inspect all private clubs regularly to enforce all of the terms of
this chapter, and report any violations to the license review board. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-328 Regulations for operation.
It is an offense, punishable as hereinafter set forth, and grounds for the revocation or suspension of a license
issued hereunder for any private club, or operator, partner or manager, or person having supervisory control
thereof, or employee, to do or permit to be done, on or about the licensed premises, any of the following acts:
1. Violate any of the provisions of this chapter;
2. Violate any of the statutes of the state pertaining to alcoholic beverages;
3. Violate any of the regulations promulgated by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board of the state;
4. Serve to or allow any intoxicated person to consume any alcoholic beverages on the premises so licensed;
5. Permitting an intoxicated person to be or to remain on the licensed premises;
6. Permitting a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to consume intoxicating alcoholic beverages
on the premises;
7. Serve or permit to be served any intoxicating alcoholic beverages to any person under the age of twentyone
(21) years; or
8. Permitting a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to serve any intoxicating alcoholic beverages
on the licensed premises.
3-329 Time of operation.
Every private club having a license under the provisions of this article shall close and remain closed, permitting
no members, other than employees, to remain on the premises of the club between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. on any day.
State Law Reference: State law, private clubs to be closed 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. daily, 37 O.S. Section 8.1.
3-330 Suspension or revocation of licenses; procedures.
A. The license review board may suspend for not more than fifteen (15) days, or revoke licenses issued
hereunder if, after public hearing, as hereinafter provided, the board finds that the holder of the license has violated
any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The chief of police shall investigate complaints concerning private clubs and if he finds a violation of
the provisions has been committed, he shall file a complaint with the city clerk setting forth the alleged acts constituting
the violation. Upon the filing of such complaint, the city clerk shall fix a date for hearing the complaint
by the license review board and shall cause to be served upon the licensee a copy of the complaint and notice of
the time and place of the hearing. The complaint and notice of hearing shall be served upon the manager, operator,
partner or persons shown on the license as having supervisory control over the premises of the private club,
or if such person may not be found, by mailing the same by registered mail, addressed to such person at the licensed
premises. At the hearing thereon, the complainant, the licensee, or any interested person may be present
and present such evidence as may be relevant and material. If at the conclusion of such hearing, the license review
board finds, that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the board shall suspend for
not more than fifteen (15) days, or revoke the license issued to the private club. Upon suspension or revocation,
the licensee shall immediately cease operation as a private club. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-331 Other laws applicable.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to exempt any person, firm, corporation, or association
operating a private club from compliance with any other applicable ordinance of the city not in conflict herewith.
(Prior Code, Chapter 5)
3-332 Penalty.
Any person, partnership, corporation or association, or officer, director, stockholder, owner or manager of any
private club, who violates any provision of this article is guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof shall
be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
PART 4
ANIMALS
Chapters:
1 Animal Regulations
2 (Reserved)
Chapter 1
ANIMAL REGULATIONS
Sections:
Article A. General Provisions
4-101 Definitions.
4-102 Animals not to be at large.
4-103 Turning animals at large unlawful.
4-104 Pasturing in public areas illegal.
4-105 Swine not to be kept within city.
4-106 Animals or livestock which may be kept; conditions.
4-107 Animals which disturb prohibited, nuisance, procedure.
4-108 Buildings for animals; construction and conditions.
4-108.1 Confinement of vicious dogs.
4-109 Stables, kennels, coops; location.
4-110 Keeping dogs within city limits; sanitation.
4-111 Stables to be kept clean.
4-112 Disposal of manure.
4-113 Health officer to inspect.
4-114 Certain acts are prohibited.
4-115 Animal control officers.
4-116 Authority of animal control officer.
4-117 Interference with animal control officer.
Article B. Dog and Cat Vaccination, Tags and Tax
4-120 Dogs and cats to be vaccinated.
4-121 Dog and cat tax; registration; tag.
4-122 Vicious dogs, determination, may be killed.
4-122.1 Unconfined vicious dogs.
4-122.2 Unlicensed vicious dogs.
4-122.3 Seizure and impoundment of vicious dogs.
4-123 Dogs and cats confined; when.
4-124 Vicious dogs issuance of license.
Article C. Animal Pound
4-130 Pound established.
4-131 Animals to be impounded.
4-132 Breaking pound.
4-133 Fees for impounding.
4-134 Owner may redeem.
4-135 Sale of impounded animals.
4-136 Owner may claim excess money.
4-137 Unclaimed animals.
Article D. Cruelty to animals.
4-140 Cruelty to animals.
4-141 Poisoning animals.
4-142 Encouraging animals to fight.
Article E. Kennels
4-150 Kennel proprietor.
4-151 Kennel tags.
Article F. Zoning Ordinance to Prevail
4-160 Zoning ordinance to prevail.
Article G. Proclamation of Rabies
4-170 Quarantine of animals for observation.
4-171 Securing support information on diagnosed animals.
4-172 Rabies crisis declaration.
4-173 Destruction of animals under crisis period.
4-174 Surrender of animals under suspect.
Article H. Penalties
4-180 Penalty.
Article A. General Provisions
4-101 Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings prescribed in this section
except in those cases where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
1. “Animal” means any horse, mule, donkey, pony, cow, sheep, goat, hog, dog, cat, rabbit, chicken, goose,
duck, turkey, or other animal or fowl;
2. “At large.” An animal shall be deemed at large unless it is on the premises under the control of or occupied
by its owner, or unless it is under restraint by a competent person by means of leash or otherwise;
3. “Confined on the premises” means that an animal is securely and physically confined and restrained on
and within the premises of the owner by means of walls or fences, or by rope, chain, leash or other device, of
such strength and size as physically to prevent the dog from leaving the premises;
4. “Kennel proprietor” means a person who, for a period of more than ninety (90) days, keeps or harbors
more than three (3) dogs. Such a person is presumed to operate a kennel whether it be for pleasure or profit, and
classified as commercial in nature;
5. “Owner” means any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring or keeping an animal, except a kennel
proprietor. The occupant of any premises on which a domesticated or tamed animal remains, or to which it
customarily returns, for a period of ten (10) days or more, shall be deemed to be harboring or keeping the animal;
6. “Under leash” means an animal is securely held, restrained and confined by his owner, member of family
or agent, by means of a strap, chain, rope, cord or other device not exceeding eight (8) feet in length, and in
such manner as to prevent the animal from attacking any person; and
7. “Vicious animal” means an animal which has bitten, or attempted to bite, any person without undue
provocation, or which attacks, or acts as if it intended to attack or bite, or bites a person or persons, when not
unduly provoked. It also means an animal with a disposition to attack all other persons or animals or a natural
fierceness or mischief which may lead it to attack other persons or animals without provocation.
“Vicious dog” means:
a. Any dog which has attacked a human being or domestic animal one or more times, without provocation;
b. Any dog with a history, tendency, or disposition to attack, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the
safety of human beings or domestic animals;
c. Any dog that snaps, bites, or manifests a disposition to snap or bite;
d. Any dog that has been trained for dog fighting, animal fighting or animal baiting or is owned or kept for
such purposes;
e. Any dog trained to attack human beings, upon command or spontaneously in response to human activities,
except dogs owned by and under the control of the police department, a law enforcement agency of the state
or of the United States or a branch of the armed forces of the United States;
f. Staffordshire terrier breed of dog;
g. The American pit bull terrier breed of dog;
h. The American Staffordshire terrier breed of dog; or
i. Any dog which has the appearance and characteristics of being predominately of the breeds of Staffordshire
terrier, American pit bull terrier, or American Staffordshire terrier. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part; Ord. 56-
032105 § 1)
State Law Reference: Regulation of animals, city powers, 11 O.S. Section 22-115.
4-102 Animals not to be at large.
No owner shall permit any animal, including fowl, owned, harbored, or kept by him in compliance with Part 4
of this code to be at large within the city. It is unlawful for any animal to be at large at any time within the city.
This section shall not apply to any cat which is collared and to which a valid city registration tag is affixed.
(Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part; Ord. No. 4-15-91)
4-103 Turning animals at large unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to open any enclosure in which any animal is confined as required by ordinance
so as to turn the animal at large, or in any manner to turn the animal at large. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
4-104 Pasturing in public areas illegal.
It is unlawful for any person to stake, confine or pasture any animal on any public school ground or other public
property, federal, state, city or other, on any railroad right-of-way, or on any property without the consent of
the person owning or controlling such property. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
4-105 Swine not to be kept within city.
It is unlawful for any person to keep swine, hog, pig or boar within the city except in an enclosure awaiting
immediate transportation. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
4-106 Animals or livestock which may be kept; conditions.
A. It is unlawful to keep or maintain any cow, bull, animal of the bovine species, horse, mule, sheep,
chicken, rabbits or goats in the city except as provided in this section and the remainder of this chapter.
B. Repealed by Ordinance Number 51-111504 § 1.
C. This section shall not apply to the specified animals in city limits on the fairgrounds property during the
county fair or other special event so long as the animal is not in the city limits for more than one week. (Prior
Code, Chapter 3, in part; Ord. 51-111504 § 1)
4-107 Animals which disturb prohibited, nuisance, procedure.
A. It is unlawful for any person to harbor, keep or possess within the city any dog or cat which damages
property, meows, barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion, or otherwise endangers
or offends the peace and quiet or well-being of the public without cause.
B. It is the duty of the chief of police, or person designated by him, on being notified that any person claiming
that an animal is a nuisance within the meaning of this chapter has filed a verified complaint alleging that an
animal is a nuisance within the meaning of this chapter to seize and impound the animal therein described. If the
municipal judge shall find that no nuisance exists, he shall order that the animal be surrendered to the owner. If
the municipal judge shall find that the nuisance exists, he shall order the animal to be destroyed as in the case of
a vicious animal. If the owner of such animal shall give a good and sufficient bond, to be approved by the city
clerk, and conditioned that such owner shall abate and prevent such nuisance, the municipal judge shall order the
return of such animal to the owner thereof upon payment of the poundage fees herein specified. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to permit any animal to run or be at large except as permitted under the city ordinances.
No such animal shall be returned to the owner if the same is a vicious animal or in any event unless the
same is registered and licensed as required by the chapter.
C. No provision herein shall limit or prohibit the city from abating any nuisance as otherwise provided by
ordinance or statute. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part; Ord. No. 40-15-91)
4-108 Buildings for animals; construction and conditions.
A. Every stable or building wherein any animal is kept within the city shall be constructed of such material
and in such manner that it can be kept clean and sanitary at all times.
B. Every such building, if located within two hundred (200) feet of any tenement or apartment house, hotel,
restaurant, boarding house, retail food store, building used for educational, religious, or hospital purposes or
residence other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which such animal is kept,
shall be provided with a water-tight and fly-tight receptacle for manure, of such size as to hold all accumulations
of manure. The receptacle shall be emptied sufficiently often and in such manner as to prevent it from being or
becoming a nuisance, and shall be kept covered at all times except when open during the deposit or removal of
manure or refuse. No manure shall be allowed to accumulate on such premises except in the receptacle.
C. This section shall not apply to vicious dogs as defined in Section 4-101(7) of the code of ordinances.
(Ord. 58-032105 § 1)
4-108.1 Confinement of vicious dogs.
A. All vicious dogs shall be securely confined within an occupied house or residence or in a securely enclosed
and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed as provided in this section. Such pen, kennel, or structure
must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides or, in lieu of a top, walls at least six (6) feet in
height and at least six (6) feet taller than any internal structure.
B. All pens or other structures designed, constructed, or used to confine vicious dogs must be locked with a
key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom,
floor, or foundation attached to the sides of the pen, or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no
less than two (2) feet so as to prevent digging under the walls by the confined dog.
C. All structures erected to house vicious dogs must comply with all city zoning and building regulations.
All such structures must be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No vicious
dog may be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit
such building on its own volition.
D. No person shall permit a vicious dog to go outside its kennel or pen unless such dog is securely leashed
with a leash no longer than six (6) feet in length. No person shall permit a vicious dog to be kept on a chain,
rope, or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless both the dog and the leash are under the actual physical
control of a person eighteen (18) years of age or older.
E. Vicious dogs may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, or any other object
or structure.
F. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. The penalties provided in this section shall be in addition to
other remedies of the city and shall not be construed as exclusive. (Ord. 57-032105 § 1)
4-109 Stables, kennels, coops; location.
No dog kennel or other establishment wherein animals are kept shall be maintained closer than forty (40) feet
to any tenement or apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, retail food store, building used for educational,
religious, or hospital purposes, or residence other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the
premises upon which such animal is kept. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
4-110 Keeping dogs within city limits; sanitation.
A. It is unlawful for any person, other than a properly licensed kennel proprietor, to keep or maintain or
permit or suffer to be kept or maintained any dog, upon any property or premises within the city limits except
that not more than two (2) dogs may be kept:
1. In any pen, lot or enclosure of four hundred (400) square feet in area, for each dog; or
2. On a leash or chain of sufficient length or mobility as to permit each dog to occupy any area of not less
than four hundred (400) square feet in area, which areas must be ten (10) feet or more in width, and shall not
extend or protrude closer than or within twenty (20) feet from any street side property line of such premises.
B. All owners or persons having charge or control of any premises where the keeping of dogs is permitted
shall pick up and remove daily from the area within or upon which such dogs are kept or maintained, all dung
and animal excrement, and shall thereupon place or cause same to be placed in an enclosed, fly-proof container.
The owner shall further prevent any offensive, disagreeable, or noxious smell, stench or odor to arise from such
area within or upon which any dog or dogs may be kept or maintained. Upon failure to comply with the provisions
of this section, the keeping of dogs and the area within which same are confined or restrained shall be and
constitute a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided in any other ordinance of the city pertaining to abating
nuisances or dogs.
4-111 Stables to be kept clean.
Every structure or place wherein an animal is kept or permitted to be shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition, devoid of rodents and vermin and free from objectionable odors. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
4-112 Disposal of manure.
Manure shall be hauled outside the city in a manner which does not jeopardize the public health, or else shall
be spread evenly upon the ground and turned under at once or as soon as the weather permits. (Prior Code, Chapter
3, in part)
4-113 Health officer to inspect.
The health officer or police chief, upon complaint of any person, shall inspect any structure or place where an
animal is kept, and may do so on his own initiative. He may issue any such reasonable order as he may deem
necessary to the owner of the animal to cause the animal to be kept as provided in this chapter or in a manner so
as not to constitute a nuisance. He may make a complaint before the municipal judge against any person for violation
of any provision of this chapter or of any such reasonable order, but this procedure shall not abridge the
right of others to make such complaint. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
4-114 Certain acts are prohibited.
It is an offense and a violation of this chapter for any owner, as herein defined, within the corporate limits of
the city to:
1. Abandon or desert any dog, cat or other animal or to permit any dog, cat or other animal to become a
stray;
2. Allow a female dog or cat to run at large while she is in heat, whether such female dog or cat is licensed
or not;
3. Harbor, keep, or have possession of any vicious dog, cat or other animal as herein defined;
4. Harbor, keep, or have possession of any dog, cat or other animal which is a nuisance as defined herein;
5. Allow any dog or cat to be at large during the period of any epidemic of rabies, after proclamation of
such epidemic;
6. Fail, or refuse, to deliver to the pound officer or persons designated by him, upon demand, any unlicensed
dog or cat, any vicious dog or cat, any animal which is a nuisance, any rabies suspected dog or cat, any
animal found at large during the period of an epidemic of rabies, or any dog or cat, the keeping, harboring or
possessing of which is declared to be an offense;
7. Keep or pen any dog on premises, under his control or under the control of himself jointly with another,
within an area used for confining dogs, which is less in size and dimension than hereinafter provided, or to maintain
an area for such purpose, any part of which protrudes, extends or is located within a minimum distance from
a street side property line, as required by ordinance;
8. Fail or refuse to comply with any sanitation rule or requirement set forth or prescribed by the provisions
of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city pertaining to sanitation;
9. Permit a nuisance to exist by keeping, possessing, harboring or allowing to remain on premises under the
control of the owner as defined in this chapter, any animal which emit sounds or noises, which disturb the peace
or quietude of any persons within the vicinity of or neighborhood where such premises are located; and
10. Do anything which is prohibited or failing to do that which is required and commanded by any part of
this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part; Ord. No. 4-15-91)
4-115 Animal control officers.
A. Animal control officers, as designated by the chief of police, or his representative, are authorized to enforce
the provisions of ordinances dealing with animals. In carrying out such duties, an animal control officer
may arrest any person violating or attempting to violate in his presence the provisions of these ordinances. The
officer must, before making the arrest, inform the person to be arrested of the cause thereof, and require him to
submit, except when the person is in actual commission of the offense or when he is arrested on pursuit immediately
after its commission. An animal control officer may issue a citation to any violator to appear in municipal
court.
B. In issuing a citation, the animal control officer shall proceed as follows:
1. The officer shall prepare a written citation to appear in municipal court, containing:
a. The name and address of the cited person;
b. The nature, location and date of the alleged offense; and
c. The time and date of the municipal court appearance.
Unless the person requests an earlier date, the time specified in the citation to appear shall be at least five (5)
days after the issuance of the citation;
2. The citation, and any copies thereof, shall be signed by the cited person and one signed copy thereof
shall be given to him;
3. The officer shall thereupon release the cited person from custody; and
4. The officer shall file one copy of the citation with the municipal court within three (3) days after issuing
the citation.
C. If a person fails to appear in response to a citation, a warrant for his arrest shall be issued. Any person
who willfully fails to appear in response to a citation is guilty of an offense. (Ord. No. 85-08, 8/12/85)
4-116 Authority of animal control officer.
The animal control officers shall possess all required power and authority necessary to enforce the provisions
of this chapter and shall have authority to enter upon private premises for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing
the same. (Ord. No. 85-08, 8/12/85)
4-117 Interference with animal control officer.
No person shall interfere with, hinder, delay, or obstruct in any manner whatsoever any animal control officer
in the performance of his duties. (Ord. No. 85-08, 8/12/85)
Article B. Dog and Cat Vaccination, Tags and Tax
4-120 Dogs and cats to be vaccinated.
A. It is the duty of every person owning or having in his charge or possession, within the city, any dog or
cat over the age of six (6) months to cause the dog or cat to be vaccinated for rabies by a person duly authorized
to practice veterinarian medicine in the state, or by any person who is under the immediate and direct supervision
of a licensed veterinarian, and to register the dog or cat with the city clerk, or designee and to pay the license
fee as is hereinafter provided. Every dog or cat within the city shall be vaccinated annually on or before
June 1 of each year; or in the case of a pup or kitten, before it is six (6) months old.
B. Each veterinarian vaccinating dogs or cats for rabies shall issue to the owner of such dog or cat a certificate
showing the name of the owner of such dog or cat, the date of rabies vaccination and a sufficient description
of the dog or cat to identify the same as required for registration, including the sex thereof and whether neutered/
spayed or not.
C. No vaccination against rabies shall be recognized or entitle the owner of a dog or cat to register it unless
such vaccination shall have been within the calendar year for which the license was issued or within a period of
sixty (60) days prior thereto.
D. The requirement of an annual registration shall not apply to any dog or cat which may follow or be led
by any nonresident or traveler through the city while such dog or cat is with its owner or keeper. The waiver of
this provision for the dog or cat of a nonresident or traveler shall not exceed thirty (30) days.
E. It is the duty of each veterinarian practicing in the city to keep a record of every dog or cat vaccinated.
Such records shall be available to the mayor or any person designated by him, at any reasonable time and upon
proper demand for a three (3) year period. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part; Ord. No. 4-15-91)
4-121 Dog and cat tax; registration; tag.
A. Every person owning or having a dog(s) or cat(s) in his custody or possession shall procure a license and
cause the dog(s) or cat(s) to be registered and pay such licensing fees as provided as follows:
1. For each dog or cat, five dollars ($5.00) per year; and
2. For each spayed or neutered dog or cat, two dollars ($2.00) per year.
B. Before the city clerk accepts any money offered in payment of the license fee, the person offering the
money shall present to the city clerk the certificate of a veterinarian or any other person legally authorized to
immunize dogs or cats, showing the dog or cat has been immunized against rabies as provided in Section 4-120.
C. Any person or owner in possession of a dog or cat may deduct one dollar ($1.00) of each fee as set forth
above if such registration and license is secured on or before the 1st day of June in the year for which such license
is required. All registrations and licenses shall expire at midnight on May 31 for the year for which same
were issued.
D. It is the duty of the city clerk to keep a register of all dog and cat licenses of the city, pursuant to the
provisions hereof. The registration shall show the date of the issuance of the license, its date of expiration, the
name of the owner, or the persons of whom the name of the license is issued, the size of the dog or cat and state
as nearly as possible the age, sex, color and breed of such dog or cat. The registration shall further show the date
of vaccination and by whom vaccinated. The registration shall show whether the dog or cat has been neutered or
spayed.
E. Any person who violates, refuses or neglects to procure a license and registration as set forth in this section,
shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. The penalties provided for
herein shall be construed as exclusive. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, as amended; Ord. No. 4-15-91; Ord. No. 5-6-91;
Ord. No. 4-18-94C)
4-122 Vicious dogs, determination, may be killed.
Repealed by Ordinance Number 62-032105 § 1.
(Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part; Ord. 18-100101 § 1; Ord. 62-032105 § 1)
4-122.1 Unconfined vicious dogs.
A vicious dog which is found more than twice in any calendar year not to be confined as required by this section
shall be required to be permanently removed from the city or destroyed. An animal which is returned to the
city after removal under this section shall be destroyed. (Ord. 60-032105 § 1)
4-122.2 Unlicensed vicious dogs.
All unlicensed vicious dogs shall be deemed illegal animals. The person harboring or keeping an unlicensed
vicious dog shall have the animal removed from the city; if, however, the animal is again found unlicensed in the
city or if the person holding or keeping the animal chooses not to remove it from the city, the dog shall be destroyed.
This section shall not apply to a dog which, upon initial notice to its owner, the owner agrees to properly
license and confine or to a dog for which a hearing has been requested under this chapter to determine if it is vicious
or until there has been a final decision on the question raised at hearing at which time the owner may, if the
dog is found vicious, properly license and confine the dog. (Ord. 61-032105 § 1)
4-122.3 Seizure and impoundment of vicious dogs.
A. The animal control officer or his or her designee, in his or her discretion or upon receipt of a complaint
alleging that a particular dog is a vicious dog as defined in Section 4-101(7), may declare such dog a vicious dog
by delivering a written notice of declaration to the owner. The notice shall include a description of the dog and
the basis for the declaration of viciousness. This notice shall also set forth that the owner shall be required to license
and confine the dog as required by this section. The notice shall be served upon any person eighteen (18)
years of age or older residing at the premises where the animal is located or may be posted on those premises if
no person eighteen (18) years of age or older is present to accept service.
B. The person owning, keeping, sheltering, or harboring the dog in question may contest the determination
that a dog is a vicious dog as defined in Section 4-101(7) by filing a written request with the city clerk within
three (3) business days of the receipt of the animal control officer’s declaration. If at this time the owner agrees
to confine the dog pursuant to Section 4-108.1 of this chapter and submits to the clerk of proof of insurance as
described in Section 4-124 of this chapter, the dog shall not be impounded pending appeal. Failure to file a request
for hearing shall constitute a waiver of any right to contest the declaration of the animal control officer,
and the animal control officer or his or her designee shall be authorized to seize and impound the dog. A dog so
seized shall be impounded for a period of seven (7) days. If, at the end of the impoundment period, the owner
has not licensed and shown ability to confine the dog as required by this chapter, or has not declared an intent to
remove the dog from the city, the animal control officer or his or her designee shall cause the dog to be destroyed.
C. The person owning, keeping, sheltering, or harboring the dog in question shall be given not less than
seventy-two (72) hours’ written notice of the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall set forth the description
of the dog in question and the basis for the allegation of viciousness. The notice shall also set forth that, if
the determination of the animal control officer is upheld, the owner shall be required to license and confine the
dog as required by this section. The notice shall be served in the same manner as the declaration notice.
D. If, after hearing, the mayor upholds the determination of the animal control officer that the dog is a vicious
dog or is a vicious dog held in violation of this section, as set out in the notice of hearing, the mayor shall
order the person owning, sheltering, harboring, or keeping the animal to permanently license and confine the dog
as required by this section or remove it from the city. The order shall immediately be served upon the individual
or entity against whom issued in the same manner as the notice of hearing. If the order is not complied with
within three (3) days of its issuance, the animal control officer or his or her designee is authorized to seize and
impound the dog. A dog so seized shall be impounded for a period of seven (7) days. If, at the end of the impoundment
period, the individual or entity against whom the order of the mayor or his or her designee was issued
has not appealed such order to the city council or has not complied with the order, the animal control officer
or his or her designee shall cause the dog to be destroyed.
E. The order to license, confine, or remove a vicious dog from the city issued by the mayor or his or her
designee may be appealed to the city council. In order to appeal such order, written notice of appeal must be
filed with the city clerk within three (3) days after receipt of the order. Failure to file such written notice of appeal
shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal the order of the mayor or his or her designee.
F. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be delivered personally or by certified
mail to the city clerk. The hearing of such appeal shall be scheduled within twenty (20) days of the receipt
of notice of appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause. After such hearing the city council may affirm
or reverse the order of the mayor or his or her designee. Such determination shall be contained in a written
decision and shall be filed with the city clerk within three (3) days after the hearing or any continued session
thereof. The hearing shall be confined to the record made before the city council, the arguments of the parties or
their representatives, any additional evidence which was not available at the time of the hearing before the mayor
or his or her designee, and any other information the city council deems necessary.
G. If the city council affirms the action of the mayor or his or her designee, the city council shall order in its
written decision that the individual or entity owning, sheltering, harboring, or keeping such vicious dog shall
license and confine the dog as required by this section or remove such animal from the city. The decision and
order shall immediately be served upon the person against whom rendered in the same manner as the notice set
out in subsection A of this section. If the original order of the mayor or his or her designee, is not appealed and is
not complied with within three (3) days of its issuance, the animal control officer or his or her designee is authorized
toseize and impound such vicious dog. A dog so seized shall be impounded for a period of seven (7)
days. If, at the end of the impoundment period, the individual or entity against whom the decision and order of
the city council or the city council was issued has not petitioned the district court for a review of the order or has
not complied with the order, the animal control officer or his or her designee shall cause the dog to be destroyed
in a humane manner.
H. Failure to comply with an order of the mayor or his or her designee issued pursuant to this section and
not appealed to the city council after appeal, is a violation and subject to the provisions of Section 4-180.
I. Any dog that is alleged to be vicious and that is under impoundment or quarantine at the animal shelter
shall not be released to the owner, but shall continued to be held at the expense of the owner pending the outcome
of the hearing. All costs of such impoundment or quarantine shall be paid by the owner if the dog is determined
to be vicious. If the dog is not determined to be vicious, all costs shall be paid by the city, except cost attributable
to initial confinement prior to notice or costs of any required quarantine which shall nonetheless be
paid by the owner. (Ord. 59-032105 § 1)
4-123 Dogs and cats confined; when.
A. When the health officer or chief of police determines and certifies that a dog, a cat, or other animal in the
city or within five (5) miles of the city is or was infected with rabies and that an epidemic of rabies threatens the
city, the council, by resolution, may order all dogs to be confined, and if deemed desirable, all cats to be confined,
during a period of time to be determined by the council. Such resolution or an adequate notice of its passage
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and shall go into effect on the day
following such publication unless the resolution prescribes a later time.
B. While such resolution is in effect, it is unlawful for any owner to permit a dog or cat to be at large in
violation of such resolution, or for any dog or cat to be at large in violation thereof. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in
part)
4-124 Vicious dogs issuance of license.
A. The owner of a vicious dog for which a license is required shall, on or before June 1 each year, apply to
the city clerk, his or her designee, for a license for each dog owned by him or her.
B. Such application for a license may be made after January 1 and at any time for a dog which has come
into the possession or ownership of the applicant or which has reached the age of six (6) months after June 1.
C. The owner of any dog defined as vicious under Section 4-101(7) of this chapter shall comply with Section
4-108.1 of this chapter at the time an application for license is made under this section.
D. An application to license a vicious dog must include, in addition to the information required in subsection
C of this section, presentation by the applicant of a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in this state, providing personal liability insurance coverage as in a homeowner’s policy,
with a minimum liability amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for the injury or death of any
person, for damage to property of others and for acts or negligence by the owner or his or her agents, in the keeping
or owning of such vicious dog. The certificate shall require notice to the city, in conformity with general city
standards for certificates of insurance, if the underlying policy of insurance is canceled for any reason. In lieu of
such a certificate, a copy of a current homeowner’s policy designating these requirements shall be sufficient
proof of insurance for purposes of this subsection. If a certificate of insurance or policy is not immediately available,
a binder indicating the coverage may be accepted for up to thirty (30) days subsequent to the determination
that a dog is vicious; however, if after thirty (30) days a certificate of insurance or a policy has not been submitted,
the dog shall be deemed unlicensed and subject to Sections 4-122.2 and 4-122.3 of this chapter, as applicable.
(Ord. 63-032105 § 1)
Article C. Animal Pound
4-130 Pound established.
A city pound is hereby established under the jurisdiction of the police department. It shall be under the immediate
control of a pound officer or of such other person as may be officially designated. The person in charge of
the pound shall provide proper sustenance for all animals impounded and shall treat them in a humane manner.
The city may contract with another agency for the use of a pound maintained by the agency. (Prior Code, Chapter
3, in part)
4-131 Animals to be impounded.
A. The pound officer, a police officer, or such other officer or employee of the city as may be authorized by
the mayor:
1. Shall take into custody and impound any animal running at large in violation of any provision of the ordinances
of the city;
2. May enter upon the premises of the owner or other private premises to take such animal into custody;
and
3. If with reasonable effort a dog illegally at large cannot be caught, may kill it, whether on or off private
premises.
B. Any other person may take such animal into custody and present it to the authority in charge of the
pound for impounding.
C. Animals which are taken into custody as provided in this chapter shall be disposed of or destroyed in a
humane manner by a veterinarian, an animal control officer or other authorized city employee, provided however:
1. No animal shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed until such animal has been in custody for seventytwo
(72) hours;
2. No dog or cat which is one year of age or less shall be destroyed until such dog or cat has been in custody
for one hundred forty-four (144) hours;
3. No animal shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of in the event the animal is redeemed or claimed as
otherwise provided in this chapter; and
4. No animal whose owner has been given notice as provided in subsection D of this section shall be destroyed
or otherwise disposed until seventy-two (72) hours has elapsed from the time the notice was given or
delivered.
D. If the owner of an animal which has been placed in custody under this chapter has been identified by the
animal’s tag or otherwise, the animal control officer or other authorized city employee shall notify the animal’s
owner at the address on the registration tag or city records that the animal is in custody and will be destroyed or
otherwise disposed of as provided in this chapter. The notice may be given to the owner or may be left at the
owner’s address with some member of the family over fourteen (14) years of age. The owner of any animal
which has been taken into custody shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city in handling and processing
such animal. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part; Ord. No. 9-16-91A)
4-132 Breaking pound.
No unauthorized person shall:
1. Break or attempt to break open the pound, or take or let out any animal therefrom;
2. Take or attempt to take from any officer or employee of the city any animal taken into custody as provided
by this chapter; or
3. In any manner interfere with or hinder an officer or employee in the discharge of his duties relating to
the taking into custody and impounding of animals as provided in this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
4-133 Fees for impounding.
A. The city council by motion or resolution shall determine the fees to be charged for impounding and
keeping animals. In computing the fee, a fraction of a day during which an animal has been fed shall be deemed
a full day.
B. Any person redeeming an impounded animal shall pay the required fees to the city clerk and present his
receipt therefor to the person in charge of the pound before the latter releases the animal.
C. Any person redeeming a dog not licensed as required by Sections 4-120 through 4-123 of this code shall
pay the required license tax to the city clerk and present the receipt therefor to the person in charge of the pound
before the latter releases the dog. If a dog has been licensed the person in charge of the pound shall require adequate
evidence of the proper licensing of the dog before releasing it. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
4-134 Owner may redeem.
Any person adopting or redeeming an animal shall pay the following fees:
1. Base fee for adoption, twenty dollars ($20.00);
2. Base fee for impoundment/redemption:
a. Ten dollars ($10.00) per animal plus three dollars ($3.00) per day; and
b. Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per liter plus three dollars ($3.00) per day;
3. License fee; (if not neutered or spayed), five dollars ($5.00);
4. License fee; (if neutered or spayed), two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50);
5. Immunization against rabies, forty dollars ($40.00); and
6. Spaying or neutering services, if required, forty dollars ($40.00). (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part; Ord.
No. 8-16-93; Ord. No. 9-20-93)
4-135 Sale of impounded animals.
Repealed by Ordinance 9-20-93.
4-136 Owner may claim excess money.
The owner of an impounded animal sold as provided herein may claim the excess of the sale price of the animal
above the fees for impounding and keeping the same and a fee in an amount set by the city council by motion
or resolution to reimburse the city for any expense it has had in making the sale, at any time within three (3)
months after the sale. If a claim is so made and approved by the council, the city clerk shall pay him such excess.
If a claim is not made, the excess shall belong to the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
4-137 Unclaimed animals.
Upon expiration of the time within which an owner may redeem any animal seized under the provisions of
this chapter, a veterinarian, an animal control officer or other authorized city employee may destroy or otherwise
dispose of the animal. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part; Ord. No. 9-16-91B)
Article D. Cruelty to animals.
4-140 Cruelty to animals.
It is unlawful for any person wilfully and maliciously to pour on, or apply to, an animal any drug or other
thing which inflicts pain on the animal; or knowingly to treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner; or knowingly
to neglect an animal belonging to him or in his custody in a cruel or inhumane manner. It is unlawful for
any person to overdrive, overload, drive when overloaded, overwork, torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance
or water, cruelly beat, mutilate or kill any animal or fail to give such animal sufficient water, or cause or
procure an animal to be so overdriven, overworked, tortured, tormented, or deprived of necessary sustenance or
water, cruelly beaten, mutilated or killed. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
4-141 Poisoning animals.
It is unlawful for a person wilfully to poison any dog or other animal except a noxious, nondomesticated animal;
or knowingly to expose poison so that the same may be taken by such an animal. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in
part)
4-142 Encouraging animals to fight.
It is unlawful for any person to instigate or encourage a fight between animals; or to encourage one animal to
attack, pursue or annoy another animal except a noxious, nondomesticated animal; or to keep a house, pit or
other place used for fights between animals. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
Article E. Kennels
4-150 Kennel proprietor.
It is unlawful for any person to be a kennel proprietor, as herein defined, within the city unless such proprietor
shall first pay to the city clerk of the city an annual license fee in an amount set by the city council by motion or
resolution. Upon proof of proper zoning and payment of such fee the city clerk shall furnish to such kennel proprietor
a license to engage in such business. The kennel proprietor’s license levied in this section shall be in lieu
of all other license fees prescribed in this chapter and ordinances of the city for dogs in such kennel. All dogs in
such kennel shall be at all times confined on the premises of such kennel proprietor. Should any dog or bitch belonging
to, or kept by, such kennel proprietor be allowed off the premises of such kennel proprietor, the owner or
keeper thereof shall pay the same tax and license fee thereon as is required by the ordinances of the city for all
dogs not kept by a kennel proprietor. Any such dog shall be subject to all of the provisions of such ordinances,
including seizure and impounding to the same extent and in the same manner as any dog at large. Such kennel
shall be maintained at all times in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be subject to inspection by the cooperative
health department or other proper official of the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
4-151 Kennel tags.
It is the duty of the city clerk to furnish to each kennel proprietor a sufficient number of tags upon each of
which shall be engraved, carved or stamped, the year of the registration of such kennel and the number under
which same was registered. The kennel proprietor or other person in charge of such kennel, shall tag each dog or
bitch in such kennel with one of the kennel tags in the same manner that other dogs are tagged. (Prior Code,
Chapter 3, in part)
Article F. Zoning Ordinance to Prevail
4-160 Zoning ordinance to prevail.
In case of conflict between this chapter and the present or any future zoning ordinance, the provision of the
zoning ordinance shall prevail and supersede the provision of this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
Article G. Proclamation of Rabies
4-170 Quarantine of animals for observation.
The identity and address of the owner of any animal that bites a person shall be promptly furnished to the
animal control officer, the city health officer, and the county health department. The animal control officer shall
securely quarantine such animal for a period of ten (10) days and shall not release such quarantined animal until
reasonable determination has been made that animal is not infected with rabies. At the discretion of the animal
control officer such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, at a veterinary hospital of the owner’s
choice at the owner’s expense, or at the city animal shelter. In case of animals whose ownership is unknown,
such quarantine shall be at the city animal shelter. The animal may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of
rabies and such owner shall then pay any related charges for confinement. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
4-171 Securing support information on diagnosed animals.
When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid or is suspected of having rabies by a licensed
veterinarian and dies while under such observation, the animal control officer, veterinarian, the city
health officer, or other designated emissary shall immediately send the necessary part of such animal to the state
health department for pathological examination and shall notify the proper public health officer of any reports of
human contact. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
4-172 Rabies crisis declaration.
When a report gives a suspected or a positive diagnosis of rabies, or when the city, county or state health officials
feel that a rabies crisis may be imminent, the health officials may recommend to the mayor city-wide quarantine,
and upon the invoking of such quarantine by the city council, by resolution, no animal shall be taken into
the streets or permitted to be in the streets, except for short periods of exercise under leash and control of a competent
adult. During the quarantine no animal may be taken or removed from the city without written permission
of the animal control officer. This declaration must be made by notice in a general circulated newspaper of the
community and will last as long as health officials determine the situation requires such action. (Prior Code,
Chapter 3, in part)
4-173 Destruction of animals under crisis period.
During the period of rabies quarantine as mentioned every animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid
shall be forthwith destroyed, or at the owner’s expense and option, shall be treated for a rabies infection by a
licensed veterinarian, or held under six (6) month quarantine by the owner in the same manner as a female in
season. The period of quarantine may be extended from time to time. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
4-174 Surrender of animals under suspect.
No person shall remove from the city any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal
which has bitten a human, except as herein provided. The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall be
surrendered to the animal control officer upon demand, and the animal control officer shall direct disposition of
the animal. No person shall refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction when such demand is
lawfully made by the animal control officer. (Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
Article H. Penalties
4-180 Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any ordinance or provision of this chapter, or who violates, or
refuses or neglects to carry out any reasonable order made by the health officer pursuant to this chapter, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. The penalties provided for
herein shall be in addition to other remedies of the city and aggrieved persons and shall not be construed as exclusive.
(Prior Code, Chapter 3, in part)
Chapter 2
(RESERVED)
PART 5
BUILDING REGULATIONS AND CODES
Chapters:
1 International Building Code and Permits
2 Plumbing Code
3 Electrical Code
4 Gas Piping
5 Liquefied Petroleum Gas
6 Moving Houses and Buildings
7 Fair Housing
8 Housing Code
9 Mechanical Co de
10 Water Well Permits
11 Penalty and Judicial Relief
12 Flood Damage Prevention
13 Oil and Gas Drilling
14 Residential Code
15 International Existing Building Code
16 Life Safety Code
17 Uniform Fire Code
18 International Property Maintenance Code
Chapter 1
INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE
AND PERMITS
Sections:
5-101 Adoption of International Building Code.
5-102 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
5-103 BOCA National Building Code revisions.
5-104 City inspector.
5-105 Application for permits.
5-106 Building permit fees.
5-107 Permit required.
5-108 Fire limits defined.
5-109 Penalty.
5-110 Adoption of Building Code.
5-101 Adoption of International Building Code.
A. That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of
Bristow, being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2003 Edition, excluding Appendix
Chapters A and B as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code
of the city of Bristow, in the state of Oklahoma for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of
all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupation and use;
and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such
structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code on filed in the office of
the city of Bristow are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with
the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
B. The following sections of the 2003 Edition of the International Building Code are hereby revised as follows:
1. Section 101.1 - insert City of Bristow in place of the phrase [name of jurisdiction].
2. Section 1612.3 - insert City of Bristow in place of the phrase [name of jurisdiction].
3. All of the provisions of Section 103 are deleted and replaced with the following: The City Inspector,
sometimes referred to as the Bristow Building Inspector, is hereby designated as the “Building Official” for the
purposes of this Code.
4. Section 1612.3 - insert ________ in place of the phrase [date of issuance].
5. Section 3410.2 - insert February 5, 2003 in place of the phrase [date in one location].
6. Section 112.3.1 insert the following schedule of fees:
Building Permits
New residential and modular homes $30.00 base minimum plus $4.00 per 100 square
feet
Residential addition and/or residential remodel $30.00 base minimum plus $4.00 per 100 square
feet
Accessory building $25.00 base minimum plus $2.50 per 100 square
feet for building in excess of 100 square feet
Carport, residential driveway, porch or patio with roof $25.00
New commercial building (including non-governmental
or institutional)
$50.00 base minimum plus $7.50 per 100 square
feet
Swimming pools (in-ground, above-ground and onground,
including hot tubs and spas) of requiring water
supply, drainage and water disposal systems
$35.00
Signs (portable, ground, wall, projecting and subdivision
marquees)
$2.50 per foot for the longest cross-sectional
distance
Demolition $30.00 base minimum plus $5.00 for each ten
feet in height
Moving of any residential structure across or within the
corporation limits of the city
$100.00
Sprinkler system $25.00
Inspections
Certificate of occupancy Residential-fifteen dollars, Commercial-thirty
dollars
Building Permits
Building Inspections
Commercial reinspection (all trades) $35.00
Residential reinspection (all trades) $25.00
Sprinkler systems $25.00
Parking lots $25.00
Mobile home-manufactured home fee $25.00
7. Section 113.4 shall provide as follows:
Any persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of
this code, shall be, upon conviction, by punished as provided in Part I, Chapter 1, Section 1-108 of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Bristow. Each day a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(Resolution 7/7/80; Ord. 12-04-95 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 7-21-97A § 1: Ord. 20-110501 § 3 (part): Ord. 34-010504 §§ 1
(part), 2, 3)
5-102 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
All other ordinances in conflict with the 2003 Edition of the International Building Code except as otherwise
provided in this chapter are hereby repealed. (Ord. 7-21-97B § 1: Ord. 20-110501 § 3 (part): Ord. 34-010504 §§
1 (part), 4)
5-103 BOCA National Building Code revisions.
Repealed by Ordinance Number 20-110501 § 3 (part); repealed by Ordinance Number 34-010504 § 1 (part).
(Ord. 7-21-97C § 1: Ord. 20-110501 § 3 (part): Ord. 34-010504 § 1 (part))
5-104 City inspector.
Repealed by Ordinance Number 12-04-95 § 1(B); repealed by Ordinance Number 7-21-97D § 2; repealed by
Ordinance Number 34-010504 § 1 (part).
5-105 Application for permits.
Repealed by Ordinance Number 12-04-95 § 1(B); repealed by Ordinance Number 7-21-97D § 2; repealed by
Ordinance Number 34-010504 § 1 (part).
5-106 Building permit fees.
Repealed by Ordinance Number 12-04-95 § 1(B); repealed by Ordinance Number 7-21-97D § 2; repealed by
Ordinance Number 34-010504 § 1 (part).
5-107 Permit required.
Repealed by Ordinance Number 34-010504 § 1 (part). (Ord. 12-04-95 § 1(B); Ord. 7-21-97D § 2; Ord. 3-2-98
§ 1: Ord. 34-010504 § 1 (part))
5-108 Fire limits defined.
Repealed by Ordinance Number 7-21-97D § 2; repealed by Ordinance Number 34-010504 § 1 (part).
5-109 Penalty.
Repealed by Ordinance Number 12-04-95 § 1(B); repealed by Ordinance Number 34-010504 § 1 (part).
5-110 Adoption of Building Code.
A. That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of
Bristow, being marked and designated as the International Building Code, including Appendix Chapters C, E, G,
H and I, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code, city of
Bristow, in the state of Oklahoma; for the control of building and structures as herein provided; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said Building Code are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and
changes, if any prescribed in subsection B of this section.
B. Additions, Insertions and Changes.
The following sections are hereby created:
101.1 City of Bristow.
103.1 Delete and replace with:
For purposes of this Code, the Building Inspector shall also mean the Code Official, Code Enforcer, and/or
the City Inspector.
103.2 Delete.
103.3 Delete.
108.2 Delete and replace with:
On buildings and structures or alterations requiring a permit or fee for each permit shall be paid as follows:
A. Building Permits:
1. New residential and modular homes, twenty-five dollars base minimum plus five dollars per 100 square
feet;
2. Residential addition and/or residential remodel, thirty-five dollars base minimum plus three dollars per
100 square feet;
3. Accessory building, twenty-five dollars base minimum plus five dollars per 100 square feet for building
in excess of 100 square feet;
4. Carport, residential driveway, porch or patio with roof, twenty-five dollars;
5. New commercial building (including non-governmental or institutional) fifty dollars base minimum plus
seven dollars and fifty cents per 100 square feet;
6. Construction or alteration of building or structure listed in 74 O.S. 1991, § 324.11e, no fee but permit
required;
7. Swimming pools (in-ground, above-ground, and on-ground, including hot tubs and spas) if requiring
water supply, drainage, and water disposal systems, thirty-five dollars;
8. Signs (portable, ground, wall, projecting, and subdivision marquees), 2.50 per square foot;
9. Demolition, thirty dollars base minimum plus five dollars for each ten feet in height;
10. Curb-cut, ten dollars permit fee. Controller is responsible for making all cuts;
11. Earth change permits, twenty-five dollars;
12. Moving of any residential structure across or within the corporation limits of the city, one hundred dollars;
13. Parking lot fee; twenty-five dollars;
14. Appeal fee, twenty-five dollars;
15. Sprinkler system, twenty-five dollars;
16. Mobile home - manufactured home, twenty-five dollars;
B. Inspections:
1. Certificate of occupancy: residential - fifteen dollars, commercial - thirty dollars;
2. Building inspections:
a. Residential - footing, slab, frame, partial wall, partial ceiling, final inspection, thirty-five dollars per inspection.
b. Commercial - footing, slab, frame, partial wall, partial ceiling, final inspection, thirty-five dollars per
inspection.
3. Commercial reinspection (all trades), thirty-five dollars:
4. Residential reinspection (all trades), twenty-five dollars;
5. Sprinkler Systems, twenty-five dollars;
6. Parking lots, twenty-five dollars;
7. Mobile home - manufactured home fee, twenty-five dollars.
112.1 Delete and replace with:
General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official
relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals.
The Board of Appeals shall consist of the eight members of the City Council. The Chairman of the Board
shall be the Mayor.
112.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not
fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to
waive requirements of this code.
112.3 Delete and replace with: Procedure.
112.3.1 A board member shall not hear an appeal in which that board member has any personal, professional,
or financial interest.
112.3.2 The Board of Appeals shall meet within ten days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings.
All appeals shall be filed with the City Clerk of the City of Bristow.
112.3.3 All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant’s
representative, the code official, any person designated by the code official, and any person whose interests are
affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
112.3.4 In conducting appeal hearings, the Board of Appeals shall not require compliance with strict rules of
evidence but shall mandate that only relevant information be received.
112.3.5 When five members of the Board of Appeals are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or
the appellant’s representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing.
112.3.6 The Board of Appeals shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official by a majority vote. In
the event of a tie, the Chairman of the Board shall be permitted to cast a vote.
112.3.7 The decision of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution. Certified copies shall be furnished to the
appellant and to the code official.
112.3.8 The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Board of Appeals.
112.3.9 Any person, whether or not a previous party to the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate
court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for judicial review shall be made within
thirty days following the filing of the decision in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Bristow.
112.3.10 Structures existing prior to March 17, 1997, in which there is work involving additions, alterations,
or changes of occupancy, shall be made to conform to the requirements of this section or the provisions of Sections
3403.0 through 3407. The provisions of Section 3408.2.1 through 3408.2.5 shall apply to existing occupancies
that will continue to be, or are proposed to be, in Use Groups, A, B, E, F, M, R, and S. These provisions
shall not apply to buildings with occupancies in Use Group H or I.
113.4 Delete and replace with:
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate a provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished
as provided in Section 1-108 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Bristow. Each day that a violation
occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 5-18-98H §§ 2, 3, 4)
1612.3 City of Bristow; May 4, 1982.
3409.2 December 4, 2001.
(Ord. 20-110501 § 1)
Chapter 2
PLUMBING CODE
Sections:
5-201 Adoption of International Plumbing Code.
5-202 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
5-203 Additions, insertions and changes.
5-204 License--Surety bond.
5-201 Adoption of International Plumbing Code.
That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Bristow,
being marked and designated as the International Plumbing Code, 2003 Edition, including Appendix Chapters
B, C, D, E, F and G as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Plumbing
Code of the city of Bristow, in the state of Oklahoma; regulating and governing the design, construction,
quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said Plumbing
Code on file in the office of the city of Bristow are hereby referred to, adopted, and made apart hereof, as if fully
set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 5-203 of
this code. (Adopted 7/7/80; Ord. No. 11-6-89: Ord. 31-010504 §§ 1 (part), 2)
State Law Reference: Plumbing regulations and licensing, 59 O.S. Sections 1001 et seq.
5-202 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
All ordinances in conflict with the provisions of 2003 Edition of the International Plumbing Code except as
otherwise provided in this chapter are hereby repealed. (Ord. No. 11-6-89: Ord. 31-010504 §§ 1 (part), 3)
5-203 Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections of the 2003 Edition of the International Plumbing Code are hereby revised as follows:
1. Section 101.1 - insert City of Bristow in place of the phrase [name of jurisdiction].
2. All of the provisions of Section 103 are deleted and replaced with the following: The City Inspector,
sometimes referred to as the Bristow Building Inspector, is hereby designated as the “Code Official” for the purposes
of this Code.
3. Section 106.6.2 insert the following schedule of fees:
PLUMBING RESIDENTIAL
Floor Drain $ 2.50 each
Gas Service 20.00 each
Kitchen Sink 2.50 each
Lavatory 2.50 each
Sewer 20.00 each
Shower 2.50 each
Stool 2.50 each
Tub 2.50 each
Utility Sink 2.50 each
Washer Drain 2.50 each
Water Heater 15.00 each
Water Service 20.00 each
PLUMBING COMMERCIAL
Floor Drain $ 4.00 each
Kitchen Sink 4.00 each
Lavatory 4.00 each
Shower 4.00 each
Stool 4.00 each
Tub 4.00 each
Utility Sink 4.00 each
Washer Drain 4.00 each
Water Heater 4.00 each
4. Section 108.4 shall provide as follows:
Any persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair plumbing work in violation of the approved construction documents
or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall
upon conviction, be punished as provided in Part 1, Chapter 1, Section 1-108 of the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Bristow. Each day that a violation occurs after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
5. Section 108.5 Insert $50.00 in the first location reciting [amount] and insert $200.00 in the second location
reciting [amount].
6. Section 109.2.1: Section 109.2.1 is deleted.
(Ord. No. 11-6-89: Ord. 31-010504 §§ 1 (part), 4)
5-204 License--Surety bond.
A. It is unlawful to perform work as a plumbing contractor, journeyman and/or an apprentice unless a
proper license has been issued by the city of Bristow and a surety bond posted.
B. Commencing July 1, 1998, the following license fees and surety bonds shall be assessed all plumbing
contractors, journeyman and/or apprentices:
First Year Plumbing
Contractor license $125.00
Journeyman license 30.00
Apprentice license 10.00
Surety bond 3,000.00
Annual Plumbing Renewal
Contractor renewal $50.00
Journeyman renewal 15.00
Apprentice renewal 10.00
C. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate a provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
punished as provided in Section 1-108 of the Code of Ordinances of the city of Bristow. Each day that a violation
occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 5-18-98H §§ 2, 3, 4)
Chapter 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
Sections:
5-301 Electrical equipment defined.
5-302 National Electrical Code adopted.
5-303 Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc. standards.
5-304 Electrical inspector; office created.
5-305 Inspector may make special rulings.
5-306 Wiring in city.
5-307 Permit required for electrical installation; exceptions; fee.
5-308 Public utilities compliance.
5-309 Electrical inspector to inspect all electrical installations.
5-310 Installation not to be concealed until approved.
5-311 Work “roughed in.”
5-312 Inspection of new work “roughed in.”
5-313 Premises not to be connected until installation is approved.
5-314 Annual inspection in fire zone--Corrections.
5-315 Inspector may enter buildings--Decisions final.
5-316 Responsibility for damages.
5-317 Electricians--Registration required.
5-318 Bond for electrical contractors.
5-319 Registration or bond--When not required.
5-320 Revocation of registration.
5-321 Electrical board created.
5-301 Electrical equipment defined.
A. The term “electrical equipment” as used in this chapter refers to electrical conductors, metallic raceways,
fittings, devices, fixtures, appliances, apparatus, and any electrical material of any nature, kind or description, to
be installed within or on any building or structure for transmitting electrical current for electric light, heat or
power.
B. The term “electrical wiring” means the installation of electrical equipment, lighting fixtures or installing
electrical apparatus of any kind or nature or description to be connected to light, heat or power service. (Prior
Code, Chapter 11, in part)
5-302 National Electrical Code adopted.
All installations of electrical equipment shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, with the
statutes of the state and any orders, rules, and regulations issued by authority thereof, and with approved electrical
standards for safety to person and property. Where no specific standards are prescribed by this code or by the
statutes of the state or by any orders, rules, or regulations issued by the authority thereof, conformity with the
regulations set forth in the 2005 Edition of the National Electrical Code as approved by the National Fire Protection
Association, Inc., shall be required. (Prior Code, Chapter 11, in part: Ord. 10-040201 § 1; Ord. 75-030606 §
1)
State Law Reference: State electrical licensing and regulations, 59 O.S. Sections 1680 to 1696.
5-303 Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc. standards.
All electrical equipment installed or used shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the statutes
of the state and any orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof, and with approved electrical
standards for safety to persons or to property. Unless by this chapter, by a statute of the state or any orders, rules,
or regulations issued by authority thereof, a specific type or class of electrical equipment is disapproved for installation
and use, conformity with the standards of Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc., shall be prima facie evidence
of conformity with approved standards for safety to persons or to property. (Prior Code, Chapter 11, in
part)
5-304 Electrical inspector; office created.
There shall be an electrical inspector who may be the building official appointed in this code or other person
appointed by the mayor with approval of the council. The electrical inspector shall be a person who has had
practical experience in inside electrical construction and who is familiar with the National Electrical Code and
the application of the “Code” rulings. (Prior Code, Chapter 11, in part)
5-305 Inspector may make special rulings.
The electrical inspector with the approval of the electrical board created in this chapter, shall have the authority
to make special rulings, when circumstances warrant, for the safeguarding of life and property and the improvement
of electrical installations, but in all cases persons engaged in the installing of electrical equipment and
holding an electrical license must be notified by letter of these decisions. (Prior Code, Chapter 11, in part)
5-306 Wiring in city.
All commercial wiring hereafter done in the city limits must be installed in rigid galvanized conduit, thin wall
EMT or metal molding. Armored cable or Greenfield is to be used only when in the judgment of the electrical
inspector. It is not practicable to install rigid conduit or any commercial or industrial building PVC plastic under
concrete. (Prior Code, Chapter 11, in part)
5-307 Permit required for electrical installation; exceptions; fee.
A. It is unlawful for any person to install any electrical wiring, fixtures, equipment or apparatus in or on any
building or structure in the corporate limits of this city or make extensions to any existing electrical installations
without first securing a permit from the electrical inspector.
B. Applications for electrical permits shall be made to the electrical inspector; and the applicant shall provide
such plans, specifications and other data as may be necessary to determine whether the permit shall be issued.
C. It is the duty of the city clerk to issue all permits upon approval of the electrical inspector. The electrical
inspector shall make inspection of all work for which permit has been issued within forty-eight (48) hours after
having been notified that work is ready for inspection (Sundays and holidays not included).
D. No permit shall be issued until the applicant shall have paid a permit fee in such amount as set by the
city council, by motion or resolution. (Prior Code, Article B)
5-308 Public utilities compliance.
It is unlawful for any public service corporation, individual, light, heat or power company to connect, or cause
to be connected any service, or building for the supply of electrical current for light, heat or power, until they
have been notified by the electrical inspector that electric work has been inspected and approved and is ready for
electric service. (Prior Code, Chapter 11, in part)
5-309 Electrical inspector to inspect all electrical installations.
The electrical inspector shall have the power to inspect all electrical equipment installed within the city. (Prior
Code, Chapter 11, in part)
5-310 Installation not to be concealed until approved.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or individual to conceal or cause to be concealed,
any electrical equipment, used for electric light, heat or power, until it is known by the person that the installation
has been approved by the electrical inspector; and a tag in the switch cabinet, or attached to the service
equipment properly signed and dated, so stating, will be sufficient notice. (Prior Code, Chapter 11, in part)
5-311 Work “roughed in.”
New or old work “roughed in” shall include all electrical equipment to make the installation complete, be free
from unintentional grounds, with joints properly made up, ready for attachment of fixtures, drop lights and appliances.
(Prior Code, Chapter 11, in part)
5-312 Inspection of new work “roughed in.”
After making inspection of new work “roughed in,” the electrical inspector shall leave a tag or notice in the
switch cabinet or attached to the service equipment, plainly indicating whether the work has been approved and
is ready to conceal, or that the installation is not standard and must not be covered until approved by the electrical
inspector. (Prior Code, Chapter 11, in part)
5-313 Premises not to be connected until installation is approved.
It is unlawful for any public service corporation, individual, light, heat or power company to connect, or cause
to be connected any service or building, for the supply of electric current for light, heat or power, until they have
been notified by the electrical inspector that electric work has been inspected and approved and is ready for electric
service. (Prior Code, Chapter 11, in part)
5-314 Annual inspection in fire zone--Corrections.
The electrical inspector may make an annual inspection of all electrical equipment in the fire zone of the city.
When any electrical installations are found to be in an unsafe or hazardous condition, the electrical inspector
shall notify the person, firm or corporation where such electrical conditions exist to correct the same and place in
a safe condition. Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to make correction of hazardous or unsafe
electrical installations, after having been notified by the electrical inspector, within a designated time to be determined
by the electrical inspector, shall be fined according to the provisions of this chapter. Each day after the
expiration of the time designated to make corrections shall constitute a separate offense. When hazardous or unsafe
electrical conditions exist and any person, firm or corporation fails to make corrections after having been
notified, the electrical inspector shall have the authority to discontinue the electrical service. (Prior Code, Chapter
11, in part)
5-315 Inspector may enter buildings--Decisions final.
The electrical inspector, while in the discharge of his official duty, shall have the authority to enter any building
or premises at any reasonable hour, for the purpose of making any electrical inspection, reinspection, or test
of the electrical equipment contained therein or its installation. Any person interfering with the electrical inspector
shall be fined as provided for in this chapter. The electrical inspector shall be the judge of what constitutes
the safe installation of electrical conductors and his decision shall be final and binding. (Prior Code, Chapter 11,
in part)
5-316 Responsibility for damages.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or liability of any party owning,
operating, controlling, or installing any electrical equipment for damages to persons or to property caused by
any defect therein, nor shall the city or any officer or employee of the city, be held as assuming such liability by
reason of the inspection or reinspection as herein provided or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any
equipment authorized herein. (Prior Code, Chapter 11, in part)
5-317 Electricians--Registration required.
A. All persons, firms, partnerships, corporations, or individuals engaging in or hereafter engaging in the
business of installing electrical fixtures, wiring or apparatus in or on any building within the corporate limits of
the city shall first procure from the city clerk a registration certificate, and upon the payment of the required fee
such certificate shall enTitle the holder to install electrical conductors, fixtures or appliances in or on any buildings
within the corporate limits of the city for a period of one year or until June 30th following the date when the
license is issued, after all other provisions have been complied with.
1. It is unlawful to perform work as an electrical contractor, journeyman and/or an apprentice unless a
proper license has been issued by the city of Bristow.
2. Commencing July 1, 1998, the following license fees shall be assessed:
First Year Electrical
Contractor license $125.00
Journeyman license 30.00
Apprentice license 10.00
Annual Electrical Renewal
Contractor renewal $50.00
Journeyman renewal 15.00
Apprentice renewal 10.00
3. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate a provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
punished as provided in Section 1-108 of the Code of Ordinances of the city of Bristow. Each day that a violation
occurs shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. There must be a registered electrician on any and all jobs at all times.
C. Any electrical contractor or journeyman electrician registered hereunder shall be entitled to be reregistered
on each succeeding year hereafter upon payment of this fee and provision of the bond herein provided.
(Prior Code, Chapter 11, in part; Ord. 6-15-98B §§ 1-3)
State Law Reference: State licensing and exams, city may require registration, 59 O.S. Sections 1680 to 1696.
5-318 Bond for electrical contractors.
Repealed by Ordinance Number 6-15-98B.
5-319 Registration or bond--When not required.
For the installing of bell, telephone, or signal systems not using over twelve (12) volts, no registration or bond
will be required but the installation of same must comply with all other requirements of the ordinances of the
city. (Prior Code, Chapter 11, in part)
5-320 Revocation of registration.
After adequate opportunity for a hearing, the council may revoke the registration of an electrical contractor,
an apprentice electrician, or a journeyman electrician for any of the following causes:
1. Serious or repeated violations of the laws, ordinances or other regulations relating to electrical installations;
2. Grossly unethical conduct in connection with the electrical trade or business;
3. Poor workmanship or service; or
4. Installing inferior or substandard materials, fixtures or equipment.
A request that the registration be revoked may be presented to the council by the electrical inspector or by any
aggrieved person. (Prior Code, Chapter 11, in part)
5-321 Electrical board created.
An electrical board is hereby created and established, which board shall consist of three (3) members to be
appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council of the city. Two (2) of the members of the board shall
be licensed electrical contractors. It is the duty of this electrical board to:
1. To work with the electrical inspector; and
2. To hold meetings and pass on and settle any disputes that may arise pertaining to the provisions of this
chapter.
The members of the electrical board shall each serve for a term of two (2) years, or at the pleasure of the mayor
and city council. The electrical inspector shall be an ex officio member of the board but without the privilege of
having a vote on the decisions made by the board. (Prior Code, Chapter 11, in part)
Chapter 4
GAS PIPING
Sections:
5-401 Rules adopted.
5-402 Inspection; fee.
5-401 Rules adopted.
The Standard Gas Code, latest edition thereof, issued by the Southern Building Code Congress International is
hereby adopted and incorporated in this code by reference. The code shall be in full force and effect in the city
and shall govern the installation of gas piping and gas appliances in buildings in the city. Any violation of this
pamphlet shall be deemed a violation of the ordinances of the city.
5-402 Inspection; fee.
All installations of gas piping within the city, upon completion, shall be inspected by the plumbing inspector
or by the gas inspector if a gas inspector is appointed, and shall not be used by the occupants until approved by
the inspector as complying with applicable city ordinances and codes. The fee for such inspection shall be as set
by the city council by motion or resolution.
Chapter 5
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS
Sections:
5-501 Persons must comply with state law, code adopted.
5-502 Inspection; fee.
5-503 Definitions.
5-504 Tank trucks, trailers prohibited.
5-505 State inspection, approval.
5-506 Trucks to comply with state rules.
5-507 Parking prohibited.
5-508 Notice to city if truck breaks down.
5-509 Repairs, fire chief approval.
5-510 LPG prohibited in residential area where natural gas is available.
5-511 State certificate required for installation.
5-512 Penalty.
5-501 Persons must comply with state law, code adopted.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to manufacture, fabricate, assemble, install, or repair any
system, container, apparatus, or appliance to be used for the transportation, storage, dispensing, or utilization of
liquefied petroleum gas, or to transport, handle, or store such gas, unless such person has complied with and
complies with all provisions of the law and ordinances relating thereto, and has any license or permit which may
be required by state law. Pamphlet Number 58 of the National Fire Protection Association, entitled Liquefied
Petroleum Gases, Storage and Handling, also adopted by the Liquefied Petroleum Gas Board, shall have full
force and effect within this city; and any violation of these rules and regulations shall be deemed a violation of
the ordinances of the city and shall be punished accordingly.
State Law Reference: State rules, liquefied petroleum gas, 52 O.S. Sections 420.1 et seq.
5-502 Inspection; fee.
All liquefied petroleum installations within the city, upon completion, shall be inspected by the plumbing inspector,
or by the gas inspector if a gas inspector is appointed, and shall not be used by the occupants until approved
by the inspector as complying with this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted thereby. The fee for
such inspection shall be as set by the city council by motion or resolution.
5-503 Definitions.
The terms “liquefied petroleum gases, LPG, or LP gas” when used in this chapter shall mean and include any
material which is composed predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons or mixtures of the same: propane,
propylene, butanes, (normal butane and isobutane), and butylenes. (Prior Code, Chapter 11)
5-504 Tank trucks, trailers prohibited.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to operate any tank, tank truck, or tank trailer
or any other container containing LPG on any street or highway within the city or to install, possess and maintain
any system for the use of liquefied petroleum gas or to store or to possess any LPG or container thereof in violation
of this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 11)
5-505 State inspection, approval.
No tank, truck or trailer used for or containing LPG shall be driven through the city or make any delivery
within the city unless the same shall be properly labeled with the name of the contents and inspected and approved
by the Oklahoma Liquefied Petroleum Gas Administrator. (Prior Code, Chapter 11)
5-506 Trucks to comply with state rules.
All tanks, trucks and trailers containing or used for LPG and all liquefied petroleum gas systems used or operated
within this city or passing through this city shall be at all times subject to the laws of the state applicable
thereto, and the rules and regulations of the Oklahoma Liquefied Petroleum Gas Administrator now, or hereafter
in force and effect. A violation of any such laws, rules or regulations, shall be deemed a violation of this code.
All such tanks, trucks, trailers and systems shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable times by the fire chief
of this city, who, in the event of discovery of a violation of any such laws, rules, regulations or the provisions of
this code which he deems to constitute a hazard to life or property, shall have the power to immediately order the
removal or abatement of such hazard and it shall thereupon be the duty of the person having control thereof to
comply with such order. Such person shall have the right to appeal the order of the fire chief to the city council
but this shall not excuse his compliance with the order of the fire chief pending a hearing by the city council.
(Prior Code, Chapter 11)
5-507 Parking prohibited.
No such tank, truck or trailer, whether loaded or empty shall be at any time, parked within the city except on
making deliveries of LPG to any user thereof, in which event the same may be stopped long enough to make
such delivery. (Prior Code, Chapter 11)
5-508 Notice to city if truck breaks down.
In the event of a breakdown or other unavoidable stop of any tank, truck, or tank trailer used for transporting
LPG within the city, the driver of the tank, truck or trailer shall give immediate notice to the fire department of
the city as to the location of the truck or trailer. The same shall not remain parked longer than is necessary for its
removal from the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 11)
5-509 Repairs, fire chief approval.
In the event it becomes necessary to make any mechanical repairs to any such truck, tank, or trailer within the
city, before such mechanical repairs shall be made, it is the duty of the person having control thereof to notify
the fire chief who shall inspect the same. If he should find that the same is in a safe condition for the contemplated
repairs, he shall issue a permit therefor which shall expire five (5) days after its issuance. If the fire chief
shall find upon such inspection that the same is not in a safe condition for the contemplated repairs, no such repairs
shall be made until the tank, truck or trailer shall be made safe as required by the fire chief and he may require
that the same be removed from the city until his requirements are complied with. (Prior Code, Chapter 11)
5-510 LPG prohibited in residential area where natural gas is available.
No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter set up or establish within the city any tanks or receptacles of
any nature, temporary or permanent, for the storage, handling, transfer or sale of any LP gas within the main
street business area nor within any residential area for home use where natural gas is available. (Prior Code,
Chapter 11)
5-511 State certificate required for installation.
Any person, firm or corporation hereafter installing any LP gas system for domestic, commercial or other use
within the city shall, prior to its use, furnish the city clerk with a certificate of the Oklahoma State Liquefied Petroleum
Gas Administrator showing that such installation or system has been duly inspected and found satisfactory
to the administrator. (Prior Code, Chapter 11)
5-512 Penalty.
The doing of any act prohibited by this chapter or the failure to do any act required herein, shall be an offense
and upon conviction thereof, the offender shall be punished by a fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
(Prior Code, Chapter 11)
Chapter 6
MOVING HOUSES AND BUILDINGS
Sections:
5-601 Prohibition on moving buildings, exceptions.
5-602 Permit, procedure and fee.
5-603 Temporary parking of buildings, structures in transit, permit.
5-604 Caution signs.
5-605 Protection of trees and overhead structures.
5-606 Guards against danger.
5-607 Limit to size of building.
5-608 Time limit.
5-609 Notice to fire department.
5-610 Liability.
5-601 Prohibition on moving buildings, exceptions.
A. The moving of houses, buildings or similar structures from one location to another within the city or
from a location outside of the city to a location within the city, except as provided by this chapter, is hereby prohibited.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the moving of houses, buildings or similar structures
through the city, or from a location within the city to a location outside the city.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to portable storage buildings not larger than two hundred
(200) square feet of floor area, moved onto a location, which are not to be used for human occupancy, and which
are intended for and actually used for storage of ordinary residential equipment and paraphernalia. However, to
be exempt from this chapter, at the time of moving such a portable storage building there must exist on the location
an occupied residential structure. (Ord. No. 5586A, 5/5/86)
5-602 Permit, procedure and fee.
A. No house, building or other structure shall be moved without prior approval by the city council, in accordance
with the following procedures.
B. The building inspector for the city or other authorized representative of the city shall first inspect such
house, building or similar structure at its existing location and shall also inspect the proposed location onto
which the property is to be moved. Prior to such inspection the owner thereof or applicant shall agree in writing
to pay an inspection fee to the city at the rate of:
1. Fifty dollars ($50.00) per hour or any part thereof; and
2. Twelve cents ($.12) per mile.
Where any part of such inspection must occur outside of the incorporated limits of the city, the owner or applicant
shall deposit the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus mileage with the city clerk to be applied upon
such inspection fee.
C. In the event such inspection, in the opinion of the inspector, reveals that such house, building or similar
structure will or can comply with all pertinent city building codes and zoning requirements at its proposed location,
and will conform generally to other structures in the immediate neighborhood, so as not to constitute a detriment
to surrounding property, the owner or applicant shall be allowed to request that the city council consider
such proposed move. At least ten (10) days notice by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city
shall be given prior to council hearing on the permit, describing the proposed location, the present location of
such structure, and the date of consideration by the city council at a public hearing. In addition, all property
owners of record within a radius of three hundred (300) feet from the proposed location, as shown by the records
in the office of the county treasurer of the county, shall be notified of the date of the public hearing, the proposed
location, and the present location of such structure, by certified mail, postage prepaid, mailed to the last known
address of such property owner at least ten (10) days in advance of such meeting. The written findings of the
inspector shall be forwarded to the council for their use at such hearing.
D. In the event of approval by the council for such proposed move, the owner or applicant shall provide the
city with a Five Thousand Dollar ($5,000.00) cash or surety bond, guaranteeing that such structure will conform,
with all city building and zoning codes within a period of one hundred twenty days (120) from its location on the
new site, and a permit to move will not be allowed until such bond is posted with the city clerk.
E. The permit for moving the structure shall be issued by the city clerk only after approval of the city council
and payment of the fee of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for issuance of the permit. (Ord. No. 5586A, 5/5/86)
5-603 Temporary parking of buildings, structures in transit, permit.
A. Houses, buildings and similar structures in transit may be parked upon a lot within a zone designated as
C-4, 1-1, 1-2, or 1-3 under the zoning ordinance of the city for the purpose of storage in transit, for a period not
to exceed thirty (30) days from the date of the issuance of the permit provided hereinafter.
B. A special permit shall be obtained from the building inspector of the city for the storage of buildings or
structures, upon payment of a fee of Five Dollars ($5.00), such fee to be in addition to any other fees required
hereunder. (Ord. No. 5586A, 5/5/86)
5-604 Caution signs.
It is the duty of the permittee to place red lights plainly visible for not less than two hundred (200) feet on
each and every side of the building or structure which is being moved at the close of day and to keep same burning
throughout the entire night and until one hour after sunrise on the morning following. Such lights shall be so
placed and maintained that and bond required hereunder. And the view of same will not be in any sense obstructed.
If necessary, as many additional lights as may be necessary shall be placed at such other points on the
building or structure as will enable any person of reasonable and ordinary prudence to take notice of the obstruction.
(Prior Code, Article D, as amended)
5-605 Protection of trees and overhead structures.
The person who may have a permit to move a building or structure over any street within the city shall by virtue
of such permit and license derive no right to injure or impair the condition or usefulness of any shade tree,
electric light, telephone or telegraph poles or lines. No tree of any kind shall be cut, bruised, scarred under any
circumstances, without the expressed permission in writing of the owner of the same and with the permission of
the street commissioner. In all cases where necessary to remove any electric light, telephone or telegraph construction,
it shall be the duty of the person moving such building or structure to give not less than twenty-four
(24) hours notice to the public utility company or person owning or operating the same, which notice shall state
the place, the construction which it is necessary to be removed, or temporarily changed or altered and the day on
which it is desired to have such clearance made as well as the amount of time it will be necessary to keep such
space clear. It is the duty of the person moving the building or structure to deposit an amount in money estimated
necessary to cover the cost of the changing or moving of public utility overhead construction and replacing the
same in its former condition, not exceeding the sum of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) with the city clerk. Upon
such deposit being made with the city clerk and such notice being delivered to the owner or operator of the telephone
or telegraph and line construction, it is the duty of the person owning or operating the overhead construction
to make such temporary changes as are reasonably necessary to comply with the representations set forth in
the notice made and delivered to him. (Prior Code, Article D, as amended)
5-606 Guards against danger.
It is the duty of the house mover, to station sufficient persons on guard and to establish such notices by placards
or boards in the immediate vicinity of the moving activities as will be necessary to apprise any reasonable
person of any potential danger that might be incurred by coming closer to the moving operations or buildings
being moved or the instruments or agencies used in the moving of the same. (Prior Code, Article D, as amended)
5-607 Limit to size of building.
No permit shall be issued to move any building which in the judgment of the building inspector or street department
might by any chance result in an injury to the pavements, bridges, conduits or other street improvements
within the city. (Prior Code, Article D, as amended)
5-608 Time limit.
At the time of application for a permit it is the duty of the mover of any building or structure to estimate the
reasonable time required for the moving of the building from its present location to its proposed location and
shall state in his application for permit what he deems to be such reasonable time. (Prior Code, Article D, as
amended)
5-609 Notice to fire department.
Any person desiring to move any building shall show his permit to the chief of the fire department. If for any
reason any delay is occasioned by any unforeseen contingency, it is his duty to inform the fire chief of such
facts, to the end that the fire chief may keep accurate and recent information on the true conditions of the streets
and alleys for fire prevention purposes. (Prior Code, Article D, as amended)
5-610 Liability.
No provision or condition of this chapter shall be construed so as to limit the liability civilly of any person
moving any house on or over the city streets, avenues and alleys from any and all damages which may result as
the proximate cause of such acts to any person or his property or to the city. (Prior Code, Article D, as amended)
Chapter 7
FAIR HOUSING
Sections:
5-701 Purposes and construction.
5-702 Housing discrimination acts prohibited.
5-703 Exemptions.
5-704 Fair housing board created.
5-705 Duties of fair housing board.
5-706 Procedure for complaints.
5-707 Notices.
5-708 Penalty.
5-701 Purposes and construction.
The general purposes of this chapter are:
1. To secure for all people equal access to housing in all neighborhoods; and
2. To preserve the public safety, health and welfare.
5-702 Housing discrimination acts prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, real estate broker, real estate salesperson, or corporation:
1. To refuse to sell, lease, rent, assign or otherwise transfer the title or other interest in any housing, or real
property upon which residential housing is to be constructed to any person, or to discriminate in the terms or
conditions of the sale, rental or leasing of any residential housing unit, because of race, sex, religion or national
origin;
2. To refuse to negotiate with any person for the sale, rental, or leasing of any residential property, or to
represent that such property is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available,
because of such person’s race, sex, religion or national origin;
3. To solicit or induce, or attempt to solicit or induce, any person owning any interest in any residential
housing to sell, rent or lease, or not to sell, rent or lease such housing to any person on the ground of loss of
value due to the present or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of another race, sex,
religion, or national origin, either by direct solicitation or inducement or by the purchase of other property in the
neighborhood for the purpose of such inducement, or to distribute, or cause to be distributed material or making
statements designed to induce a residential property owner to sell or lease his property due to such change in
neighborhood; or
4. To file a complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, with knowledge that such complaint is false in
any material respect, or to file such complaint for the sole purpose of harassment.
5-703 Exemptions.
A. Nothing herein shall apply to any religious organization, association, society or private club; a religious
nonprofit organization, operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association,
or society from limiting the sale or rental of dwelling units owned and operated for other than a commercial
purpose.
B. Nothing herein shall apply to:
1. Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that such private individual owner does
not own more than three (3) such single family houses and was not the most recent resident of such house prior
to such sale with the exception granted to one such sale within a twenty-four (24) month period; provided further
that such owner does not own or retain in his behalf title to a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of
more than three (3) such single family houses at any one time; provided further that such sale or rental of such
single family house shall be excepted if such house is sold or rented without the use in any manner of a sale or
rental facilities or employee thereof; or
2. Any dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4)
families living independent of each other and the owner actually occupies one such living quarter as his residence.
5-704 Fair housing board created.
There is hereby created a Fair Housing Board of the city, hereinafter referred to as “board,” which shall be the
mayor and city council.
5-705 Duties of fair housing board.
It is the duty of the Fair Housing Board to:
1. Initiate, receive, and investigate complaints, charging unlawful housing practices;
2. Seek conciliation of such complaints, hold hearings, make findings of fact, and publish its findings of
fact; and
3. Adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary within the limits of this chapter, and carry out the
purposes and provisions of this chapter.
5-706 Procedure for complaints.
A. Any person aggrieved by discriminatory practice prohibited by this chapter may file with the fair housing
board a complaint in writing, under oath. The complaint shall be signed by the person claiming to be aggrieved,
and shall state the name and address of the person alleged to have violated the provisions of this chapter,
and shall further set forth the particulars of the violation, and may include such other information as may be
required by the board. Complaints filed under this section must be filed within thirty (30) days after the alleged
violation, and failure to file within the time, shall be considered a waiver of the application of this chapter. The
board may issue a complaint on its own initiative, at any time it is within the knowledge of the board that a person
has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The board shall investigate each complaint filed with the board, and shall attempt an adjustment of the
complaint by means of conference and conciliation. Sixty (60) days shall be allowed for the purpose of investigation,
conference and conciliation. Upon determination that a complaint is not well founded, the board shall
dismiss the complaint and notify the complainant and respondent in writing of the dismissal. If the board takes
no action within ninety (90) days of the filing of the complaint, it shall be considered as dismissed.
C. If conference or conciliation does not result in compliance with this chapter, the board shall cause to be
issued and served in the name of the city a written notice, together with a copy of the complaint, requiring the
person named in the complaint, hereinafter referred to as respondent, to answer charges of the complaint at a
hearing before the board at a time and place to be specified in the notice.
D. At the hearing, provided for in Subsection C of this section, the complaint shall be heard by the board.
At the hearing, the complainant or person aggrieved may appear in person or by counsel, and the respondent may
file a written answer to the complaint and may appear in person or by legal counsel. The board, when conducting
any hearing pursuant to this section, may permit amendments to any complaint or answer, and the testimony
taken at the hearing shall be under oath, and shall be transcribed at the request of either party, or at the direction
of the board. If the board finds at the hearing that the respondent has engaged in any discriminatory practice or
practices prohibited by this chapter, it shall state its findings of fact, and shall so certify the matter to the city
attorney for appropriate action. No prosecution shall be brought under this chapter except upon such certification.
If the board, upon hearing, finds that respondent has not engaged in any discriminatory practice, it shall
state its findings of fact and shall issue and file an order dismissing the complaint. The board shall establish rules
and regulations to govern and expedite and effectuate the foregoing procedure, and shall maintain the files provided
for herein.
5-707 Notices.
Any and all notices required under the provisions of this chapter to be served upon any person, may be served
personally on such person, or by mailing a copy thereof by certified or registered mail, with return receipt requested,
to the most current business or residence address of such person.
5-708 Penalty.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person found
guilty of violating any provisions shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and is subject, upon conviction, to a fine
as provided in Section 1-108 of this code, including costs.
Chapter 8
HOUSING CODE
Sections:
Article A. Housing Code
5-801 Adoption of housing code.
Article B. Equal Access to Housing
5-802 Intent.
5-803 Acts prohibited.
5-804 Acts exempted.
5-805 Complaint procedure.
Article A. Housing Code
5-801 Adoption of housing code.
There is hereby adopted by reference the Standard One and Two Family Dwelling Code, and the Standard
Housing Code, the latest editions thereof, issued by the Southern Building Code Congress International, as
dwelling and housing codes, for the city. The One and Two Family Dwelling Code and the Housing Code shall
be fully applicable and enforceable in governing housing in the city, save and except such portions as are hereinafter
deleted, modified or amended, as fully as if set out at length herein. If any provision of the ordinances of
the city are in conflict with the provisions of these codes, except as provided in this chapter, the provisions of the
codes shall prevail.
Article B. Equal Access to Housing
5-802 Intent.
The general intention of the city council of the city of Bristow in providing for the passage of this article is as
follows:
A. To secure for all residents of Bristow, Oklahoma, equal access to housing in all neighborhoods and areas
of the city;
B. To preserve the public welfare, to provide for the preservation of public peace, health and safety. (Ord.
5-18-98B § 1(1))
5-803 Acts prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to commit any of the following acts:
A. To refuse to sell, lease, rent, assign or otherwise transfer the title or other interest in any housing, or real
property upon which residential housing is to be constructed, to any person, or to discriminate in the terms or
conditions of the sale, rental or leasing of any residential housing unit, because of race, color, religion, or national
origin, familial status, or disabilities;
B. To refuse to negotiate with any person for the sale, rental, or leasing of any residential property, or to
represent that such property is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when, in fact, it is so available,
because of such person’s race, color, religion, or national origin, familial status or disabilities;
C. To solicit or induce, or attempt to solicit or induce, any person owning any interest in residential housing
to sell, rent or lease, or not to sell, rent or lease such housing to any person on the grounds of loss of value due to
the present or prospective entry in the neighborhood of a person or persons of another race, color, religion, or
national origin, familial status or disabilities either by direct solicitation or inducement or by the purchase of
other property in the neighborhood for the purpose of such inducement, to distribute, or cause to be distributed,
material or make statements designed to induce a residential property owner to sell or lease his property due to
such change in neighborhood;
D. To file a complaint alleging violation of Sections 5-802 through 5-805, with knowledge that such complaint
is false in any material respect, or to file such complaint for the sole purpose of harassment. (Ord. 5-18-
98B § 1(2))
5-804 Acts exempted.
Nothing contained in this Article B shall apply to the following:
A. To prohibit persons from giving a preference to prospective buyers or tenants for reasons other than
race, color, religion, national origin, familial status or disability;
B. To the sale of a dwelling which is, or was at the time when first offered for sale, the principal residence
of its owner;
C. To the rental of rooms in an owner-occupied residence or in a dwelling used exclusively as a rooming
house;
D. To the rental or leasing of a housing unit in a building containing less than four (4) housing units;
E. To the rental or leasing of a dwelling or housing units owned by a religious or fraternal organization, or
private club used and occupied for such organizational purposes. (Ord. 5-18-98B § 1(3))
5-805 Complaint procedure.
A. Any person aggrieved by any discriminatory practice as prohibited by Sections 5-802 through 5-804,
may file with the mayor a complaint in writing which shall be filed under oath. Such complaint shall be signed
by the person claiming to be aggrieved, and shall state the name and address of the person alleged to have violated
the provisions of this article, and shall further set forth the particulars of such violation, and may include
such other information as may be required by the mayor. Complaints filed under this section must be filed within
thirty (30) days after the alleged violation, and failure to file within such time period shall be considered a
waiver of the application of this section. The city may issue a complaint on its own initiative, at any time that it
comes within the knowledge of the city that a person has violated any of the provisions of Sections 5-802
through 5-804.
B. The mayor shall forward the filed complaint to the State Human Rights Commission for investigation
and resolution. The State Human Rights Commission has one hundred (100) days to complete its investigation.
If the State Human Rights Commission cannot complete its investigation in that time period, it must notify the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) in writing explaining the cause of the delay.
C. The State Human Rights Commission will attempt to conciliate the complaint. Under state law, the State
Human Rights Commission must prosecute the alleged violator if the facts warrant it. If the State Human Rights
Commission finds the complaint is unjustified, and has followed the housing discrimination complaint guidelines
issued by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, the findings will be honored by HUD. The
complainant may, however, pursue redress through district court within two (2) years of the alleged violation or
from two (2) years of the date notice is given by the State Human Rights Commission that the matter will not be
pursued. (Ord. 5-18-98B § 1(4))
Chapter 9
MECHANICAL CODE
Sections:
5-901 Adoption of International Mechanical Code.
5-902 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
5-903 Additions, insertions and changes.
5-904 License required.
5-905 License fees.
5-906 Violation--Penalty.
5-901 Adoption of International Mechanical Code.
That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Bristow,
being marked and designated as the International Mechanical Code, 2003 Edition, including Appendix
Chapter A as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of
the city of Bristow, in the state of Oklahoma; regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
mechanical systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said Mechanical Code on file in
the office of the city of Bristow are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 5-902 of this code.
(Ord. No. 2-21-89: Ord. 33-010504 §§ 1 (part), 2)
5-902 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
All other ordinances in conflict with the 2003 Edition of the International Mechanical Code except as otherwise
provided in this chapter are hereby repealed. (Ord. No. 2-21-89: Ord. 33-010504 §§ 1 (part), 3)
5-903 Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections of the 2003 Edition of the International Mechanical Code are hereby revised as follows:
1. Section 101.1 - insert City of Bristow in place of the phrase [name of jurisdiction].
2. All of the provisions of Section 103 are deleted and replaced with the following: The City Inspector,
sometimes referred to as the Bristow Building Inspector, is hereby designated as the “Code Official” for the purposes
of this Code.
3. Section 106.5.2 insert the following schedule of fees:
RESIDENCE
Refrigeration Units $ 20.00
Heating Appliance 20.00
Rough-in-Duct 20.00
Range 5.00
Range Hood 5.00
Clothes Dryer 5.00
Chimneys 20.00
Vents 20.00
Gas Piping 20.00
COMMERCIAL
Heating Appliance $ 30.00
Refrigeration Units 30.00
Rough-in-Duct 10.00
Incinerator 10.00
Range 10.00
Range Hood 10.00
4. Section 1068.4 shall provide as follows:
Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved construction documents
or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall upon
conviction, be punished as provided in Part 1, Chapter 1, Section 1-108 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Bristow. Each day that a violation occurs after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
5. Section 109.21: Section 109.21 is deleted and replaced with the following:
The Board of Appeals shall consist of five individuals.
(Ord. No. 2-21-89: Ord. 33-010504 §§ 1 (part), 4)
5-904 License required.
It is unlawful to perform work as an mechanical contractor, journeyman and/or an apprentice unless a proper
license has been issued by the city of Bristow. (Ord. 6-30-98D § 1)
5-905 License fees.
Commencing July 1, 1998, the following license fees shall be assessed:
First Year Mechanical
Contractor license $125.00
Journeyman license 30.00
Apprentice license 10.00
Annual Mechanical License Renewal Center
Contractor renewal $50.00
Journeyman renewal 15.00
Apprentice renewal 10.00
(Ord. 6-30-98B § 1)
5-906 Violation--Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate a provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished
as provided in Section 1-108 of the Code of Ordinances of the city of Bristow. Each day that a violation
occurs shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 6-30-98C § 1)

Chapter 10
WATER WELL PERMITS
Sections:
5-1001 Water wells to be inspected by water superintendent--Permits.
5-1002 Application for permit--Fee--Permit issued.
5-1003 Use of water from private wells.
5-1004 Drilling, deepening, and use of well.
5-1005 Compliance with laws ordinances, and regulations; revocation of permit.
5-1006 Penalty.
5-1001 Water wells to be inspected by water superintendent--Permits.
No water well shall be used within the city unless the well has been inspected and approved by the water superintendent
and a permit issued therefor by the city clerk. (Prior Code, Article F)
5-1002 Application for permit--Fee--Permit issued.
Each owner of property in the city having a water well thereon shall apply to the city clerk for a permit for the
use of the well, and in the application shall state the location, depth, and capacity of the well, the nature of the
use of the water obtained therefrom, and the sand or sands from which it produces. Each person making such
application shall pay to the city clerk a permit fee in such amount as may be set by the council, by motion or
resolution. After receipt of the application and fee in the office of the city clerk, the water superintendent shall
inspect the well and the connections thereto, and shall approve the well if it complies with the ordinances of the
city, the laws of the state and the regulations of the State Health Department. Upon approval by the water superintendent,
or other appropriate city official, the city clerk shall issue a permit for the use of the well. (Prior Code,
Article F)
5-1003 Use of water from private wells.
Water from privately owned wells within the city shall be used only for domestic purposes on the premises
where the well is located, and there shall be no interconnection of any kind between any such well and the water
supply of the city or any connection thereto or extension thereof. In the case of wells in use prior to the effective
date of this chapter, use of the water therefrom for other than domestic purposes may be continued to the same
extent and for the same purposes, but such uses shall not be extended or increased. (Prior Code, Article F)
5-1004 Drilling, deepening, and use of well.
A. No privately owned water well within the city shall hereafter be drilled to, nor shall any existing well
hereafter be deepened to, nor shall any privately owned well be completed at, such depth as will interfere with or
allow water to be taken and produced from the water producing sands from which the city obtains its municipal
water supply, except in those instances and in those areas where water is not available to the prospective user
from the city’s regular water system.
B. In the event a well is completed in the sands comprising the city’s water supply in pursuance of the authorization
herein granted, by any citizen of the city, the well and its operation shall be subject to inspection and
regulation in all respects by the officials and administrative agents of the city to prevent pollution of the water
sands and to prevent damage to the sands by such operation.
C. No water from a privately owned well within or without the city limits shall be taken from the sands
from which the city obtains its water supply for industrial or commercial purposes unless the prospective user
thereof shall have first received the permission of the city council.
D. The city, acting through its city council, shall at all times have power and authority to issue cease and
desist orders to all users of water from such water sands during those periods of drought or low water periods,
and at any other time when in the discretion of the council, the cease and desist orders are necessary to the welfare
of the city and its citizens.
E. At such time as water is available to the persons from the city’s regular water system, or at such time as
the city can furnish water by other means to the persons who have completed a well in the water sands, the persons
owning such wells shall immediately and forthwith cease using water from the water sands, and shall plug
and abandon any such wells having been completed in the water sands of the city. (Prior Code, Article F)
5-1005 Compliance with laws, ordinances, and regulations; revocation of permit.
The drilling and use of water wells within the city shall comply in all respects with city ordinances, the laws
of the state, and the regulations of the state health department in respect to the drilling, equipping, and use of
such wells. The water superintendent shall have the right to inspect any such well at any time and to revoke the
permit for the use thereof if any violation of any such ordinance, law, or regulation is found to exist. (Prior Code,
Article F)
5-1006 Penalty.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter, or who wilfully fails to cease and
desist using water from the water supply sands of the city, after receiving notice of such order from the city,
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Article F)
Chapter 11
PENALTY AND JUDICIAL RELIEF
Sections:
5-1101 Penalty.
5-1102 Relief in the courts.
5-1101 Penalty.
Any person who shall engage in any business, trade or vocation for which a license, permit, certificate, or registration
is required by this Part 5 without having a valid license, permit, certificate, registration as required, or
who shall fail to do anything required by this chapter, or by any code adopted by this Part 5, or who shall otherwise
violate any provision of this chapter or of any code adopted by this Part 5, or who shall violate any lawful
regulation or order made by any of the officers provided for in this Part 5, shall be guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. Each day that a violation occurs
shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 6-30-98A § 1)
5-1102 Relief in the courts.
No penalty imposed by and pursuant to this chapter shall interfere with the right of the city also to apply to the
proper courts of the state for a mandamus, an injunction, or other appropriate action against such person.
Chapter 12
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Sections:
5-1201 Findings of fact.
5-1202 Statement of purpose.
5-1203 Methods of reducing flood losses.
5-1204 Definitions.
5-1205 Lands to which special flood hazard applies.
5-1206 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
5-1207 Establishment of development permit.
5-1208 Compliance.
5-1209 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
5-1210 Interpretation.
5-1211 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
5-1212 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
5-1213 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
5-1214 Permit procedures.
5-1215 Variance procedures.
5-1216 Provisions for flood hazard reduction; general standards.
5-1217 Provisions for flood hazard reduction; specific standards.
5-1218 Standards for subdivision proposals.
5-1201 Findings of fact.
A. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
B. These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods
and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from
flood damage. (Ord. No. 5-15-87, 5/15/87)
5-1202 Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
1. Protect human life and health;
2. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
3. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the
expense of the general public;
4. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
5. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and
sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
6. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in
such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
7. Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. (Ord. No. 5-15-87, 5/15/87)
5-1203 Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive
increases in flood heights or velocities;
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against
flood damage at the time of initial construction;
3. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are
involved in the accommodation of flood waters;
4. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; or
5. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which
may increase flood hazards to other lands. (Ord. No. 5-15-87, 5/15/87)
5-1204 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The following
terms as used herein will mean:
1. “Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision
of this chapter or a request for a variance;
2. “Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one
percent (1%) or greater change of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication
of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or
3. “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equalled or exceeded in any
given year;
4. “Critical feature” means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without
which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised;
5. “Development” means any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations;
6. “Elevated building” means a nonbasement building:
a. Built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of
the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns
(posts and pliers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water; and
b. Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to
the magnitude of the base flood;
In the case of zones A1-30, A1, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, D, “elevated building” also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of flood waters. In the case of zones V1-30, VE, or V, “elevated building” also includes a building
otherwise meeting the definition of “elevated building”, even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of Section 60.3(e)(5) of the Nation Flood Insurance
Program regulations;
7. “Existing construction” means for the purpose of determining rates, structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective
before that date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures;”
8. “Flood or flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
b. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
9. “Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)” means the official map of a community on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related to
erosion areas having special hazards which have been designated as Zone A, M, or E;
10. “Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see definition of flooding);
11. “Flood protection system” means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized,
appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce
the extent of the areas within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes.
These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards;
12. “Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance
with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection
from temporary flooding;
13. “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees, and associated
structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound
engineering practices;
14. “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built to render the
structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations;
15. “Manufactured home” means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. For flood plain management purposes the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel
trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
For insurance purposes the term “manufactured home” does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other
similar vehicles;
16. “Mean sea level” means for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which the base flood elevations shown on a community’s
flood insurance rate map are referenced;
17. “New construction” means for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community;
18. “Start of construction” means for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the
Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement
was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include excavation of
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or shed not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure;
19. “Structure” means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally
above ground, as well as a manufactured home;
20. “Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either:
a. Before the improvement or repair is started; or
b. If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred;
For the purpose of this definition “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
b. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic
places;
21. “Variance” means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter when specific enforcement
would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a
manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations;
22. “Violation” means the failure of a structure of other development to be fully compliant with the community’s
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate,
other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(4),
or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided; and
23. “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, here specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains
of coastal or riverine areas. (Ord. No. 5-15-87, 5/15/87)
5-1205 Lands to which special flood hazard applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. No. 5-15-
87, 5/15/87)
5-1206 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on its Flood
Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this chapter. (Ord. No. 5-15-87, 5/15/87)
5-1207 Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No.
5-15-87, 5/15/87)
5-1208 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with
the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. (Ord. No. 5-15-87, 5/15/87)
5-1209 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail. (Ord. No. 5-15-87, 5/15/87)
5-1210 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor appeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. No. 5-15-87,
5/15/87)
5-1211 Warning and disclaimer or liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas
of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord.
No. 5-15-87, 5/15/87)
5-1212 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
The building inspector is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions
of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CRF (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations)
pertaining to floodplain management. (Ord. No. 5-15-87, 5/15/87)
5-1213 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter;
2. Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site will be reasonably safe from
flooding;
3. Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter;
4. Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from
those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. I 334) from which prior approval is required;
5. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation;
6. Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Oklahoma
Water Resources Board prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
7. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is
maintained; and
8. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 5-1206, the floodplain
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Sections 5-1216, 5-1217 and 5-
1218 of this chapter. (Ord. No. 5-15-87, 5/15/87)
5-1214 Permit procedures.
A. Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished
by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, and the location
of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially
improved structures;
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
3. A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed
structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of Paragraph 2 of Section 5-1217;
4. Description of the extent of which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a
result of proposed development; and
5. Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with Paragraph 1 of Section 5-1213.
B. Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the
provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors:
1. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
2. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage
on the individual owner;
3. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
4. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
5. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
6. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance
and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
7. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the
effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
8. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
9. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for proposed use; and
10. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. (Ord. No. 5-15-87,
5/15/87)
5-1215 Variance procedures.
A. The appeal board of the community shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter. This board shall consist of the mayor and council of the city.
B. The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration
of this chapter.
C. Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
D. The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
E. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
F. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of
one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in Paragraph 2 of Section 5-1214 have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
G. Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter as set out in Section 5-1202 herein.
H. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
I. Pre-requisites for granting variances:
1. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering
the flood hazard, to afford relief;
2. Variances shall only be issued upon:
a. Showing a good and sufficient cause;
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
and
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and
3. Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be
permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the costs of flood
insurance will commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
J. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for
other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. The criteria outline in Subsections A through I of this section are met; and
2. The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the
base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. (Ord. No. 5-15-87, 5/15/87)
5-1216 Provisions for flood hazard reduction; general standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
1. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damage;
3. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood
damage;
4. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
5. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
flood waters into the system;
6. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood water; and
7. On-site waste water disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding. (Ord. No. 5-15-87, 5/15/87)
5-1217 Provisions for flood hazard reduction; specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Sections
5-1206, Paragraph 8 of 5-1213 or Subsection D of 5-1218, the following provisions are required:
1. Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the
standard of this subsection as proposed in Subsection A of Section 5-1214 is satisfied;
2. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial
or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base
flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review structural design, specifications,
and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes
the specific elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which such structures are floodproofed shall be
maintained by the floodplain administrator; and
3. Manufactured homes are required to be placed within zone A, and shall be installed using methods and
practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated
and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are
not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. All manufactured homes shall be in compliance
with Paragraph 1 of Section 5-1217. (Ord. No. 5-15-87, 5/15/87)
5-1218 Standards for subdivision proposals.
A. All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with
Sections 5-1201, 5-1202 and 5-1203 of this chapter.
B. All proposals for the development of subdivisions including manufactured home parks and subdivisions
shall meet development permit requirements of Sections 5-1207, 5-1214 and the provisions of Sections 5-1216
and 5-1217.
C. Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development,
including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Sections 5-1206 or 5-1213(8) of this chapter.
D. All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate
drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
E. All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage. (Ord. No. 5-15-87, 5/15/87)
Chapter 13
OIL AND GAS DRILLING
Sections:
5-1301 Intent and purpose.
5-1302 Definitions.
5-1303 Permits.
5-1304 Application and filing fee.
5-1305 Issuance or refusal of permit.
5-1306 Permittee’s insurance and bond.
5-1307 Conversion from natural or primary to enhanced recovery or disposal well.
5-1308 Annual fee to operate.
5-1309 Disposal of salt water.
5-1310 Compliance with applicable laws.
5-1311 Surface casing.
5-1312 Plugging and abandonment.
5-1313 Well location.
5-1314 Movement of heavy equipment.
5-1315 Fences.
5-1316 Noise and other nuisances.
5-1317 Facilities.
5-1318 Storage tanks and separators.
5-1319 Fire prevention.
5-1320 Pits.
5-1321 Retaining walls and diversion dikes.
5-1322 Motive power.
5-1323 Derrick and rig.
5-1324 Drilling operations, equipment.
5-1325 Open hole formation testing.
5-1326 Moving of drilling rig.
5-1327 Streets and alleys.
5-1328 Flaring of gas.
5-1329 Fracture and acidizing.
5-1330 Swabbing and bailing.
5-1331 Rupture in surface casing.
5-1332 Depositing oil products.
5-1333 Safety precautions.
5-1334 Forms filed with the corporation commission.
5-1335 Water for muds.
5-1336 Oil and gas inspector.
5-1337 Service companies.
5-1338 Accumulation of vapor.
5-1339 Pipe lines.
5-1340 Ingress and egress.
5-1341 Order to cease operations.
5-1342 Appeals.
5-1343 City council review of permit recommendations.
5-1344 Conduits on streets and alleys.
5-1345 Annual fee for conduits.
5-1346 Applicability to existing conditions.
5-1347 Penalties.
5-1348 Temporarily abandoned wells.
5-1349 Transfer of ownership.
5-1350 Blowout prevention equipment.
5-1351 Flood elevations and pollution prevention.
5-1352 Zoning.
5-1353 Informal complaints.
5-1354 Salt water (or other deleterious substance) disposal well.
5-1301 Intent and purpose.
Whereas the imprudent operation of an oil and gas facility can constitute a menace to the public health, safety
and welfare of the city, it is the intent and purpose of this chapter that oil and gas operations be reasonably regulated
for the public good. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1302 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
1. “Permittee” means the person to whom is issued a permit or permits under the terms of this chapter;
2. “Well” means, unless specifically qualified, any hole or holes, bore or bores, to any depth for the purpose
of producing and recovering any oil, gas or liquefied petroleum matter or deleterious substances, or for the
injection or disposal of any of the foregoing;
3. “Natural production” means the raising to the surface of the earth, by natural flow, petroleum or natural
gas;
4. “Artificial production” means the raising to the surface of the earth, by means other than natural flow,
petroleum or natural gas;
5. “Deleterious substance” means any chemical, salt water, oil field brine, waste oil, waste emulsified oil,
basic sediment, mud or injurious substances produced or used in the drilling, development, producing, transportation,
refining and processing of oil, gas or condensate;
6. “Pollution” means the contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological properties
of any natural waters of the city, or such discharge of any liquid, gaseous or solid substance into any water
of the city as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful or detrimental or injurious to
public health, safety, or welfare; to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other beneficial
uses; or to livestock, animals or aquatic life;
7. “Water”, “waters of the city” or “city water” means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border
upon the city or any portion thereof;
8. “Pressure maintenance” means an operation by which gas, water or other fluids are injected into a supply
of oil to maintain pressure or retard pressure decline therein for the purpose of facilitating recovery therefrom,
and which has been approved by the Corporation Commission after notice and hearing;
9. “Enhanced recovery” means an operation by which fluid or energy is introduced into a source of supply
for the purpose of facilitating recovery therefrom;
10. “Corporation Commission” means the Oklahoma Corporation Commission;
11. All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not specifically defined herein
shall have that meaning customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry;
12. “Oil and gas inspector” means that person, firm or corporation appointed by the city mayor to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, or by his authorized representatives;
13. “Abandoned well” means any natural production or enhanced recovery well in which production casing
has been run but which has not been operated for six (6) months and the city has not granted temporarily abandoned
status; each well in which no production casing has been run, and for which drilling operations have
ceased for thirty (30) consecutive days; and each well for which a city permit has not been obtained;
14. “Temporarily abandoned well” means any well, for which the city has issued a permit as a “temporarily
abandoned well”;
15. “Salt water” as used in this chapter means any water containing more than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l
chlorides;
16. “Treatable water” means surface and subsurface water in its natural state which may or may not require
treatment to be useful for human consumption, and contains less than ten thousand (10,000) ppm total dissolved
solids and/or five thousand (5,000) ppm chlorides;
17. “Injection well” means any well used for the injection of any fluid and shall include wells used for enhanced
recovery and injection purposes;
18. “Public building” means all buildings used or designed and intended to be used for gathering together
fifty (50) or more persons for such purposes as deliberation, entertainment, amusement, health care, or awaiting
transportation. Public buildings include, but shall not be limited to:
a. Armories;
b. Assembly halls;
c. Auditoriums;
d. Bowling lanes;
e. Clubrooms;
f. Conference rooms;
g. Courtrooms;
h. Dance halls;
i. Drinking establishments;
j. Exhibition halls;
k. Golf course club house;
l. Gymnasiums;
m. Hospitals;
n. Libraries;
o. Mortuary chapels;
p. Motion picture theaters;
q. Museums;
r. Pool rooms;
s. Recreation piers;
t. Rodeo facilities;
u. Restaurants;
v. Skating rinks; and
w. Theaters;
19. “Drinking quality water” means water from a fresh water well or a city water supply and suitable for
domestic use;
20. “Dry hole” means any well which is determined to be noncommercial and in which plugging operations
are completed within ninety (90) days of the initial removal of the completion rig from the well;
21. “Pipeline” means any pipe constructed or used to transport produced oil, water or gas or any water or
other fluid for enhanced recovery or disposal purposes in association with any oil or gas production operation;
and
22. “Conduit” means any casing used to protect one of more pipelines where the pipeline crosses a city
street or alley. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1303 Permits.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person acting for himself or acting as agent, servant, employee, subcontractor,
or independent contractor of any other person, to commence to drill an original well or re-enter any
abandoned well or plugged well or temporarily abandoned well or to change the status of any well or to plug any
well or to relocate or to enlarge any surface production facilities in this city, or to work upon or assist in any way
in the production or operation of any such well, or other oil and gas facility, without a permit having first been
issued by the authority of the oil and gas inspector in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1304 Application and filing fee.
A. Every application for a permit to drill an original well, to deepen an existing well, or to re-enter an abandoned
well, except when a valid permit exists, shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or by some person
duly authorized to sign same on his behalf, and it shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector and be accompanied
by a filing fee as set by the council in cash or certified funds. No application shall request a permit to drill
more than one well. The application shall contain full information required by the oil and gas inspector, including
the following:
1. Name and address of applicant and date of application;
2. Where applying for a proposed original well:
a. A plat of the surface surrounding the drill site and proposed surface facilities, including thereon the location
of the proposed well, the proposed surface facilities, pipe lines, roads, powerlines, fences, streams and
ponds. The plat should show the distances from the proposed well bore and proposed production facilities to all
dwelling houses, buildings, or other structures designated for the occupancy of human beings or animals within
six hundred (600) feet of the proposed well bore and the proposed production facilities. The plat should also
show the distances from the proposed well bore and proposed surface facilities to all oil, gas, or fresh water
wells located within six hundred (600) feet of the proposed well or production facilities. The radius required by
this subparagraph shall be increased when such a condition is placed on the Special Use Permit issued by the
city; and
b. The names of the mineral, surface and lease owners;
3. A copy of the approved Notice of Intent to Drill from the corporation commission and a copy of the
staking plat, showing the location and elevation of the proposed well bore signed by a registered surveyor;
4. The applicant shall provide all of the information shown in Exhibit A as attached to and hereby incorporated
into Ordinance 11-16-92A by reference. Plugging procedures to be used in the event production is not established
shall also be specified. A well bore diagram showing the proposed plugging of a dry hole shall be included.
The applicant shall provide any additional information which may be required by the oil and gas inspector;
5. A statement of the provisions for water for the drilling rig;
6. The name and address of the person within the state upon whom service or process upon applicant may
be made within this state; and in the case of any non-resident person who has no such service agent within this
state, there shall be attached to the application the designation of such a service agent resident in Creek County,
Oklahoma, and a consent that service of summons may be made upon such person in any action to enforce any
of the obligations of the applicant hereunder; and
7. A verification of the above information by the applicant hereunder.
B. Where the application is one for the re-entry of an abandoned well or plugged well, the application shall
contain all the information required by Subsection A, with the exception that the oil and gas inspector may vary
the requirements thereof to suit the application before him. Provided, that such application for a permit to reenter
an abandoned well shall provide the following information in every case:
1. A statement of:
a. The then condition of the well at time of present application;
b. The depth to which it is proposed such well shall be deepened;
c. The proposed casing program to be used in connection with the proposed re-entry; and
2. A statement of the tests which are to be performed on the casing strings in order to show that the casing
meets the same requirements for casing as for an original well.
C. There shall be no fee charged for the re-entry of a temporarily abandoned well in full compliance with
the requirements of the city ordinance except when the application includes the deepening of the well. (Ord. No.
11-16-92; Ord. No. 1-4-93A)
Editor’s Note: Ord. 1-4-93A set fee in Subsection A at $50.00.
5-1305 Issuance or refusal of permit.
A. The oil and gas inspector’s office within thirty (30) city business days after the filing of a complete application
for a permit under this chapter shall determine whether or not the application complies in all respects
with the provisions of this chapter and applicable federal and state law, and, if it does, shall recommend to the
mayor and city council that the permit be issued. Each permit issued under the terms of this chapter shall:
1. By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of this chapter with the same force and effect
as if this chapter were copied verbatim therein;
2. By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of applicable state law and the rules, regulations
and standards adopted in accordance therewith relating to the protection of human beings, animals, and
natural resources;
3. Specify that the term of the permit shall be for a period of one year from the date of issuance thereof,
and for like periods thereafter upon the successful inspection of the permittee’s well and operations, as is provided
for elsewhere herein;
4. Specify such conditions imposed by the oil and gas inspector as are by this chapter authorized; and
5. Specify that no actual operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file and have approved
the required bonds and certificate of insurance in the appropriate amounts as provided for elsewhere herein.
B. If the permit is issued, it shall, in two (2) originals, be signed by the oil and gas inspector and the permittee,
and when so signed shall constitute the permittee’s license to drill and operate in the city and the contractual
obligation of the permittee to comply with the terms of such permit, such bonds as are required, and applicable
state law, rules, regulations, standards and directives. One executed original copy of the permit shall be retained
by the oil and gas inspector; the other shall be retained by the permittee and shall be kept available for inspection
by any city or state law enforcement official who shall demand to see same.
C. If the approved permit is refused, or if the applicant notifies the oil and gas inspector in writing that he
wishes to withdraw his application prior to approval by council, or if the applicant fails to execute the approved
permit within ten (10) city business days of the date of city approval, then upon the happening of any of the
events the cash fee filed with the application shall be refunded to the applicant, except that there shall be retained
therefrom by the city the sum as set by the city council as a processing fee. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1306 Permittee’s insurance and bond.
A. In the event a permit shall be issued by the city, no operations shall be commenced until the permittee
shall file with the city a bond and insurance certificate as provided in this section.
B. An approved bond or irrevocable letter of credit in the principal sum of at least Twenty-five Thousand
Dollars ($25,000.00). The bond to be executed by a reliable insurance company authorized to do business in the
state, as surety, and with the applicant as principal, running to the city for the benefit of the city and all persons
concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter in the operation
of the well for either natural or artificial production, injection or disposal. The bond shall become effective
on or before the date the same is filed with the city and remain in force and effect for at least twelve (12) months
subsequent to the expiration of the permit term, and in addition the bond will be conditioned that the permittee
will promptly pay fines, penalties, and other assessments imposed upon the permittee by reason of his breach of
any of the terms, provisions and conditions of this chapter, and that the permittee will promptly restore the
streets, sidewalks and other public property of the city which may be disturbed or damaged in permittee’s operations,
to their former condition; and that the permittee will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste,
and other substances, and will, after abandonment, grade, level and restore the property to the same surface condition,
as practicable as is possible, as existed prior to commencing operations; and further that the permittee
shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all liability attributable to granting the permit. When a
permittee operates several wells in the city, he may post a blanket bond or an irrevocable blanket letter of credit
in the amount of One Hundred Fifty Thousand Dollars ($150,000.00) to cover all of his wells in the city.
C. In addition to the bond required in Subsection A of this section, the permittee shall obtain either a bond
as in paragraph 1 below or pollution insurance as in paragraph 2 below:
1. The permittee shall obtain a bond in the principal sum of at least One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00).
The bond to be executed by a reliable insurer licensed to do business in the state, as surety, and with applicant as
principal, running to the city for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee
will comply with every applicable federal and state law, rule, regulations, standard or directive relating to the
maintenance of the safe and beneficial physical, chemical and biological properties of any natural waters of the
city; that the permittee shall obtain the necessary permits from the city and state with regard to any operations
which have the potential of rendering such water harmful or detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety
and welfare; that the permittee shall bear all the costs necessary and incidental to the correction of any pollution
to the water caused by the permittee or permittee’s agents, servants, employees, subcontractors or independent
contractors; that the permittee shall pay all fines, penalties, assessments or judgment resulting directly or incidentally
from the permittee’s activities and which result in pollution of city waters; that the permittee shall indemnify
and hold harmless the city from any and all liability attributable to granting the permit where such liability
results from the pollution of city waters;
2. Pollution insurance meeting the requirements set out below:
a. The policy shall indemnify the insured for all losses incurred due to pollution of any waters of the city.
The indemnification and loss to include, but not be limited to reimbursement to the city for all costs incurred in
clean up or containment of any pollution of the waters of the city, including the Garber-Wellington Aquifer
which provides the city with potable water, and in restoring the waters to their previous condition; any additional
costs of water treatment or other costs incurred to supplement or continue the city’s water supply and services
prior to clean up and restoration; and, any net revenues lost by reason of irreparable damage to any waters of the
city or to water stored by the city or which could have been stored by the city;
b. For the purposes of this policy, the term “water” or “waters of the city” means all rivers, streams, lakes,
ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, aquifers, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all
other bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which
are contained within, flow through or border upon the city or any portion thereof;
c. The city shall be named as additional insured hereunder. However, this extension shall not limit the city
from any rights it would have, had it not been included as an additional insured;
d. The limits of liability as provided by this policy shall be in the sum of One Million Dollars
($1,000,000.00) for each accident or occurrence;
e. This policy is specifically intended to cover all claims made by third parties against the city, but only in
respect of the rights and interests in wells scheduled below;
f. The well insured hereunder represents one hundred percent (100%) interest irrespective of the insured
working interest being less than one hundred percent (100%);
g. The deductible applicable shall be Twenty-five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) any one accident or occurrence;
h. In the event of expiration of the term of this policy any well which is in course of drilling at the time of
such termination shall continue under full coverage afforded by the policy until drilling of the well is completed
or complete abandonment of the well. Where a well hereon has been covered while drilling, coverage shall continue
while producing until policy expiry without additional premium;
i. The policy shall identify covered wells by operator, lease, well number and United States Survey location,
including quarter section, township and range;
j. The city shall receive thirty (30) days written notice by certified mail with return receipt requested prior
to any termination, cancellation or change in any of the conditions of the policy. Notice shall be mailed to the
following address:
Oil and Gas Inspector
The City of Bristow
110 W. 7th St.
Bristow, Oklahoma 74010
k. The policy shall show the name and address of the authorized agency. The policy shall be issued by an
insurer authorized to do business in the state;
C. In addition to the bonds required in Subsections A and B of this section, the permittee shall carry a policy
or policies of standard comprehensive public liability insurance, including contractual liability covering bodily
injuries and property damage, naming the permittee and the city, issued by an insurer authorized to do business
within the state, the policy or policies in the aggregate shall provide for the following minimum coverage:
One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence combined bodily injuries and property damage. Permittee
shall file with the city, certificates of the insurance as above stated, and shall obtain the written approval thereof
of the oil and gas inspector who shall act thereon promptly after the date of such filing. The insurance policy or
policies shall not be cancelled without written notice to the oil and gas inspector at least thirty (30) days prior to
the effective date of such cancellation. In the event the policy or policies are cancelled, the permit granted shall
immediately thereupon terminate without any action on the part of the oil and gas inspector, and permittee’s
rights to operation under the permit shall cease until permittee files additional approved insurance as provided
herein. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1307 Conversion from natural or primary to enhanced recovery or disposal well.
No person shall convert any well from natural or primary production to a use for enhanced recovery or disposal.
(Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1308 Annual fee to operate.
A. An annual inspection fee is hereby levied upon each well operated or maintained under a permit issued
by the city.
B. Such fee shall be in the amount set by the council, payable to the city on or before the annual anniversary
date of the issuance of any permit under this chapter.
C. No permit for any well shall be considered valid for any year for which the annual fee has not been paid.
Failure to pay any required permit fee within thirty (30) days of a delinquent notice sent to the latest address
provided by the permittee will result in cancellation of the permit. (Ord. No. 11-16-92; Ord. No. 1-4-93B)
Editor’s Note: Ord. 1-4-93B set fee in Subsection A at $ 50.00.
5-1309 Disposal of salt water.
A. Every permittee under this chapter shall be responsible for the safe disposal of salt water or other deleterious
substances which he may bring to the surface of the earth and shall provide a plan for such disposal as required
in this chapter. Such disposal shall not result in pollution of the waters of the city and shall not result in
any other environmental hazard, and shall incorporate the best available techniques and equipment.
B. In the event of any leakage or spillage of any pollutant or deleterious substance, whatever the cause
thereof, the permittee shall cause the oil and gas inspector to be notified thereof promptly. If, in the judgment of
the oil and gas inspector, such leakage or spillage represents a potential environmental hazard, he may issue
whatever corrective orders he deems appropriate, and additionally may require the appropriate testing of the surface
and subsurface for pollutant incursion, the cost of such test or tests to be borne by the permittee.
C. The operator shall identify in writing to the oil and gas inspector the method of disposing of salt water
produced from each well. The disposal well used shall be identified by operator, lease, well number and U.S.
Survey when the disposal well is located within the city limits. The operator shall notify the oil and gas inspector
in writing when there is any change in the method of disposing of produced water from any producing well.
D. No lined or unlined earthen pit shall be used in conjunction with any salt water disposal facility located
in the city.
E. No person shall inject any salt water or other deleterious substance into the annulus between the inside
of the surface casing string and the next inside casing string, or into any other annulus of a well.
F. No disposal wall shall be used to dispose of any substance other than fluids produced from oil or gas
wells located on the same lease or other leases in the immediate area. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1310 Compliance with applicable laws.
No person shall drill an original well or re-enter an abandoned well or a temporarily abandoned well or
change the status of any well for any purpose, or permit to exist any well, structure, equipment, pipeline, machinery,
tank or other appurtenance, in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or other city ordinances
as may be applicable, or the laws, rules, regulations, operative standards or directives of the state. (Ord. No. 11-
16-92)
5-1311 Surface casing.
A. Surface casing requirements are as follows:
1. Surface casing shall be set a minimum of two hundred (200) feet below the deepest fresh water zone
found in the nine (9) section area surrounding the well site;
2. A resistivity and porosity electric log shall be run in the surface hole before surface pipe is set, a copy of
which will be filed with the corporation commission, Oklahoma Water Resources Board, and the oil and gas inspector,
but the oil and gas inspector may waive these logs when sufficient data exists to show the depth of the
fresh water in the nine (9) section area. Surface pipe shall have a centralizer on the shoe joint, a centralizer
within fifty (50) feet of the shoe joint and centralizers no more than two hundred (200) feet apart above the second
centralizer;
3. A guide shoe shall be installed on the first joint of surface casing and a float collar or equivalent shall be
installed within fifty (50) feet of the first joint. No cement baskets may be installed on the surface casing;
4. Surface casing requirements:
a. Surface casing shall be new pipe of an API grade of J or K or a higher grade. The casing shall be eight
and five eights (8-5/8) inch outside diameter casing having a minimum weight of twenty-four (24) pounds per
foot or a different diameter and weight of pipe, having a wall thickness and internal yield pressure at least equal
to the casing specified above.
b. Provided, however, that the oil and gas inspector may approve used casing to be used for surface casing
when he inspects the used casing and finds it to be acceptable. The used casing shall be inspected by the oil and
gas inspector and he may reject such casing based solely on this inspection and any decision by the oil and gas
inspector to reject the casing shall be final. Before the oil and gas inspector may approve the used casing, he
shall witness a successful pressure test on such casing to a minimum internal pressure of four thousand (4000)
pounds per square inch (PSI). The oil and gas inspector may require any additional non-destructive testing of
such casing which he may consider appropriate to insure the quality and acceptability of the casing. The cost of
all pressure testing or non-destructive testing to be borne by the applicant. When used casing approved by the oil
and gas inspector is installed in a well, a signed, written statement stating that the casing installed was the casing
approved by the oil and gas inspector and that no other pipe was substituted, shall be submitted to the oil and gas
inspector within twenty-four (24) hours of the installation of such casing. The statement shall be signed by the
pipe vendors, the applicant, the trucking firm, the drilling contractor, the casing contractor, the cementer and any
other firm or individual assisting with the installation of such casing; and
5. Only drinking quality water shall be used to mix cement used to cement the surface casing.
B. Surface pipe and cementing requirements are as follows:
1. Surface pipe shall be cemented by attempting to circulate good cement to surface by normal displacement
practices. If cement cannot be circulated to surface due to washed out hole or lost circulation, the existing
cement shall not be over-displaced and a plug shall be left in the bottom of the casing string to be drilled out
once the surface is set. The remaining open hole behind the surface pipe shall be cemented by running a tubing
string between the conductor string and the surface pipe until the top of the cement is tagged. The remaining
uncemented annular space will then be cemented until good cement is circulated to surface;
2. The cement used to cement surface casing shall be a grade of cement capable of reaching a minimum
compressive strength of five hundred (500) PSI in twenty-four (24) hours at a curing temperature of eighty degrees
Fahrenheit (80° F). After the surface casing is cemented, the surface casing shall not be disturbed in any
way until the cement has set a sufficient period of time to reach a compressive strength of six hundred (600) PSI
at a curing temperature of eighty degrees Fahrenheit (80° F). A minimum of twelve (12) hours curing time is
required on any cement used to cement surface casing before cutting off the casing or disturbing the casing. Only
drinking quality water shall be used to mix cement to be placed in the well. Prior to drilling below the surface
casing a cement bond log of a type approved by the oil and gas inspector shall be run to check the quality of the
cement bond. The oil and gas inspector shall be notified so that he may be present to witness the running of the
cement bond log. The applicant shall not drill below the surface casing until the oil and gas inspector has examined
and approved the cement bond log. If the bond log does not show good bonding then remedial cementing
shall be performed as required by the oil and gas inspector and an additional bond log shall be run to check the
cement bond. This process shall be repeated until a good cement bond has been achieved throughout the complete
interval of the surface casing.
C. Where an existing well is to be used as an injection or disposal site, the existing casing and cement shall
be of such integrity and depth as to adequately and safely isolate fresh water producing zones from the seepage
or bleeding of injection fluids or disposants. Where additional protective operations are undertaken to comply
with this paragraph, the oil and gas inspector shall be notified thereof sufficiently in advance in order for him to
be present for such operations. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1312 Plugging and abandonment.
A. A permit shall be required to plug any well in the city with the exception of a dry hole permitted under
this chapter.
B. Application requirements are as follows:
1. When applying to the oil and gas inspector for a plugging permit, the following information must be
provided to the oil and gas inspector:
a. A well bore diagram showing the current status of the well bore. This diagram should show all tubing,
packers, casing, perforations, plugs, squeeze cemented intervals, known cement tops and any known defects in
the casing;
b. Details of the original casing and cementing of the well;
c. Copies of any cement bond logs or temperature surveys run in the well to evaluate the cement or to locate
the top of the cement;
d. A proposed plugging procedure including the position of plugs, the quantity of cement to be used for
plugs, and the type of cement to be used. This procedure should also identify any casing stubs to be left in the
well;
e. A well bore diagram to show the proposed plugged condition of the well; and
f. Copies of any forms filed with the State of Oklahoma Corporation Commission pertaining to any drilling,
recompletion, deepening or reclassification of the well;
2. Whenever any well is abandoned it shall be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well
to properly plug the well. In plugging wells, it is essential that all formations bearing usable quality water, oil or
gas be protected. All cementing operations during plugging must be performed under the direct supervision of
the operator or his authorized representative, who shall not be an employee of the service or cementing company
hired to plug the well. Direct supervision means supervision on location at the well site;
3. A cement plug shall be set to isolate the productive horizons. A productive horizon is defined as any
zone known to be capable of producing hydrocarbons at any location in the city. This plug shall be placed above
but within two hundred (200) feet of the top of the shallowest productive horizon. The plug shall be sized to fill a
minimum of two hundred (200) feet of the well bore. This plug shall be tagged by placing tubing or drill string
weight on the plug. If the plug has moved, an additional plug shall be required;
4. Cement plugs must be placed by the circulation or squeeze method through tubing or drill pipe;
5. All cement for plugging shall be an appropriate API oil well cement without volume extenders mixed in
accordance with API standards. Slurry weights shall be reported on the cementing report. The oil and gas inspector
may require specific cementing compositions to be used in special situations;
6. Operators shall use only cementers approved by the oil and gas inspector. Cementing companies, service
companies or operators can qualify as approved cementers by demonstrating that they are able and qualified to
mix and pump cement in compliance with this rule. If the oil and gas inspector refuses to administratively approve
a cementing company, the company may request a hearing on the matter with the city mayor. After the
hearing, the city mayor shall recommend final action to the city council;
7. A fifty (50) foot cement plug shall be placed in the top of the well, and the casing must be cut off three
(3) feet below ground level;
8. Mud-laden fluid having a density of at least nine (9) pounds per gallon, but not less than the density of
the mud used to drill the well, and a funnel viscosity of at least thirty-six (36) funnel seconds shall be placed in
all portions of the hole not filled with cement. The hole must be in static condition at the time cement plugs are
set; and
9. Material that would hamper re-entry of a well shall not be placed in any well bore during plugging operations.
Pipe and unretrievable junk shall not be cemented in the hole during plugging operations without prior
approval by the oil and gas inspector. After the plugging work is completed, the operator must fill the rat hole,
mouse hole and cellar, and must remove all loose junk and trash from the location. All pits must be emptied and
back-filled within a reasonable period of time.
C. Plugging requirements for wells with surface casing are as follows:
1. When insufficient surface casing is set to protect all usable quality water strata and such usable quality
water strata are exposed to the well bore when production or intermediate casing is pulled from the well or as a
result of such casing not being run, a cement plug shall be placed from one hundred (100) feet below the base of
the deepest usable water stratum to one hundred (100) feet above the top of the stratus. This plug shall be evidenced
by tagging with tubing or drill pipe. The plug must be respotted if it has not been properly set. In addition
a cement plug must be set across the shoe of the surface casing. This plug must be a minimum of two hundred
(200) feet in length and shall extend at least one hundred (100) feet above and below the shoe;
2. When sufficient surface casing has been set to protect all usable quality water strata, a cement plug shall
be placed across the shoe of the surface casing. This plug shall be a minimum of two hundred (200) feet in
length and shall extend at least one hundred (100) feet above the shoe and at least one hundred (100) feet below
the shoe; or
3. If the surface casing has been set deeper than two hundred (200) feet below the base of the deepest usable
quality water stratum, an additional cement plug shall be placed inside the surface casing across the base of
the deepest usable quality water stratum. This plug shall be a minimum of two hundred (200) feet in length and
shall extend from one hundred (100) feet below the base of the deepest usable quality water stratum to one hundred
(100) feet above the top of the stratum.
D. Plugging requirements for wells with intermediate casing are as follows:
1. For wells in which the intermediate casing has been cemented through all usable quality water strata and
all productive horizons, a cement plug shall be placed inside the casing and centered opposite the base of the
deepest usable quality water stratum, but extend no less than one hundred (100) feet above and below the stratum;
or
2. For wells in which the intermediate casing is not cemented through all usable quality water strata and all
productive horizons, and if the casing will not be pulled, the intermediate casing shall be perforated at the required
depths to place cement outside of casing by squeeze cementing through casing perforations.
E. Plugging requirements for wells with production casing are as follows:
1. For wells in which the production casing has been cemented through all usable quality water strata and
all productive horizons, a cement plug having a minimum height of two hundred (200) feet shall be placed inside
the casing and centered opposite the base of the deepest usable quality water stratum and across any multi-stage
cementing tool;
2. For wells in which the production casing has not been cemented through all usable quality water strata
and all productive horizons and if the casing will not be pulled, the production casing shall be perforated at the
required depths to place cement outside of the casing by squeeze cementing through casing perforations;
3. The oil and gas inspector may approve a cast iron bridge plug to be placed immediately above each perforated
interval, provided at least twenty (20) feet of cement is placed on top of each bridge plug.
F. Plugging requirements for a well with screen or liner are as follows:
1. If practical, the screen or liner shall be removed from the well; or
2. If the screen or liner is not removed, a cement plug having a minimum height of two hundred (200) feet
shall be placed on the top of the liner.
G. Plugging requirement for wells without production casing and open-hole completions are as following:
Any production horizon or any formation in which a pressure or formation water problem is known to exist shall
be isolated by placing a cement plug having a minimum height of two hundred (200) feet immediately above the
productive horizon or formation.
H. When any oil, gas or water line is abandoned, it shall be flushed with fresh water, and the salt water or
hydrocarbons removed shall be collected in steel tanks and disposed of properly. The portions of any abandoned
lines underlying any city street shall be abandoned in accordance with the recommendations of the oil and gas
inspector and the city engineer.
I. Any foundations remaining at the site of an abandoned well or associated oil and gas operation shall be
removed from the site or buried on-site with a minimum of four (4) feet of cover.
J. All abandoned pressure vessels, tanks and other surface facilities used in conjunction with an oil and gas
operation shall be removed from the site.
K. The ground at the site of the abandoned well shall be returned as near as is practical to the original contour.
L. The surface shall be seeded, sodded or otherwise treated as required by the oil and gas inspector to prevent
erosion. (Ord. No. 11-16-92; Ord. No. 1-4-93C)
5-1313 Well location.
A. No well shall be drilled nor shall any tank batteries, well facilities or equipment be located and no permit
shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is nearer than three hundred (300) feet to any occupied
or unoccupied dwelling or any other building used or designated and intended to be used for human occupancy.
This distance shall be calculated from the well bore, tank batteries, well facilities and equipment to the
closest exterior point of the dwelling or other subject building.
B. No well shall be drilled nor shall any tank batteries, well facilities or equipment be located and no permit
shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is nearer than six hundred (600) feet to any public
building, religious building or school building. This distance shall be calculated from the well bore, tank batteries,
well facilities and equipment to the closest exterior point of the building. The city council may waive the
requirement for a six hundred (600) foot separation distance.
C. No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is
nearer than three hundred (300) feet to an active or inactive fresh water well. This distance shall be calculated
from the well bore to the fresh water well bore. An inactive fresh water well nearer than three hundred (300) feet
to the proposed well bore may be plugged in accordance with the State Water Resources Board if the owner of
the inactive fresh water well grants permission for such plugging.
D. The provisions of this section shall also apply to any dwellings, public buildings, religious buildings, or
other subject buildings under construction or to any fresh water wells being drilled on the date the application for
a permit is filed with the oil and gas inspector.
E. The application of the provisions of this section to a proposed well shall be determined by examining the
existing uses of the surrounding property as of the date the application for a permit is filed with the oil and gas
inspector.
F. The provisions of this section shall not apply to wells, facilities or equipment in use on the effective date
of this chapter. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1314 Movement of heavy equipment.
A. The permittee shall submit to the oil and gas inspector the description of the route to be used for the
move-in and move-out of all heavy equipment. The route to be used for the transportation of any mud, rock, oil,
pipe, cement, water, or other heavy load shall also be identified. The permittee shall state the following information
regarding the maximum load to be transported on each route:
1. Maximum length of vehicle and load;
2. Maximum width of vehicle and load;
3. Maximum weight of the vehicle and load;
4. Maximum weight of the load; and
5. Maximum axle load.
B. No heavy load may be transported on any city street without first obtaining written permission from the
oil and gas inspector. Mud or debris shall not be deposited on city streets. Lease roads shall be paved or graveled,
if necessary, to prevent mud being carried onto city streets by any vehicle. The oil and gas inspector may
require rerouting of any heavy equipment as may be necessary to protect city roadways from damage. Similarly,
axle load limits shall be regulated as may be necessary. It shall be the duty of every permittee to assure that any
agents or subcontractors shall conform to routes approved hereunder. Failure of any equipment mover to so
abide shall be deemed a violation of this chapter by the permittee. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1315 Fences.
Any person who completes any well as a producer shall have the obligation to enclose the well, together with
its surface facilities, by a fence sufficiently high and properly built so as to ordinarily keep persons and livestock
out of the enclosure with all gates thereto to be kept locked when the permittee or his employees are not within
the enclosure. A duplicate set of keys to the lock shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector. The oil and gas
inspector may require sight-proof fencing and landscaping be installed around the well site and surface production
facilities when such installations are located in developed areas. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1316 Noise and other nuisances.
All oil operations, drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to eliminate, as
far as practicable, dust, noise, vibration or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices
incident to exploration for, drilling for and production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances. Proven
technological improvements in exploration, drilling and production methods shall be adopted as they become,
from time to time, available, if capable of reducing factors of nuisance and annoyance. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1317 Facilities.
All lease equipment shall be painted and maintained in a good state of appearance, and shall have posted at
the point the access road intersects the city street and near the well in a prominent place metal signs no less than
two (2) feet square in area upon which the following information shall be conspicuous: permittee’s name; lease
name; location of the drill site by reference to the United States survey; identifying number of the permit issued
by the city; and emergency telephone numbers. Additional signs shall be posted warning of “Danger”, “No
Smoking”, and “Equipment Starts Automatically” when equipment operates under automatic control. (Ord. No.
11-16-92)
5-1318 Storage tanks and separators.
A. Crude oil storage tanks shall not be constructed, operated or used except to the extent of three (3) steel
tanks for crude storage, not exceeding two hundred ten (210) barrels capacity each. One water storage tank not to
exceed two hundred ten (210) barrels capacity may be constructed, operated and used. Provided, that additional
tankage may be approved by the oil and gas inspector when the applicant or permittee can show that a need for
the additional tankage exists. The operator shall provide for the safe handling of vapors which may be released
from the tanks. A flame arrestor valve shall be installed on the tank battery vent line. In the event that excessive
vapors are being released from the tanks, in the opinion of the oil and gas inspector, the operator shall be required
to install a vapor recovery system to prevent the release of the vapors into the atmosphere.
B. A permittee may use, construct and operate a steel conventional separator and such other steel tanks and
appurtenances as are necessary for treating oil with each of such facilities to be so constructed and maintained as
to properly control vapors. Each separator or pressure vessel shall be equipped with both a regulation pressurerelief
safety valve and a bursting head.
C. A dike made of properly compacted impervious material shall be constructed around any crude oil or
salt water storage tanks or pressure vessels. The dike shall be sized to hold one hundred percent (100%) of the
combined volume of the tanks and vessels which it surrounds with a minimum of six (6) inches additional height
of the dike wall. Any vessel heated by gas burners or electric heating coils shall be diked separately from crude
storage tanks. The design of the dike, including materials used to construct the dikes and the degree of compaction
achieved shall meet the specifications of the oil and gas inspector.
D. All crude storage tanks and gas separators shall be located so that the top of the dike surrounding the
above shall be at least three hundred (300) feet from the nearest point on any occupied or unoccupied dwelling
or commercial building. All crude storage tanks and gas separators shall be located so that the top of the dike
surrounding the above shall be at least six hundred (600) feet from the nearest point of a religious center, school
or public building. The requirement of this subsection shall not apply to tanks in use on the effective date of this
chapter. A greater separation distance shall be required when such condition is placed on the special use permit
issued by the city. For pressure vessels or crude tanks installed after the effective date of this chapter, the distance
separating pressure vessels containing hydrocarbons or crude tanks and residents or commercial buildings
shall meet the guidelines of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development handbook titled
“Urban Development Siting with Respect to Hazardous Commercial/Industrial Facilities” (and prepared under
contract HC 5232) in regard to protecting buildings and people from blast overpressure and thermal radiation.
(Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1319 Fire prevention.
A. Adequate fire fighting apparatus and supplies approved by the city fire department shall be maintained
on the drilling site at all times during drilling and production operations. All machinery, equipment and installations
on all drilling sites within the city limits shall conform with such requirements as may from time to time be
issued by the fire department.
B. During drilling, workover, or any down-hole operations, the permittee shall provide a minimum of four
(4) portable fire extinguishers, the size, rating, distribution and maintenance of which shall be in accordance with
national Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard #10, entitled “Portable Fire Extinguishers” and NFPA
Standard #30, entitled “Flammable Liquids Code”.
C. In areas where flammable vapors may be present, precautions shall be taken to prevent ignition by controlling
sources of ignition.
D. The permittee shall protect all hazardous materials or special hazards at the well site in accordance with
applicable NFPA standards.
E. The permittee shall comply with such other requirements which the oil and gas inspector or the city fire
department may prescribe for the particular well.
F. Crude and water storage tanks shall be equipped with lightening protection equipment as required by the
oil and gas inspector. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1320 Pits.
A. Steel mud or circulating pits shall be used during drilling. During drilling, no earthen pits, either lined or
unlined, shall be constructed nor used as a mud circulating pit, mud storage pit, working pit, or settling pit. Steel
pits and contents shall be removed from the drilling site within fifteen (15) days after the completion of the drilling
phase of the well. Earthen pits may only be used when authorized by the oil and gas inspector as catch basins
or sumps to collect drill cuttings and run-off. The oil and gas inspector shall authorize the use of such pits only
when the excavated soil is an impervious type of soil such as stiff clay. When the soil excavated is a pervious
type such as soil containing a significant fraction of sand or gravel, steel pits may be buried and used to collect
cuttings and run-off. The maximum size of an earthen pit to be used to collect cuttings or run-off shall be ten
(10) feet by ten (10) feet by six (6) feet deep. Earthen pits may be used only when authorized in writing by the
oil and gas inspector. After the pit is constructed, but before any liquid is placed in the pit, the oil and gas inspector
shall be contacted to inspect the type of soil in the sides and bottom of the pit. When the oil and gas inspector
determines that the soil is an impervious type, he may approve the pit. No approval for the pit shall be given
when the soil at the site is a pervious type.
B. Earthen pits may be constructed in an emergency to prevent or to minimize pollution. When emergency
pits are constructed, the oil and gas inspector shall be notified immediately and his instructions shall be followed.
Emergency pits shall be emptied and any contaminated soil shall be removed and disposed of before the
emergency pit is back filled as soon as the emergency is over. Such pits shall be leveled within fifteen (15) days
after completion of the drilling of the well. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1321 Retaining walls and diversion dikes.
A. An earthen retaining wall of adequate size for the terrain involved will be constructed on the low side of
the well site in the event the well site is located on sloping or unlevel ground. The top of the retaining wall shall
be at least two (2) feet higher than the elevation of the ground at the well bore. The retaining wall shall be constructed
prior to the commencement of the drilling of a new well.
B. When the well site is located on sloping or unlevel ground, an earthen diversion dike or ditch of adequate
size for the terrain involved shall be constructed on the high side of the well site. The diversion dike or
ditch shall be designed, constructed and maintained to divert runoff waters around the well site.
C. Depending upon conditions which exist at the site, the oil and gas inspector may waive the requirements
of this section for well sites existing on the effective date of this ordinance. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1322 Motive power.
Motive power for all well pumping equipment installed after the effective date of this chapter, shall be electricity,
except that in rural areas, the oil and gas inspector may specify that internal combustion engines may be
used. All internal combustion engines shall be equipped with “state of the art” mufflers to minimize noise. (Ord.
No. 11-16-92)
5-1323 Derrick and rig.
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use or operate in connection with the drilling, re-entry or
reworking of any well within the city, any wooden derrick or any steam-powered rig, and all engines shall be
equipped with adequate mufflers approved by the oil and gas inspector. Permitting any drilling rig or derrick to
remain on the premises or drilling site for a period of longer than sixty (60) days after completion or abandonment
of a well is hereby prohibited. The oil and gas inspector may grant an extension in this time when extenuating
circumstances exist. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1324 Drilling operations, equipment.
All drilling, re-entry and operations at any well performed under this chapter shall be conducted in accordance
with the best practices of the reasonably prudent operator. All casing, valves, blowout preventers, drilling fluid,
tubing, bradenhead, Christmas tree and well head connections shall be of a type and quality consistent with the
best practices of such reasonably prudent operator. Setting and cementing casing and running drill stem tests
shall be performed in a manner and at a time consistent with the best practices of such reasonably prudent operator.
Any permittee under this chapter shall observe and follow the recommendations or regulations of the American
Petroleum Institute and the Corporation Commission, except in those instances that are specifically addressed
by this chapter. A copy of all logs associated with the surface casing shall be filed with the oil and gas
inspector. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1325 Open hole formation testing.
A. All open hole formation testing shall be done during daylight hours, with adequate advance notification
thereof made to the oil and gas inspector to enable him to be present if he so chooses.
B. All open hole formation testing shall be done into steel tanks, or flared properly in the case of gas. All
flaring of gas shall require approval by the oil and gas inspector.
C. The well shall be circulated or reverse circulated prior to commencing to pull drill stem test tools from
the hole. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1326 Moving of drilling rig.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to move or cause to be moved the drilling rig from a well until the
hole has been cased or properly plugged unless written permission to do so is obtained from the oil and gas inspector.
(Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1327 Streets and alleys.
No well shall be drilled, and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is within
any of the streets or alleys of the city; and no street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed in any
drilling or production operation except with the written approval of the oil and gas inspector, and then only temporarily.
The city engineer shall specify axle tonnage limits for each roadway in the city limits. All vehicles exceeding
this tonnage limit will be required to select an alternate route when and if possible. Any resulting street
damage will require repair by the permittee or executing of the surety bond to repair the street as soon as the well
site is complete or abandoned. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1328 Flaring of gas.
All produced gas shall either be sold or flared with the flaring procedures being approved by the oil and gas
inspector and the fire marshal. Flaring shall not be approved unless the state has issued an order permitting such
flaring. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1329 Fracture and acidizing.
In the completion work-over or servicing of an oil and gas, injection, disposal or service well, where acidizing
or fracturing processes are used, no oil, gas or other deleterious substances or pollutants shall be permitted to
pollute any surface or subsurface fresh waters. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1330 Swabbing and bailing.
In swabbing, bailing or purging a well, all deleterious substances removed from the bore hole shall be placed
in appropriate tanks and no substances shall be permitted to pollute any surface or subsurface fresh waters. During
swabbing or bailing operations, the well shall be equipped with the appropriate valves, fittings, blowout preventers,
and a lubricator complete with a functional pack-off to permit complete pressure control of the well.
(Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1331 Rupture in surface casing.
In the event a rupture, break or opening occurs in the surface or production casing, the permittee or the operator
or drilling contractor shall take immediate action to repair it. The repair procedure shall be submitted to the
oil and gas inspector for his approval prior to commencing the repair work. The oil and gas inspector may specify
tests to be run to confirm the success of the repair work and extent of contamination. The oil and gas inspector
shall be notified so that he may witness the repairs and testing. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1332 Depositing oil products.
No person shall deposit, drain or divert into or upon any public highway, street or alley, drainage ditch, storm
drain, sewer, gutter, paving, creek, river, lake or lagoon, any oil or oily liquid with petroleum content or any
mud, rotary mud, sand, water or salt water, or in any manner permit by seepage, overflow, deliberate release or
otherwise, any of such substances to escape from any property owned, leased or controlled by such person and
flow or be carried into or upon any public highway, street or alley, drainage ditch, storm drain, sewer, gutter,
paving, creek, river, lake or lagoon, within the city. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1333 Safety precautions.
Persons drilling, operating or maintaining any well shall use all necessary care and take all precautions which
shall be reasonably necessary under the circumstances to protect the public. The provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed to be the minimum requirements for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare, and
compliance with the terms hereof shall not be deemed to relieve any persons of any additional duty imposed by
law. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1334 Forms filed with the corporation commission.
When requested by the oil and gas inspector, copies of all applications, notices, forms, records, logs and the
like filed by permittee with the corporation commission shall be filed with the city. The oil and gas inspector
shall keep confidential all submitted material which the state requires to be kept confidential. (Ord. No. 11-16-
92)
5-1335 Water for muds.
A. Water to be used in drilling or work-over operations may be brought in by tank trucks, or obtained from
the existing city water supply. Surface water from unpolluted ponds or streams may also be used. When a fresh
water supply well is drilled, a copy of a permit for the well from the State Water Resources Board shall be submitted
to the oil and gas inspector as part of the permit application. The applicant shall also state the disposition
of the fresh water supply well upon the completion of the drilling of the oil well. A fresh water well shall not be
drilled closer than three hundred (300) feet to the oil well. A fresh water well may not be drilled deeper than two
hundred (200) feet above the base of the fresh water aquifer. The oil and gas inspector shall determine the base
of the fresh water aquifer.
B. When any fresh water well is drilled as a source of drill water, the applicant shall state the disposition of
the fresh water well. When ownership of the water well is to be transferred to the land owner, a written statement
from the land owner accepting responsibility of the well shall be submitted to the city. When any such water well
is plugged, it shall be plugged in accordance with the rules of the State Water Resources Board. Only drilling
contractors licensed by the State Water Resources Board shall drill fresh water wells to be used as a source of
drill water. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1336 Oil and gas inspector.
A. The city mayor shall employ or retain a qualified person, person, firm or corporation as an oil and gas
inspector, whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to issue such orders or directives as are required to
carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter and its particular provisions. Failure to abide by any such order or
directive shall be a violation of this chapter.
C. The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to go upon and inspect any premises covered by the
terms of this chapter to ascertain whether this chapter and the applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or
directives of the state are being complied with. Failure to permit access to the oil and gas inspector shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter.
D. The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to request and receive from any permittee, contractor,
or subcontractor, any records, logs, reports and the like relating to the status or condition of any well or project
or the appurtenances thereof within the city. Such material shall remain confidential where such confidentiality
is usually granted by the state. Material considered confidential by the state shall be submitted to the oil and gas
inspector in a sealed envelope and shall be opened only in the presence of the operator. Failure to provide any
such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1337 Service companies.
Upon request of the oil and gas inspector, service companies or other persons shall furnish and file reports and
records showing perforating, hydraulic fracturing, cementing, shooting, chemical treatment and all other service
operations on any site covered by this chapter. Such furnished material shall remain confidential where such
confidentiality is usually granted by the state. Failure to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1338 Accumulation of vapor.
The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to require the immediate shutting in or closing of any well if
he finds that there exists, within a one hundred (100) foot radius of any well, any gas or gasoline vapor in a
quantity sufficient to constitute, in his judgment, or in the judgment of the city fire marshal, a fire hazard. The
well shall remain shut or closed in until the hazard and its cause are removed. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1339 Pipe lines.
A. No permittee shall make any excavations or construct any pipelines for the conveyance of fuel, water or
minerals, on, under or through the city without first having obtained a revocable permit therefor upon application
to the oil and gas administration office.
B. The oil and gas inspector shall prescribe the forms to be used for such application and the information to
accompany it and prescribe the appropriate publication notice requirements. Such information shall include the
plans, specifications and maps submitted to the state.
C. Each application for a permit under this section shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee in
the amount of Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00). (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1340 Ingress and egress.
Lease roads shall be maintained in such a manner as to safely and comfortably allow for ingress and egress of
city or state personnel traveling in a common passenger motor vehicle. Upon completion of a new well, the lease
road shall be covered with a layer of gravel. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1341 Order to cease operations.
A. If the oil and gas inspector finds that, in his judgment, a hazard to life or natural resources exists, he
shall order immediate rectification of the cause. If the permittee takes no immediate measure to reduce the hazard,
or if the situation be so perilous as to constitute an imminent threat to safety, then in either of these events he
may order the prompt cessation of activity, and if necessary, the clearance of the premises.
B. The oil and gas inspector shall apply to the city mayor for a hearing upon such order, which hearing
shall be held not longer than twenty-four (24) hours after the issuance of the order by the oil and gas inspector.
The city mayor shall determine if proper cause existed, and, if not, shall order the permittee’s activity to resume
without delay. If the city mayor determines that proper cause did not exist for the order to cease activity to be
issued, then he shall make whatever ruling is proper to assure rectification of the cause of the peril. Such ruling
and compliance with it by the permittee shall not be construed to absolve the permittee of any liability for any
violation of this chapter or for any damage or injury caused thereby. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1342 Appeals.
Any permittee aggrieved by any order, directive or ruling issued by the oil and gas inspector, or by any ruling
by the city mayor, may appeal the same to the city council which shall hear the matter at a meeting. The lodging
of such appeal shall not stay the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter. The city council, upon
hearing the matter, may issue whatever ruling or order is appropriate, provided that such ruling or order be in
keeping with the spirit and purpose of this chapter. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1343 City council review of permit recommendations.
Upon the consideration of any application for a permit required by the terms of this chapter, the oil and gas
inspector shall recommend approval or disapproval thereof to the mayor and city council, who shall review the
matter at a regularly scheduled meeting, and thereupon uphold or reverse the recommendation with or without
the addition of any conditions thereto. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1344 Conduits on streets and alleys.
A. No permittee shall make any excavations or construct any lines for the conveyance of fuel, water or
minerals, on, under or through the streets and alleys of the city without first having obtained a permit therefor
upon application to the oil and gas inspector.
B. The oil and gas inspector shall prescribe the forms to be used for such application and the information to
accompany it and prescribe the appropriate publication notice requirements.
C. The oil and gas inspector shall, within thirty (30) city business days of receipt of the properly executed
application, either grant or deny the request.
D. The granting of any such permit shall not be construed to be the granting of a franchise, nor do the provisions
hereof mandate city approval of any request for a permit. (Ord. No. 11-16-92; Ord. No. 1-4-93D)
5-1345 Annual fee for conduits.
The oil and gas inspector shall inspect such conduits to assure the public safety. No permit issued under this
chapter shall be renewed if the conduit or any part thereof covered by such permit is in an unsafe condition.
(Ord. No. 11-16-92; Ord. No. 1-4-93D)
5-1346 Applicability to existing conditions.
This chapter shall apply to any person drilling an original well, re-entering an abandoned well or temporarily
abandoned well, conducting natural or artificial production projects or operations, or maintaining a disposal well
within the city on the effective date of this chapter and every such person shall have no longer than ninety (90)
days to come into compliance with this chapter. Provided that:
1. No initial permit fees shall be charged such person as would otherwise apply; and
2. No penalties shall be sought against any activity violative of this chapter where such activity pre-existed
the adoption of this chapter and was otherwise in compliance with the applicable state law, rules, regulations,
standards or directives, provided the operation is brought into compliance within ninety (90) days of the effective
date of this chapter. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1347 Penalties.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or neglect to comply with any provisions hereof irrespective
of whether or not the verbiage of each section hereof contains the specific language that such violation
or neglect is unlawful and is an offense. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or
any of the provisions of a drilling and operating permit issued pursuant hereto, or any condition of the bond filed
by the permittee pursuant to this chapter, or who shall neglect to comply with the terms hereof, shall be punished
as provided in Section 1-108 of this code, and the violation of each separate provision of this chapter, and of the
permit, insurance and of the bond, shall be considered a separate offense, and each day’s violation of each separate
provision thereof shall be considered a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, it is further
provided that the city council at any regular or special sessions or meeting thereof, may, provided ten (10) days
notice has been given to the permittee that revocation is to be considered at such meeting, revoke or suspend any
permit issued under this chapter and under which drilling or producing operations are being conducted in the
event the permittee thereof has violated any provision of this chapter. In the event the permit be revoked, the
permittee may make application to the oil and gas inspector for re-issuance of such permit, and the action of the
city thereon shall be final. Any continuing offense shall be considered a public nuisance, the remedies for which
under law shall be in addition to those hereinbefore enumerated. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1348 Temporarily abandoned wells.
When the state corporation commission has granted temporary abandonment status for a well, and the well
has been actively produced after January 1, 1984, the permittee may apply to the oil and gas inspector for temporary
abandonment status. Temporary abandonment status shall be granted for a maximum of two (2) years except
when an extension is granted by the city council. The temporary abandonment status shall be granted provided
the requirements placed upon the well by the oil and gas inspector are met. These requirements shall include
but not be limited to the following:
1. For enhanced recovery or disposal wells, a cast iron bridge plug shall be placed above but within one
hundred (100) feet of the perforated interval and a minimum of twenty (20) feet of cement shall be placed on the
cast iron bridge plug. The casing shall be pressure tested to a pressure approved by the oil and gas inspector.
Pressure testing shall be repeated annually. The production casing and each annulus of the well shall be equipped
with fittings to permit the pressure on each string of casing to be measured using a gauge having a one-fourth
(1/4) inch fitting;
2. Producing wells shall have fittings and valves installed to permit the pressure on tubing and each string
of casing to be measured using a gauge having a one-fourth (1/4) inch fitting:
a. A fluid level test shall be performed on each well in this classification at intervals not to exceed six (6)
months, and the pressure shall be checked on the tubing and each casing string at least every six (6) months.
These tests shall be witnessed by the oil and gas inspector;
b. If the fluid level in the production casing when no tubing is installed in the well is found to be less than
two thousand (2,000) feet from ground level then the same requirements specified in paragraph 1 above shall be
applied;
c. If the fluid level in both the tubing and the tubing-casing annulus when tubing and packer are installed in
the well is found to be less than two thousand (2,000) feet from the surface, then the requirements shall be the
same as in paragraph 1 above; and
d. If pressure in excess of fifty (50) PSI is found on the production casing or when other evidence of a leak
exists, the requirements shall be as in paragraph 1 above;
3. If pressure in excess of fifty (50) PSI is found on the surface casing of any well or when other evidence
of a leak exists, additional tests shall be performed to determine if a casing leak or channel flow outside the casing
exists. When the oil and gas inspector determines that a leak exists, appropriate repair work or remedial cementing
shall be performed by the permittee or applicant to correct the problem. All repair procedures shall be
approved by the oil and gas inspector. The oil and gas inspector shall be notified so that he may witness the repair
work and test to confirm the success of such repair work;
4. The requirements for annual fees, insurance and bonds for temporarily abandoned wells shall be the
same as for active wells; and
5. All testing required by this chapter shall be performed at the permittee’s expense. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1349 Transfer of ownership.
A. When a permittee desires to transfer ownership of a well to another operator, he shall notify the oil and
gas inspector in writing. Transfer of the permit will be granted only when the subject well is in full compliance
with the requirements of this chapter. A fee shall be paid by the applicant for a transfer of permit. The city shall
inspect each well sought to be transferred as soon as may be practicable after filing of any application for transfer
of ownership.
B. No permittee shall be released from the obligations imposed by this chapter until such time as the transfer
is approved by the city, conditioned upon acceptance of all necessary bonds and insurance, to assure coverage
of existing conditions. (Ord. No. 11-16-92; Ord. No. 1-4-93E)
Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 1-4-93E set transfer fee in Subsection A at $50.00.
5-1350 Blowout prevention equipment.
Blowout prevention equipment (BOPE) shall be installed and used on all wells during drilling, running, casing,
down-hole work-over operations, logging, open-hole formation testing and the pulling of casing during
plugging operations:
1. During drilling, a minimum of three (3) hydraulically operated blowout preventers which meet the
American Petroleum Institute Recommended Practices RP # 53 recommendations for Class 3M shall be installed
on the well. One blowout preventer shall be a spherical annular type, one shall be a ram type equipped with pipe
rams to fit the drill pipe in use, and the third shall be a ram type equipped with blind rams. A hydraulic operating
unit which meets the recommendations of the American Petroleum Institute (API) Recommended Practices RP #
53 shall be installed to operate the blowout preventers:
a. A choke line, kill line, and choke manifold which meet the blowout prevention equipment recommendations
of API RP # 53 for Class 3M shall be connected to the BOPE during drilling operations;
b. The BOPE shall be installed prior to drilling below the surface casing. BOP equipment shall be function
tested and pressure tested in accordance with the recommendations of the oil and gas inspector after installation
and prior to drilling below the surface casing; or
c. The oil and gas inspector may specify more stringent requirements for BOPE when, in his opinion, conditions
warrant the additional requirements;
2. During work-over operations and tubing changes, the minimum BOPE acceptable shall be two (2) ram
type BOP. One BOP shall be a ram type equipped with rams to fit the tubing, and the other BOP shall be a ram
type equipped with blind rams;
3. When casing is being pulled from a well, the well shall be equipped with rams to fit the tubing, and the
other BOP equipment which shall be required; or
4. For operations other than the ones contained hereinunder, the oil and gas inspector shall determine the
type of BOP equipment which shall be required.
(Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1351 Flood elevations and pollution prevention.
A. When well locations fall in an area that is within the one hundred (100) year flood elevation as defined
by the Federal Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or as determined by the city engineer, the ground level of the drilling
and production pad shall be constructed to an elevation at least one foot above the one hundred (100) year flood
elevation as defined by FIRM. When the proposed site is not covered by the FIRM, the city engineer shall determine
the elevation of the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.
B. No wells, tanks, vessels, or structures may be located in the floodway as defined by FIRM. The floodway
shall be defined by the city engineer when the FIRM does not cover the proposed site. No facilities may be
constructed which will cause adverse flooding affecting existing structures or roadways. Any dike or levee permitted
to be in the one hundred (100) year flood elevation shall have an elevation at least two (2) feet above the
elevation of the one hundred (100) year flood plain.
C. Storage tanks or other types of tanks used in connection with any oil, gas, or injection well shall have
earthen embankments constructed as required in Section 5-1321.
D. A slope of not less than one percent (1%) away from the tank shall be provided for a minimum of fifty
(50) feet or to the dike base, whichever is less.
E. The floor and walls of the diked area shall be constructed of impervious earth. The floor of the diked
area shall be covered with a compacted layer of stiff clay having a minimum thickness of twelve (12) inches except
when the native soil present is stiff clay. The floor of the diked area shall be constructed prior to the installation
of tanks or vessels. The requirement for the floor of the diked area shall not apply to installations constructed
prior to September 16, 1986. The walls of the diked area shall be constructed of adequately compacted
impervious earth such as stiff clay and shall be covered with rock or other material to prevent erosion. The top of
the dike shall have a flat section not less than two (2) feet wide, and the slope of the dike shall be consistent with
the angle of repose of the material used to construct the dike, as determined by the oil and gas inspector. The
requirements of this subsection shall not apply to wells or facilities in use on the effective date of this ordinance.
F. No drain plugs, openings or siphons shall be placed in the walls of dikes, which will permit the escape of
any liquids through the dike. All pipe lines or cables running to the installation shall be routed above the dike or
under the dike with a minimum of two (2) feet of earthen cover.
G. Storage tank areas shall be kept free of all liquids, combustible materials, brush, weeds and debris and
shall be inspected by the oil and gas inspector every six (6) months.
H. Site proof fencing shall be placed around the diked area, but fences shall not be placed on top of the dike
when the dike is constructed of earth. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1352 Zoning.
All provisions of this chapter shall be construed as supplementary to the zoning ordinances of the city, and
any activity requiring zoning approval shall be first so approved prior to being deemed eligible for any permit
provided for hereinunder. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1353 Informal complaints.
If, upon information or inspection, it is found that a permittee is violating any portion of this chapter or causing
damage or pollution to any surface or underground treatable water the oil and gas inspector shall file a written
administrative complaint with the city mayor, a copy of which shall be delivered or mailed to the permittee
or his agent. If upon subsequent inspection, it is determined that the permittee has taken the corrective actions
specified, the complaint may be dismissed; otherwise, formal application will be made to the city council for an
order revoking the permit, and for any other appropriate remedy; pending the outcome of the final determination
of the city council on the formal application, the oil and gas inspector shall, after an onsite inspection, have the
authority to shut down those operations where conditions appear obvious that surface or underground pollution
is occurring. It is the intent of this section to supplement the penalty provisions of this chapter and shall be construed
so as not to conflict therewith. (Ord. No. 11-16-92)
5-1354 Salt water (or other deleterious substance) disposal well.
No well shall be utilized for the purpose of disposing or storing salt water or any other deleterious substance.
(Ord. No. 11-16-92)
Chapter 14
RESIDENTIAL CODE
Sections:
5-1401 Adoption of International Residential Code.
5-1402 International Residential Code revisions.
5-1403 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
5-1401 Adoption of International Residential Code.
That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Bristow,
being marked and designated as the International Residential Code, 2003 Edition, including Appendix
Chapters A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J and K as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Residential Code of the city of Bristow, in the state of Oklahoma for regulating and governing the
construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repairs, equipment, location, removal and demolition
of detached one and two family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than
three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of
said Residential Code on file in the office of the city of Bristow are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed
in Section 5-1402 of this code. (Ord. 30-010504 § 1)
5-1402 International Residential Code revisions.
The following sections of the 2003 Edition of the International Residential Code are hereby revised as follows:
1. Section R101.1 - insert City of Bristow in place of the phrase [Name of Jurisdiction].
2. All of the provisions of Section R103 are deleted and replaced with the following:
The City Inspector, sometimes referred to as the Bristow Building Inspector, is hereby designated as the
“Building Official” for the purposes of this Code.
3. Section R113.4 shall provide as follows:
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall construct, alter, move, enlarge, repair, equip, locate, remove, or demolish one and two family
dwellings and multiple single family dwellings in violation of the approved construction documents or directive
of the code official, of or a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall upon conviction,
be punished as provided in Part 1, Chapter 1, Section 1-108 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Bristow.
Each day that a violation occurs after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 30-010504 § 2)
5-1403 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
That any ordinance or any part of any ordinance of the city of Bristow, state of Oklahoma, in conflict herewith
is hereby repealed. (Ord. 30-010504 § 3)
Chapter 15
INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING
CODE
Sections:
5-1501 Adoption of International Existing Building Code.
5-1502 International Existing Building Code revisions.
5-1503 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
5-1501 Adoption of International Existing Building Code.
That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Bristow,
being marked and designated as the International Existing Building Code, 2003 Edition, including the Appendix
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code
of the city of Bristow, in the state of Oklahoma; regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy,
addition, and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings, as herein provided, providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions, and terms of said Existing Building Code on file in the office of the city of Bristow are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions
and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 5-1502 of this code. (Ord. 32-010504 § 1)
5-1502 International Existing Building Code revisions.
The following sections of the 2003 Edition of the International Existing Building Code are hereby revised as
follows:
1. Section 101.1 - insert City of Bristow in place of the phrase [Name of Jurisdiction].
2. Section 1201.2 - insert February 5, 2004 in place of the phrase [Date in one location].
3. All of the provisions of Section 103 are deleted and replaced with the following:
The City Inspector, sometimes referred to as the Bristow Building Inspector, is hereby designated as the
“Code Official” for the purposes of this Code.
4. Section 113.4 shall provide as follows:
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing buildings, including
historic buildings in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official,
of or a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall upon conviction, be punished as provided
in Part 1, Chapter 1, Section 1-108 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Bristow. Each day that a violation
occurs after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 32-010504 § 2)
5-1503 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
That any ordinance or any part of any ordinance of the city of Bristow, state of Oklahoma, in conflict herewith
is hereby repealed. (Ord. 32-010504 § 3)
Chapter 16
LIFE SAFETY CODE
Sections:
5-1601 Adoption of Life Safety Code.
5-1602 City inspector.
5-1603 Violation--Penalty.
5-1604 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
5-1601 Adoption of Life Safety Code.
That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Bristow,
being marked and designated as the Eighth Edition, be and is hereby adopted as the Life Safety Code of the
city of Bristow, in the state of Oklahoma; providing for rules and regulations to improve safety of the public by
promoting the control of fire hazards; regulating the installation, use, and maintenance of equipment; regulating
the use of structures, premises, and open areas; providing for the abatement of fire hazards; setting forth standards
for compliance to achieve their objectives; providing for penalties; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of
said Existing Building Code on file in the office of the city of Bristow are hereby referred to, adopted, and made
a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter. (Ord. 35-012004 § 1)
5-1602 City inspector.
The city inspector, sometimes referred to as the Bristow building inspector, is hereby designated as the “Code
Official” for the purposes of this code. (Ord. 35-012004 § 2)
5-1603 Violation--Penalty.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing buildings, including
historic buildings in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official,
of or a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall upon conviction, be punished as provided
in Section 1-108 of this code. Each day that a violation occurs after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 35-012004 § 3)
5-1604 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
That any ordinance or any part of any ordinance of the city of Bristow, state of Oklahoma, in conflict herewith
is hereby repealed. (Ord. 35-012004 § 4)
Chapter 17
UNIFORM FIRE CODE
Sections:
5-1701 Adoption of Uniform Fire Code.
5-1702 City inspector.
5-1703 Violation--Penalty.
5-1704 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
5-1701 Adoption of Uniform Fire Code.
That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Bristow,
being marked and designated as the NFPA 1 Uniform Fire Code, be and is hereby adopted as the Uniform
Fire Code of the city of Bristow, in the state of Oklahoma; prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous
to life and property from fire or explosion, providing for penalties; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said
Uniform Fire Code on file in the office of the city of Bristow are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter. (Ord. 36-012004 § 1)
5-1702 City inspector.
The city inspector, sometimes referred to as the Bristow building inspector, is hereby designated as the “AHJ
Official” for the purposes of this code. (Ord. 36-012004 § 2)
5-1703 Violation--Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this code or standard hereby adopted or fail to comply
therewith; or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder; or who shall build in violation
of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder; or failed to operate in
accordance with any certificate or permit issued thereunder; and from which no appeal has been taken; or who
shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the appeal board or a court of competent jurisdiction,
within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance,
respectively, shall upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this
code. Each day that a violation occurs after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord.
36-012004 § 3)
5-1704 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
That any ordinance or any part of any ordinance of the city of Bristow, state of Oklahoma, in conflict herewith
is hereby repealed. (Ord. 36-012004 § 4)
Chapter 18
INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Sections:
5-1801 Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code.
5-1801 Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code.
A. That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of
Bristow, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the city
of Bristow, in the state of Oklahoma, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical
things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing
structures as provided in this chapter; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such Property Maintenance
Code on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part of this chapter, as if
fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection
B of this section.
B. The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition, are hereby revised:
101.1 insert “City of Bristow”
103.1 Delete
103.2 Delete and replace with:
“For purposes of this Code, the Building Inspector shall also mean the Code Official, Code Enforcer, and/or
the City Inspector.”
103.3 Delete
106.4 Delete and replace with:
“Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or limited liability company who shall violate a provision of this
Chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Part 1, Chapter 1, Section 1-108 of the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Bristow. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate occurrence.”
304.14 Insert March 15 and November 1
602.3 Insert September 1 and May 15
602.4 Insert September 15 and May 1
(Ord. 73-010306 § 1)
PART 6
COURT
Chapters:
1 Municipal Court
2 (Reserved)
Chapter 1
MUNICIPAL COURT
Sections:
6-101 Organization of municipal court.
6-102 Definitions.
6-103 Jurisdiction of court.
6-104 Judge; qualifications.
6-105 Term of judge.
6-106 Alternate judge.
6-107 Acting judge.
6-108 Appointment of judge and alternate judge.
6-109 Salary and payments to judges.
6-110 Removal of judge.
6-111 Vacancy in office of judge.
6-112 Disqualification of judge.
6-113 Chief of police.
6-114 Clerk of the court; duties.
6-115 Prosecuting attorney; duties; conflict of interest.
6-116 Bond of court clerk.
6-117 Rules of court.
6-118 Enforcement of rules.
6-119 Written complaints to prosecute ordinance violations.
6-120 Traffic ordinance violations; procedures for issuing citation; custody, arrest.
6-121 Creation of traffic violations bureau, parking violations.
6-122 Summons for arrest.
6-123 Form of arrest warrant.
6-124 Procedures for bail or bond.
6-125 Traffic bail bond procedures.
6-126 Arraignment and pleadings by defendant.
6-127 Trials and judgments.
6-128 Trial by jury and waiver.
6-129 Juror and jury trial procedures.
6-130 Witness fees.
6-131 Compensation of jurors.
6-132 Suspension of sentence.
6-133 Imprisonment.
6-134 Fines and costs--Imprisonment for failure to pay.
6-135 Deduction from fines for training fund.
6-136 Conduct of sessions of court--Notice.
6-101 Organization of municipal court.
This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the municipal criminal court of the city of Bristow
as put into operation by resolution duly passed on January 6, 1969, and filed in accordance with law as authorized
by Sections 27-101 and 27-102 of Title II of the Oklahoma Statutes. To the extent of conflict between any
provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any ordinance of this city, the provisions of this chapter shall
control. The court shall be operative on and after January 13, 1969. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608,
1/19/76)
State Law Reference: Municipal courts not of record, organization, rules and procedures, 11 O.S. Sections 27-
101 to 27-131.
6-102 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning, the following words shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
1. “Court” means the municipal criminal court of the city of Bristow;
2. “Judge” means the judge of the municipal criminal court, including any acting judge or alternate judge
thereof as provided for by the statutes of this state and this chapter;
3. “Municipality” or “this municipality” means the city of Bristow, Creek County, Oklahoma;
4. “Clerk” means the clerk of this municipality, including any deputy or member of the office staff of the
clerk while performing duties of the clerk’s office;
5. “Governing body” means the city council of the city of Bristow;
6. “Chief of police” means the peace officer in charge of the police force of the municipality; and
7. “This judicial district” means the district court judicial district of the state of Oklahoma wherein the
government of this municipality is situated. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-103 Jurisdiction of court.
The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all prosecutions wherein a violation of any
ordinance of this municipality is charged, including any such prosecutions transferred to the court in accordance
with applicable law. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-104 Judge; qualifications.
There is one judge of the court. A judge shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in Oklahoma. A judge
who is a licensed attorney may engage in the practice of law in other courts, but he shall not accept employment
inconsistent with his duties as judge, or arising out of facts which give rise to or are connected with cases within
the jurisdiction of the court, pending therein or which might become the subject of proceedings therein. He must
be a resident of this county or maintain a law office therein. He may serve as judge of other municipal courts, if
such service may be accomplished consistently with his duties as judge of this court, with the consent of the
mayor and council. If no licensed attorney residing within the county is willing to accept the appointment as
judge, a resident of this municipality, of the age of twenty-five (25) years or older, or the mayor, may be appointed
judge. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-105 Term of judge.
The official term of the judge shall be two (2) years expiring on the 15th day of May in each odd-numbered
year. Each judge, unless sooner removed for proper cause, shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified.
(Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-106 Alternate judge.
There may be appointed for each judge of the court an alternate judge possessed of the same qualifications as
the judge. His appointment shall be for the same term and made in the same manner as the judge. He shall sit as
acting judge of the court in any case if the judge is:
1. Absent from the court;
2. Unable to act as judge; or
3. Disqualified from acting as judge in the case. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-107 Acting judge.
If at any time there is no judge or alternate judge, duly appointed and qualified, available to sit as judge, the
mayor shall appoint some person, possessing the qualifications required by this chapter for the judge, who shall
preside as acting judge over the court in the disposition of pending matters until such time as a judge or alternate
judge shall be available. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-108 Appointment of judge and alternate judge.
Judges and alternate judges shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the governing body. A proposed
appointment shall be submitted in writing to the governing body at the next to the last regularly scheduled
meeting prior to the day upon which the appointment is to take effect, and shall be acted upon at the next regularly
scheduled meeting. The governing body may decide upon the proposed appointment by a majority vote of a
quorum present and acting. Failure of decision upon a proposed appointment shall not prevent action thereon at a
later regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body unless the mayor, in writings withdraws the proposed
appointment. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/9/76)
6-109 Salary and payments to judges.
A judge, other than an alternate judge or an acting judge, shall receive a salary as set by the governing body
from time to time paid in the same manner as the salaries of other officials of this municipality. (Prior Code,
Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-110 Removal of judge.
Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the governing body for the causes prescribed by the constitution
and laws of this state for the removal of public officers. Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the
filing of a verified written petition setting forth facts sufficient to constitute one or more legal grounds for removal.
Petitions may be signed and filed by:
1. The mayor; or
2. Twenty-five (25) or more qualified electors of this municipality. Verification of the number or qualifications
of electors shall be executed by one or more of the petitioners.
The governing body shall set a date for hearing the matter and shall cause notice thereof, together with a copy of
the petition, to be served personally upon the judge at least ten (10) days before the hearing. At the hearing, the
judge shall be entitled to:
1. Representation by counsel;
2. To present testimony and to cross-examine the witnesses against him; and
3. Have all evidence against him presented in open hearing.
So far as they can be applicable, the provisions of the Oklahoma Administrative Procedures Act governing individual
proceedings (Sections 309 to 317 of Title 75 of the Oklahoma Statutes as amended) shall govern removal
proceedings hereunder. Judgment of removal shall be entered only upon individual votes, by a majority of all
members of the governing body, in favor of such removal. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-111 Vacancy in office of judge.
A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if the incumbent:
1. Dies;
2. Resigns;
3. Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or
4. Is removed, and the removal proceedings have been affirmed finally in judicial proceedings or are no
longer subject to judicial review.
Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of judge, the mayor shall appoint a successor to complete the unexpired
term in the same manner as an original appointment is made. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608,
1/1976)
6-112 Disqualification of judge.
In prosecutions before the court no change of venue shall be allowed; but the judge before whom the case is
pending may certify his disqualification or he may be disqualified from sitting under the terms, conditions and
procedure provided by law for courts of record. If a judge is disqualified, the matter shall be heard by an alternate
or acting judge appointed as provided in this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-113 Chief of police.
All writs or processes of the court shall be directed, in his official title, to the chief of police of this municipality,
who shall be the principal officer of the court. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-114 Clerk of the court; duties.
The clerk, or a deputy designated by him, shall be the clerk of the court. He shall assist the judge in recording
the proceedings of the court and in preparing writs, processes and other papers. He shall administer oaths required
in proceedings before the court. He shall enter all pleadings, processes, and proceedings in the dockets of
the court. He shall perform such other clerical duties relating to the proceedings of the court as the judge shall
direct. He shall receive and receipt for forfeitures, fines, deposits, and sums of money payable to the court. He
shall pay to the treasurer of this municipality all money so received by him, except such special deposits or fees
as shall be received to be disbursed by him for special purposes. All money paid to the treasurer shall be placed
in the general fund of the municipality, or in such other funds as the governing body may direct, and it shall be
used in the operation of the municipal government in accordance with budgetary arrangements governing the
fund in which it is placed. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-115 Prosecuting attorney; duties; conflict of interest.
The attorney for this municipality, or his duly designated assistant, shall be the prosecuting officer of the
court. He shall also prosecute all alleged violations of the ordinances of the city. He shall be authorized, in his
discretion, to prosecute and resist appeal, proceedings in error and review from this court to any other court of
the state, and to represent this municipality in all proceedings arising out of matters in this court. (Prior Code,
Sec. Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-116 Bond of court clerk.
The court clerk of the court shall give bond, in the form provided by Section 27-111 of Title II of the Oklahoma
Statutes, in a sum to be determined by the governing body. When executed, the bond shall be submitted to
the governing body for approval. When approved, it shall be filed with the clerk of this municipality and retained
in the municipal archives. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-117 Rules of court.
The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and with the ordinances of this municipality
for the proper conduct of the business of the court. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-118 Enforcement of rules.
Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the judge or by the court may be enforced by the judge,
who may fine or imprison for contempt committed as to him while holding court, or committed against process
issued by him, in the same manner and to the same extent as the district courts of this state. (Prior Code, Chapter
17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-119 Written complaints to prosecute ordinance violations.
All prosecutions for violations of ordinances of this municipality shall be styled “The City of Bristow, Oklahoma
vs. (naming defendant or defendants)”. Except as provided hereinafter, prosecution shall be initiated by the
filing of a written complaint, subscribed and verified by the person making complaint, and setting forth concisely
the offense charged and approved for filing by the city attorney. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-120 Traffic ordinance violations; procedures for issuing citation; custody, arrest.
A. If a police officer observes facts which he believes constitute a violation of the traffic ordinances of this
municipality, committed by a resident thereof, in lieu of arresting such a person, he may take his name, address,
operator’s license number, and registered license number of the motor vehicle involved and any other pertinent
and necessary information and may issue him in writing in form prescribed by the mayor or his duly designated
delegate, a traffic citation embracing the above information, and also stating the traffic violation alleged to have
occurred, and notifying him to answer to the charge against him at a time, not later than fifteen (15) days thereafter,
specified in the citation. The officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged violator, endorsed on
the citation to answer as specified, may then release the person from custody. If the person to whom a citation is
issued fails to answer as prescribed in the citation, a complaint shall be filed and the case shall be prosecuted as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
B. If the alleged traffic violation is committed by a nonresident of this municipality, the police officer may:
1. Release the person after obtaining sufficient information as set out in Section 6-125, pending his appearance
on a day certain in court, as specified in the citation; or
2. Take the person in custody and demand that bond for the offense charged be posted according to the
provisions of this chapter; or
3. Take the person into custody under arrest. The arrested person either shall be taken immediately before
the judge for further proceedings according to law or shall have bail fixed for his release in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Upon providing bail as fixed, and upon giving his written promise to appear upon a
day certain, as provided in Subsection A of this section, the person shall be released from custody.
C. If the alleged offense be a violation of an ordinance restricting or regulating the parking of vehicles, including
any regulations issued under such an ordinance, and the operator be not present, the police officer shall
place on the vehicle, at a place reasonably likely to come to the notice of the operator, a citation conforming substantially
to that prescribed in Subsections A or B of this section, with such variation as the circumstances require;
the operator of this vehicle shall be under the same obligation to respond to the citation as if it had been
issued to him personally under Subsections A or B of this section. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608,
1/19/76; Ord. No. 2/18/80B, as amended)
6-121 Creation of traffic violations bureau, parking violations.
A. A traffic violations bureau hereby may be established as a division of the office of the clerk of the court,
to be administered by the clerk, or by subordinates designated by him for that purpose. Persons who are cited for
violation of one of the parking ordinances of this municipality may elect to pay a fine in the traffic violations
bureau according to the schedule of fines to be determined by the judge.
B. The court may adopt rules to carry into effect this section. Payment of a fine under this section shall constitute
a final determination of cause against the defendant. If a defendant who has elected to pay a fine under
this section fails to do so, prosecution shall proceed under the provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter
17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-122 Summons for arrest.
A. Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of any ordinance, the judge, unless he determines to
issue a warrant of arrest, or unless the defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been arrested and
has given bond for appearance, shall issue a summons, naming the person charged, specifying his address or
place of residence, if known, stating the offense with which he is charged and giving him notice to answer the
charge in the court on a certain day, as specified in the summons, and including such other pertinent information
as may be necessary.
B. The summons shall be served by delivering a copy to the defendant personally. If he fails to appear and
to answer the summons within the prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest, as provided by this
chapter. (Prior Code, Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-123 Form of arrest warrant.
A. Except as otherwise provided in the ordinances of this municipality, upon the filing of a complaint approved
by the endorsement of the attorney of this municipality or by the judge, there shall be issued a warrant of
arrest, in substantially the following form:
The City of Bristow, Oklahoma to the chief of police of Bristow, Oklahoma.
Complaint upon oath having this day been made by (naming complainant) that the offense of (naming the offense
in particular but general terms) has been committed and accusing (name of defendant) thereof, you are
commanded therefor forthwith to arrest the above named defendant and bring ______________ before me, at the
municipal courtroom,
Witness my hand this _______ day of ______________, 19___.
____________________________
Judge of the Municipal Court
Bristow, Oklahoma.
B. It is the duty of the chief of police, personally, or through a duly constituted member of the police force
of this municipality, or through any other person lawfully authorized so to act, to execute a warrant as promptly
as possible. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-124 Procedures for bail or bond.
Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to citation or summons, or at any time before trial,
before or after arraignment, the defendant shall be eligible to be released upon giving bail for his appearance in
an amount and upon conditions fixed by this chapter or the judge, who shall prescribe appropriate rules of court
for the receipt of bail. In case of arrests made at night or under other conditions of emergency or when the judge
is not available, the rules shall authorize the chief of police, or his designated representative, to accept a temporary
cash bond of not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor more than the maximum monetary penalty provided by
ordinance for the offense charged. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-125 Traffic bail bond procedures.
A. In addition to other provisions of law for posting bail, any person, whether a resident of this state or a
nonresident, who is arrested by a law enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a state traffic
law or municipal traffic ordinance shall be released by the arresting officer upon personal recognizance if:
1. The arrested person has been issued a valid license to operate a motor vehicle by this state, another state
jurisdiction within the United States, or any party jurisdiction of the Nonresident Violator Compact;
2. The arresting officer is satisfied as to the identity of the arrested person;
3. The arrested person signs a written promise to appear as provided for on the citation; and
4. The violation does not constitute:
a. A felony;
b. Negligent homicide;
c. Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while impaired or under the influence of
alcohol or other intoxicating substances:
d. Eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer;
e. Operating a motor vehicle without having been issued a valid driver’s license, or while the license is
under suspension, revocation, denial or cancellation;
f. An arrest based upon an outstanding warrant;
g. A traffic violation coupled with any offense stated in subparagraphs a through f of this paragraph;
h. An overweight violation, or the violation of a special permit exceeding the authorized permit weight; or
i. A violation relating to the transportation of hazardous materials.
B. If the arrested person is eligible for release on personal recognizance as provided for in subsection A of
this section, then the arresting officer shall:
1. Designate the traffic charge;
2. Record information from the arrested person’s driver’s license on the citation form, including the name,
address, date of birth, personal description, type of driver’s license, driver’s license number, issuing state, and
expiration date;
3. Record the motor vehicle make, model and tag information;
4. Record the arraignment date and time on the citation; and
5. Permit the arrested person to sign a written promise to appear as provided for in the citation.
The arresting officer shall then release the person upon personal recognizance based upon the signed promise to
appear. The citation shall contain a written notice to the arrested person that release upon personal recognizance
based upon a signed written promise to appear for arraignment is conditional and that failure to timely appear for
arraignment shall result in the suspension of the arrested person’s drivers license in this state, or in the nonresident’s
home state pursuant to the Nonresident Violator Compact.
C. Procedures for arraignment, continuances and scheduling, timely appearances, pleas of guilty or nolo
contendere, posting bail, payment of fines and costs, issuance of arrest warrants, and requests for suspension of
drivers license, shall be required in state law, Sections 1115.1 through 1115.5 of Title 22 of the Oklahoma Statute.
D. A defendant released upon personal recognizance may elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
to the violation charged at any time before he is required to appear for arraignment by indicating such plea on the
copy of the citation furnished to him or on a legible copy thereof, together with the date of the plea and his signature.
The defendant shall be responsible for assuring full payment of the fine and costs to the court clerk. The
defendant shall not use currency for payment by mail. If the defendant has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
as provided for in this subsection, such plea shall be accepted by the court and the amount of the fine and
costs shall be as prescribed by ordinance for the violation charged or as prescribed by the court.
E. If, pursuant to the provisions of subsection D of this section, the defendant does not timely elect to enter
a plea of guilty or nolo contendere and fails to timely appear for arraignment, the court may issue a warrant for
the arrest of the defendant and the municipal or district court clerk, within one hundred twenty (120) calendar
days from the date the citation was issued by the arresting officer, shall notify the State Department of Public
Safety that:
1. The defendant was issued a traffic citation and released upon personal recognizance after signing a written
promise to appear for arraignment as provided for in the citation;
2. The defendant has failed to appear for arraignment without good cause shown;
3. The defendant has not posted bail, paid a fine, or made any other arrangement with the court to satisfy
the citation; and
4. The citation has not been satisfied as provided by law.
The court clerk shall request the State Department of Public Safety to either suspend the defendant’s driver’s
license to operate a motor vehicle in this state, or notify the defendant’s home state and request suspension of the
defendant’s driver’s license in accordance with the provisions of the Nonresident Violator Compact. Such notice
and request shall be on a form approved or furnished by the State Department of Public Safety. The court clerk
shall not process the notification and request provided for in this subsection if, with respect to such charges:
1. The defendant was arraigned, posted bail, paid a fine, was jailed, or otherwise settled the case;
2. The defendant was not released upon personal recognizance upon a signed written promise to appear as
provided for in this section or if released, was not permitted to remain on such personal recognizance for arraignment;
3. The violation relates to parking or standing, an overweight violation, an overweight permit, or the transportation
of hazardous materials; or
4. A period of one hundred twenty (120) calendar days or more has elapsed from the date the citation was
issued by the arresting officer.
F. The court clerk shall maintain a record of each request for driver’s license suspension submitted to the
State Department of Public Safety pursuant to the provisions of this section. When the court or court clerk receives
appropriate bail or payment of the fine and costs, settles the citation, makes other arrangements with the
defendant, or otherwise closes the case, the court clerk shall furnish proof thereof to such defendant, if the defendant
personally appears, or shall mail such proof by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the defendant at the
address noted on the citation or at such other address as is furnished by the defendant. Additionally, the court or
court clerk shall notify the home jurisdiction of the defendant as listed on the citation, if such jurisdiction is a
member of the Nonresident Violator Compact, and shall in all other cases, notify the State Department of Public
Safety of the resolution of the case. The form of proof and the procedures for notification shall be approved by
the State Department of Public Safety. Provided however, the court or court clerk’s failure to furnish such proof
or notice in the manner provided for in this subsection shall in no event create any civil liability upon the court,
the court clerk, the state or any political subdivision thereof, or any state department or agency or any employee
thereof but duplicate proof shall be furnished to the person entitled thereto upon request.
6-126 Arraignment and pleadings by defendant.
Upon making his appearance before the court, the defendant shall be arraigned. The judge, or the attorney of
the municipality, shall read the complaint to the defendant, inform him of his legal rights, including the right of
trial by jury, if available, and of the consequences of conviction, and ask him whether he pleads guilty or not
guilty. If the defendant pleads guilty, the court may proceed to judgment and sentence or may continue the matter
for subsequent disposition. If the plea is not guilty, and the case is not for jury trial, the court may proceed to
try the case, or may set it for hearing at a later date. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-127 Trials and judgments.
A. Before trial commences, either party, upon good cause shown, may obtain a reasonable postponement
thereof.
B. The defendant must be present in person at the trial.
C. In all trials, as to matters not covered in this chapter, or by the statutes relating to municipal criminal
courts, or by rules duly promulgated by the Supreme Court of Oklahoma, the procedure applicable in trials of
misdemeanors in the district courts shall apply to the extent that they can be made effective.
D. If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after the trial, the court must render judgment thereon, fixing
the penalty within the limits prescribed by the applicable ordinance and imposing sentence accordingly.
E. At the close of trial, judgment must be rendered immediately by the judge who shall cause it to be entered
in his docket.
F. If judgment is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be detained for any other legal cause, he must be
discharged at once.
G. A judgment that the defendant pay a fine may also direct that he be imprisoned until the fine is satisfied
at the rate of one day imprisonment for each Five Dollars ($5.00) of fine. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608,
1/19/76)
6-128 Trial by jury and waiver.
A. In all prosecutions for violations of ordinances punishable by fine of more than that amount as set by
state law for jury trials, or by imprisonment, or by both fine and imprisonment, trial shall be by jury, unless
waived by the defendant. If trial by jury is waived, trial shall be to the court.
B. At arraignment, the defendant shall be asked whether he demands or waives trial by jury. His election
shall be recorded in the minutes of the arraignment and entered on the docket of the court respecting proceedings
in the case.
C. An election waiving jury trial, made at arraignment, may be changed by the defendant at any time prior
to the day for which trial by the court is set; an election demanding jury trial may be changed at any time prior to
the commencement of proceedings to impanel the jury for the trial, but if that change occurs after the case has
been set for jury trial, it may not thereafter be rechanged so as again to demand trial by jury. (Prior Code, Chapter
17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
State Law Reference: Fines over $100.00 or imprisonment to be determined by jury trial, 11 O.S. Section 27-
119.
6-129 Juror and jury trial procedures.
A. Whenever a calendar has been made up for the trial of cases by jury, the judge shall request, in writing,
the presiding judge of the district court for this judicial district to cause the names of a stated number of jurors,
deemed sufficient to dispose of the cases on the calendar, to be drawn from the jury wheel in accordance with
the governing statutes of the state, and to be certified by the clerk of the district court to the judge of the municipal
court. The request shall be made in time for the list to be certified and the jurors to be summoned legally before
the trial of the calendar begins. If it is anticipated that the completion of the calendar will require more than
two (2) weeks, the request for jurors shall specify the number required for each two week period, as provided by
law for the drawing of jurors for the district court. Additional drawing of other names also may be requested by
the judge, when necessary, in accordance with the law for such additional drawings in the district court. If, in the
future, provisions of the law respecting the drawing of jury lists for the district court are changed, the judge shall
take such steps, in requesting jury lists for the court, as are necessary to comply with the state law.
B. Upon receipt of the jury list, the clerk of the court shall cause a summons substantially in the following
form to be issued and served upon each person on the list:
STATE OF OKLAHOMA,
SS
COUNTY OF CREEK,
TO _____________, GREETING: you hereby are summoned to appear in the Municipal Court for the City of
Bristow, Oklahoma, to be held at ___________ on the ______day of __________,19____, at the hour of
________o’clock ____.M., to serve as a juror in said court, and to continue in such service until discharged by
the court.
Hereof fail not, under penalty of law.
Issued under the authority of said court, this _______day of _____________, 19___.
_____________________________
Clerk of the Municipal Court of the City of Bristow, Oklahoma
C. Service shall be made, as the judge may prescribe by rule or direct by order, either in person upon the
juror by the marshal of the court or by any member of the police force of this municipality, or by the clerk of the
court, through certified mail, directed to the juror at his address as given in the jury list with request for a personally
signed return receipt. In any proceeding wherein service of summons by mail is in issue, evidence of the
due mailing of the summons by the clerk or a member of his staff and the presentation of an official postal return
receipt purportedly signed by the addressee shall be prima facie evidence that the summons was duly received by
the addressee and therefore, that he was properly served therewith.
D. A jury in the court shall consist of six jurors, good and lawful men or women, citizens of the County of
Creek possessing the qualifications of jurors in district court.
E. After the jurors are sworn, they must sit together and hear the proofs and oral arguments of the parties,
which must be delivered in public and in the presence of the defendant.
F. A verdict of the jury may be rendered by the vote of five (5) jurors.
G. In all actions tried before a jury, the judge shall determine all questions of law, including questions as to
the introduction of evidence, arising during the trial. He also shall instruct the jury as to the law.
H. The verdict of the jury, in all cases, must be general. When the jury has arrived at its verdict, it must deliver
the verdict publicly to the court. The judge must enter the verdict in the docket or cause it to be so entered.
I. The jury must not be discharged after the cause is submitted to it until a verdict is rendered, unless the
judge, for good cause, discharges it sooner, in which event the court may proceed again to trial, and so on, until a
verdict is rendered.
6-130 Witness fees.
Witnesses in any proceeding in the court other than the police officers or peace officers shall be entitled to a
fee of two dollars ($2.00) each day of attendance, plus mileage of five cents ($0.05) for each mile actually and
necessarily traveled in going to and returning from the place of attendance if their residence is outside the limits
of the municipality. However, no witness shall receive fees or mileage in more than one case for the same period
of time or the same travel. A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit with the clerk a sum sufficient
to cover fees and mileage for one day of attendance for each witness to be summoned, but such deposit
shall not be required from an indigent defendant who files an affidavit setting out:
1. The name of no more than three (3) witnesses;
2. That the defendant, by reason of his poverty, is unable to provide the fees and mileage allowed by law;
3. That the testimony of the witnesses is material; and
4. That their attendance at the trial is necessary for his proper defense.
The fees of such witnesses shall be paid by the municipality. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-131 Compensation of jurors.
Jurors shall receive for their services a fee of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) per day, plus mileage of ten
cents ($0.10) for each mile necessarily traveled by the most direct route in going to and from the court from their
respective places of residence. The claims for such compensation shall show the location of the juror’s residence
and the route and miles traveled, and must be verified as other claims against the municipality are verified. Jurors
shall be paid out of the general funds of the municipality.
6-132 Suspension of sentence.
After conviction and sentence, the judge may suspend sentence, continue and delay imposing a judgment sentence,
or order the defendant to a term of community service or remedial action in lieu of fine or in conjunction
with imprisonment, in accordance with the provisions of, and subject to the conditions and procedures imposed
by the statutes of the state of Oklahoma now and hereinafter provided. In accordance with Oklahoma Law, an
administrative fee not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) may be accessed in cases where a deferred sentence
is imposed. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76; Ord. No. 7-1-91)
6-133 Imprisonment.
A. If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment is entered, a copy thereof, certified by the clerk, shall be
delivered to the chief of police, the sheriff of the county or other appropriate police officer. Such copy shall be
sufficient warrant for execution of the sentence.
B. All prisoners confined to jail on conviction or on plea of guilty may be compelled, if their health permits,
to work on the public streets, avenues, alleys, parks, buildings, or other public premises or property. For
each day of such work, the prisoner shall be credited for serving two days of imprisonment under his sentence.
C. The chief of police, subject to the direction of the mayor, shall direct where the work shall be performed.
The head of the department in charge of the place where the work is to be performed, himself, or by some person
designated by him, shall oversee the work. If a guard is necessary, the chief of police shall make provision therefor.
(Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No. 608, 1/19/76)
6-134 Fines and costs--Imprisonment for failure to pay.
A. If judgment of conviction is entered, the clerk of the court shall tax the costs to the defendant plus the
fees and mileage of jurors and witnesses, but the total amount of fine may not exceed the amount set out in Section
1-108 of this code.
B. Any person fined for violation of a municipal ordinance who is financially able but refuses or neglects to
pay the fine or costs may be compelled to satisfy the amount owed by working on the streets, alleys, avenues,
areas, and public grounds of the city subject to the direction of the mayor or department head, at a rate of five
dollars ($5.00) per day for useful labor, until the fine or costs are satisfied. (Prior Code, Chapter 17; Ord. No.
608, 1/19/76: Ord. No. 6-20-88, 6/20/88)
6-135 Deduction from fines for training fund.
A. For every offense punishable by a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) or more, fees in the amounts set by Oklahoma
State Statutes shall be collected and set aside for the state law enforcement officer’s training fund and for
the automated fingerprint identification system.
B. For every offense punishable by a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) or more, an additional fee in the amount of
three dollars ($3.00) shall be collected by the court and set aside for the Bristow police training and equipment
fund.
C. For every offense not resulting in a judicial finding of innocence, a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) may be
collected by the court.
D. The Bristow police training and equipment fund is hereby created. The Bristow police training and
equipment fund shall be a separate fund, not supplanting normal training funds established within the municipal
budget, for the purpose of providing training of municipal law enforcement officers and to provide additional
police equipment as needed.
E. The treasurer shall deposit the monies set aside pursuant to subsections A, B and C of this section into
the appropriate funds as required by the state statute and municipal ordinance.
F. The fees specified in subsections A and B of this section shall not be considered as a part of court costs
assessed in any case.
G. The provisions of this section shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other provisions of the
ordinances of the city of Bristow, Oklahoma.
H. All former ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting or inconsistent with the provisions of this section
are hereby repealed.
I. The provisions of this section shall become effective October 1, 1995, at 12:01 a.m. (Ord. 8-28-95 § 1)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 20 O.S. Section 1313.1.
6-136 Conduct of sessions of court--Notice.
The judge of the municipal court shall conduct regular sessions of the municipal court. Notice of the sessions
shall be given as prescribed in the Oklahoma Open Meetings Law, Sections 301 et seq., of Title 25 of the Oklahoma
Statutes.
Chapter 2
(RESERVED)
PART 7
FINANCE AND TAXATION
Chapters:
1 Finance and Budget Administration
2 Sales Tax
3 Telephone Exchange Tax
4 Utility Tax
5 Miscellaneous Fees
6 Transient Occupancy Tax
7 Tangible Personal Property Excise Tax
Chapter 1
FINANCE AND BUDGET
ADMINISTRATION
Sections:
7-101 Depositories designated--Funds to be deposited.
7-102 Funds secured by unit collateral system.
7-103 Contractual services defined for purchasing.
7-104 Purchases--How made.
7-105 Purchasing procedure.
7-106 Competitive bidding.
7-107 When competitive bidding is not required.
7-108 Sales, council to declare surplus or obsolete competitive bidding.
7-109 When competitive bidding is not required on sales.
7-110 Officers--Purchases--Contracts.
7-111 Funding and accounting generally.
7-112 Claims and invoices--How made and processed.
7-113 Warrants--Disbursement of funds.
7-101 Depositories designated--Funds to be deposited.
Funds of the city shall be deposited as required by law. The city treasurer shall deposit daily all public funds
received by him into designated banks and savings and loan associations.
State Law Reference: Deposits by treasurers, designation of depositories; 11 O.S. Section 10-118.
7-102 Funds secured by unit collateral system.
The deposits of the city shall be secured by the Unit Collateral System provided by the Oklahoma Statutes.
State Law Reference: Unit Collateral System, 62 O.S. Sections 516.1 et seq.
7-103 Contractual services defined for purchasing.
“Contractual services,” for the purpose of this chapter, shall mean services performed for the city by persons
not in the employment of the city, and may include the use of equipment or the furnishing of commodities in
connection with the services under express or implied contract. Contractual services shall include travel; freight;
express; parcel post; postage; telephone; telegraph; utilities; rents; printing out; binding; repairs, alterations and
maintenance of buildings, equipment, streets and bridges, and other physical facilities of the city; and other services
performed for the city by persons not in the employment of the city.
7-104 Purchases--How made.
A. All purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services for the offices, departments and
agencies of the city government, shall be made by the city’s purchasing authority or pursuant to authorizations
granted by the mayor and council, and subject to their supervision and control.
B. The mayor or the mayor’s designee is authorized to make decisions for the purchase of goods, services
or material, including, but not limited to, the decision to purchase same, the quantity and quality of same and the
source of supply, without approval of the city council in such amounts not to exceed five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) per transaction. The goods, services, labor or supplies shall be purchased after such reasonable notice
as the city mayor or the mayor’s designee may direct. (Ord. No. 6/2/80B, 6/2/80; Ord. No. 619, 6/21/76;
Ord. 11-3-97A § 1)
7-105 Purchasing procedure.
A. Any person purchasing equipment, services, labor or supplies for the city shall give the seller thereof the
following information:
1. The specific department of city government to which the charge is to be made;
2. The name of the person authorizing the purchase or repair; and
3. The truck or vehicle number or specific piece of property on which the purchase is to be used. Serial
numbers shall be used whenever possible.
B. A copy of an invoice or ticket prepared by the seller shall be given to the department head upon the day
in which the debt is incurred, to be filed and matched when the statement is received, so the account can be reconciled
for payment.
C. All invoices and bills presented to the city shall bear the information set out in subsection A of this section.
D. Any charges billed to the city not bearing the information outlined above will not be certified or presented
to the council for approval until such time as this information has been furnished.
E. It is the responsibility of the head of each city department to acquaint the workers with the guidelines set
forth above. (Ord. No. 1-80, 1/6/80)
7-106 Competitive bidding.
Before the city makes any purchase of, or contract for, supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services,
except as otherwise provided below, the purchasing officer shall submit to at least three (3) persons, firms or
corporations dealing in and able to supply the same, or to a smaller number if there are not three (3) dealing in
and able to supply the same, a request for quotation, or invitation to bid, and specifications, to give them opportunity
to bid; or publish notice of the proposed purchase in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
The purchasing officer shall favor a person, firm or corporation in the city when this can be done without additional
cost to the city; but the purchasing officer shall submit requests for quotation to those outside the city
when this may be necessary to secure bids or to create competitive conditions, or when the purchasing officer
thinks that by so doing the purchasing officer can make a saving for the city; and shall purchase from them when
the purchasing officer can make a saving for the city. All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in public at a
designated time and place. The purchasing officer may repeatedly reject all bids, and again may submit to the
same or other persons, firms or corporations the request for quotation, or invitation to bid, or again publish notice
of the proposed purchase. The purchasing officer may purchase from the bidder whose bid is most advantageous
to the city, considering price, quality, date of delivery and so on, and in case of a tie, may purchase from
one of those tying, or may divide the purchase among those tying, always accepting the bid or bids most advantageous
to the city.
State Law Reference: Public Competitive Bidding Act requirements, capital improvements and repairs, 60
O.S. Sections 101 et seq.
7-107 When competitive bidding is not required.
The following may be purchased without giving an opportunity for competitive bidding. For the purpose of
this section, competitive is as defined in Section 7-106 of this code:
1. Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services whose cost does not exceed five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) in a single transaction;
1.1. Supplies, material, equipment or contractual services whose cost does not exceed twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) provided that prior to the expenditure of such sums (1) the city has received three (3) written
quotes, and (2) the city council has approved such expenditures;
2. Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services which can be furnished only by a single dealer, or
which have a uniform price wherever bought;
3. Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services purchased from another unit of government at a
price deemed below that obtainable from private dealers, including government surplus;
4. Equipment to replace existing equipment which has become inoperable when the board of trustees declares
the purchase an emergency;
5. Contractual services, including but not limited to natural gas, electricity, telephone service, purchased
from a public utility at a price or rate determined by the State Corporation Commission or other governmental
authority;
6. Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services when purchased at a price not exceeding a price
set thereof or by the state purchasing agency or any other state agency hereafter authorized to regulate prices for
things purchased by the state, whether such price is determined by a contract negotiated with a vendor or otherwise;
7. Employee health insurance;
8. Contractual services of a professional nature, such as engineering, architectural and medical services
unless competitive bidding is required by applicable law or regulations; and
9. Emergency purchases as authorized by the mayor and council. (Ord. No. 4-16-90.1; Ord. 11-3-97B § 1;
Ord. 26-050503 § 1)
7-108 Sales, council to declare surplus or obsolete competitive bidding.
No surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment of a value of more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) may be sold until the city council shall have declared them obsolete or surplus. Before the city sells
any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment, except as otherwise provided below, the city purchasing
officer shall advertise them for sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or give notice in such
other manner as the city purchasing officer deems necessary adequately to reach prospective buyers to give them
opportunity to make necessary bids. All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in public at a designated time
and place, except when the sale is by auction. The city may repeatedly reject all bids and advertise or give notice
again. The city purchasing officer shall sell such supplies, materials or equipment to the highest responsible bidder.
In case of a tie, if necessary, the city purchasing officer shall cast lots to determine to whom to sell, or the
city purchasing officer may divide the sale among two (2) or more tying, always selling to the highest responsible
bidder or bidders.
7-109 When competitive bidding is not required on sales.
The city may sell the following without giving an opportunity for competitive bidding:
1. Surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment whose total value does not exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) in a single transaction; and
2. Supplies, materials or equipment when sold at a price at least as great as that paid by the city for the
same.
7-110 Officers--Purchases--Contracts.
A. No member of the city council may sell, or furnish for a consideration, any materials or supplies for use
of the city; and any member of the council voting for, or consenting to, or being a party to, such contract or purchase
is personally liable as provided by law.
B. The city council may not make any contract with any of its members, or in which any of its members
shall be directly or indirectly interested, such contracts being prohibited by law.
C. No officer of the city may become directly or indirectly interested individually in any sale, lease, or contract
which he is authorized to make, such being prohibited by law.
State Law Reference: Personal liability for contracts where board of trustees member is a party, 62 O.S. Section
355-357; contracts where board of trustees has an interest, 12 O.S. 371; officers’ interest in contracts, 21
O.S. Section 344.
7-111 Funding and accounting generally.
The revenues and other resources of the city shall be divided into funds as provided by law and accounted for
as provided thereby.
7-112 Claims and invoices--How made and processed.
Claims and invoices against the city shall be made and processed as provided by law.
7-113 Warrants--Disbursement of funds.
Warrants shall be issued and processed, and funds of the city disbursed, only for legal purposes and in accordance
with law.
Chapter 2
SALES TAX
Sections:
7-201 Citation and codification.
7-202 Definitions.
7-203 Tax collector defined.
7-204 Classification of taxpayers.
7-205 Subsisting state permits.
7-206 Effective date.
7-207 Purpose of revenues.
7-208 Tax rate; sales subject to tax.
7-209 Exemptions; sales subject to other tax.
7-210 Exemptions; governmental and nonprofit entities.
7-211 Exemptions; general.
7-212 Exemptions; agriculture.
7-213 Exemptions; manufacturers.
7-214 Exemptions; corporations and partnerships.
7-215 Tax due when; returns; records.
7-216 Payment of tax; brackets.
7-217 Tax constitutes debt.
7-218 Vendor’s duty to collect tax; penalties.
7-219 Returns and remittances; discounts.
7-220 Interest and penalties; delinquency.
7-221 Waiver of interest and penalties.
7-222 Erroneous payments; claim for refund.
7-223 Fraudulent returns.
7-224 Records confidential.
7-225 Amendments.
7-226 Provisions cumulative.
7-201 Citation and codification.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as “City of Bristow Sales Tax Ordinance.” (Prior Code, Chapter
10, as amended)
Editor’s Note: Ordinance Number 519, effective August 1, 1967, levied a one cent tax. Ordinance Number
606, effective May 1, 1976, levied the second one cent tax. Ord. No. 102786, effective December 16, 1986, levied
a third one cent tax earmarked as provided herein. The term of the third cent sales tax is until 1987 Municipal
Authority debt is paid. Ordinance Number 4-3-95, effective June 13, 1995, has amended the provisions of this
chapter by increasing the excise tax to three and one-half percent and providing for the continuation of the tax
levy until either the indebtedness is repaid in full or until September 1, 2015, whichever comes first.
State Law Reference: Authority to levy (sales) taxes for municipal purposes, 68 O.S. Section 2701; State
Sales Tax Code 68 O.S. Sections 1350 et seq.
7-202 Definitions.
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, Section 1352 of Title
68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Prior Code,
Chapter 10, as amended)
7-203 Tax collector defined.
The term “tax collector” as used in this chapter means the department of the city or the official agency of the
state duly designated according to law or contract, and authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax
levied in this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-204 Classification of taxpayers.
For the purpose of this chapter the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for
purposes of the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-205 Subsisting state permits.
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma Tax Commission pursuant to the
Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are, for the purpose of this chapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of
any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended; Ord.
No. 102786, 10/27/86)
7-206 Effective date.
This chapter became effective after approval of a majority of the registered voters of the city voting on the
ordinance in the manner prescribed by Section 16-112 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. (Prior Code, Chapter
10, as amended)
7-207 Purpose of revenues.
A. It is the purpose of the first cent sales tax to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal
government of the city.
B. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this third cent sales tax to:
1. Provide funds to secure and to provide funds to repay or refund certain indebtedness heretofore or hereafter
issued by the Municipal Authority of the city, such indebtedness having been heretofore incurred or as shall
be hereafter incurred to finance the improvements to the municipal utility or street systems for the beneficiary
city, and to pay related professional expenses and costs of issuance of such obligations; or
2. Provide general revenues to the city of any funds in excess of those required for paragraph 1 above.
(Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended; Ord. No. 102786, 12/27/86)
Editor’s Note: Ordinance 102786 levying the third cent tax provides that all of the provisions thereof shall be
and remain effective and unabated until, through and including the date all series of indebtedness of the Municipal
Authority of the city issued during 1987 and evidenced by the issuance of such Authority’s bond, notes or
other evidences of indebtedness shall be paid in full, after which time the ordinance, and the additional sales tax
provided and levied hereby, shall thereupon and then terminate without any further act or deed.
7-208 Tax rate; sales subject to tax.
There is hereby levied an excise tax of three percent (3%) upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived
from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code including but not exclusive of the following:
1. Tangible personal property;
2. Natural or artificial gas, electricity, ice, steam, or any other utility or public service except water and
those specifically exempt by this chapter;
3. Transportation for hire of persons by common carriers, including railroads, both steam and electric, motor
transportation companies, taxicab companies, pullman car companies, airlines and all other means of transportation
for hire;
4. Service by telephone and telegraph companies to subscribers or users, including transmission of messages,
whether local or long distance. This shall include all services and rental charges having any connection
with transmission of any message;
5. Printing or printed matter of all types, kinds, and characters and the service of printing or over-printing,
including the copying of information by mimeograph or multigraph or by otherwise duplicating written or
printed matter in any manner, or the production of microfiche containing information on magnetic tapes furnished
by customers;
6. Service of furnishing rooms by hotel, apartment hotel, public rooming house, motel, public lodging
house or tourist camps;
7. Service of furnishing storage or parking privileges by auto hotels and parking lots;
8. Selling, renting or otherwise furnishing computer hardware or software or coding sheets, cards or magnetic
tapes on which prewritten programs have been coded, punched or otherwise recorded;
9. Food, confections and all drinks sold or dispensed by hotels, restaurants, or other dispensers, and sold
for immediate consumption upon the premises or delivered or carried away from the premises for consumption
elsewhere;
10. Advertising of all kinds, types and character, including any and all devices used for advertising purposes
and the servicing of any advertising devices, except those specifically exempt by this chapter;
11. Dues or fees to clubs including free or complimentary dues or fees which shall have the value equivalent
to the charge that would have otherwise been made, including any fees paid for the use of facilities or services
rendered at a health spa or club or any similar facility or business;
12. Sales of tickets, fees or other charges made for admission to or voluntary contributions made to places of
amusement, sports entertainment, exhibition, display or other recreational events or activities, including free or
complimentary admissions which shall have the value equivalent to the charge that would have otherwise been
made;
13. Charges made for the privilege of entering or engaging in any kind of activity, when no admission is
charged spectators, such as tennis, racket ball or hand ball courts;
14. Charges made for the privilege of using items for amusement, sports, entertainment or recreational activity
such as trampolines or golf carts;
15. The rental of equipment for amusement, sports, entertainment or other recreational activities, such as
bowling shoes, skates, golf carts, or other sports and athletic equipment;
16. The gross receipts from sales through any vending machine, without any deduction for rental to locate
the vending machine on the premises of a person who is not the owner or any other deductions therefrom;
17. Gross receipts or gross proceeds from the rental or lease of tangible personal property, including rental
or lease of personal property when the rental or lease agreement requires the vendor to launder, clean, repair or
otherwise service the rented or leased property on a regular basis, without any deduction for the cost of the service
rendered. Provided if the rental or lease charge is based on the retail value of the property at the time of
making the rental or lease agreement and the expected life of the property, and the rental or lease charge is separately
stated from the service cost in the statement, bill or invoice delivered to the consumer, the cost of services
rendered shall be deducted from the gross receipts or gross proceeds;
18. Any licensing agreement, rental, lease or other device or instrument whereby rights to possess or exhibit
motion pictures or filmed performances or rights to receive images, pictures or performances for telecast by any
method are transferred. Provided, persons regularly engaged in the business of exhibiting motion pictures for
which the sale of tickets or admissions is taxed under this article shall not be deemed to be consumers or users in
respect to the licensing or exhibiting of copyrighted motion picture features, shorts, cartoons and scenes from
copyrighted features and the sale or licensing of such films shall not be considered a sale within the purview of
this chapter;
19. Flowers, plants, shrubs, trees and other floral items, whether or not same was produced by the vendor,
sold by persons engaged in florist or nursery business in this state, including all orders taken by an Oklahoma
business for delivery in another state. Provided, all orders taken outside this state for delivery within this state
shall not be subject to the tax levied by this chapter;
20. Tangible personal property sold to persons, peddlers, solicitors or other salesmen, for resale where there
is likelihood that this state will lose tax revenue due to the difficulty of enforcing this chapter because of:
a. The operation of the business;
b. The nature of the business;
c. The turnover of independent contractors;
d. The lack of place of business in which to display a permit or keep records;
e. Lack of adequate records;
f. The persons are minors or transients;
g. The persons are engaged in service businesses; or
h. Any other reasonable reason;
21. Any taxable services and tangible personal property including materials, supplies and equipment sold to
contractors for the purpose of developing and improving real estate even though such real estate is intended for
resale as real property are hereby declared to be sales to consumers or users and taxable; and
22. Any taxable services and tangible personal property sold to persons who are primarily engaged in selling
their services, such as repairmen, are hereby declared to be sales to consumers or users and taxable. (Prior Code,
Chapter 10, as amended; Ord. No. 102786, 10/27/86)
7-209 Exemptions; sales subject to other tax.
There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this chapter the gross receipts or gross proceeds
exempted from the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code inclusive, but not exclusive of, and derived from the:
1. Sale of nonintoxicating beverages on which the tax levied by state law has been paid;
2. Sale of cigarettes and such tobacco products on which the tax levied by state law has been paid;
3. Sale of gasoline or motor fuel on which the motor fuel tax, gasoline excise tax or special fuels tax levied
by state law has been paid;
4. Sale of motor vehicles or any optional equipment or accessories attached to motor vehicles on which the
Oklahoma Motor Vehicle Excise Tax levied by state law has been paid; and
5. Sale of crude petroleum or natural or casinghead gas and other products subject to gross production tax
under state law. This exemption shall not apply when such products are sold to consumer or user for consumption
or use, except when used for injection into the earth for the purpose of promoting or facilitating the production
of oil or gas. This paragraph shall not operate to increase or repeal the gross production tax levied by the
laws of this state. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-210 Exemptions; governmental and nonprofit entities.
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this chapter:
1. Sale of tangible personal property or services to the United States government or to the State of Oklahoma,
any political subdivision of this state or any agency of a political subdivision of the state; provided, all
sales to contractors in connection with the performance of any contract with the United States government, State
of Oklahoma or any of its political subdivisions shall not be exempted from the tax levied by this chapter, except
as hereinafter provided;
2. Sales of property to agents appointed or contracted with by agencies or instrumentalities of the United
States Government if ownership and possession of such property transfers immediately to the United States
Government;
3. Sales made directly by county, district or state fair authorities of this state, upon the premises of the fair
authority, for the sole benefit of the fair authority;
4. Sale of food in cafeterias or lunch rooms of elementary schools, high schools, colleges or universities
which are operated primarily for teachers and pupils and are not operated primarily for the public or for profit;
5. Dues paid to fraternal, religious, civic, charitable or educational societies or organizations by regular
members thereof, provided, such societies or organizations operate under what is commonly termed the lodge
plan or system, and provided such societies or organizations do not operate for a profit which inures to the benefit
of any individual member or members thereof to the exclusion of other members;
6. Sale of tangible personal property or services to or by churches, except sales made in the course of business
for profit or savings, competing with other persons engaged in the same or similar business;
7. The amount of proceeds received from the sale of admission tickets which is separately stated on the
ticket of admission for the repayment of money borrowed by any accredited state-supported college or university
for the purpose of constructing or enlarging any facility to be used for the staging of an athletic event, a theatrical
production, or any other form of entertainment, edification or cultural cultivation to which entry is gained
with a paid admission ticket. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, athletic fields, athletic stadiums, field
houses, amphitheaters and theaters. To be eligible for this sales tax exemption, the amount separately stated on
the admission ticket shall be a surcharge which is imposed, collected and used for the sole purpose of servicing
or aiding in the servicing of debt incurred by the college or university to effect the capital improvements hereinbefore
described;
8. Sales of tangible personal property or services to the council organizations or similar state supervisory
organizations of the Boy Scouts of America, Girl Scouts of U.S.A. and the Campfire Girls shall be exempt from
sales tax;
9. Sale of tangible personal property or services to any county, municipality, public school district, the institutions
of the Oklahoma system of higher education and the Grand River Dam Authority, or to any person
with whom any of the above named subdivisions or agencies of this state has duly entered into a public contract
pursuant to law, necessary for carrying out such public contract or to any subcontractor to such a public contract.
Any person making purchases on behalf of such subdivision or agency of this state shall certify, in writing, on
the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor that the purchases are made for and on behalf
of such subdivision or agency of this state and set out the name of such public subdivision or agency. Any person
who wrongfully or erroneously certifies that purchases are for any of the above named subdivision or agencies
of this state or who otherwise violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined an amount equal to double the amount of the sales tax involved or incarcerated for not
more than sixty (60) days or both;
10. Sales of tangible personal property or services to private institutions of higher education and private institutions
of higher education and private elementary and secondary institutions of education accredited by the
State Department of Education or registered by the State Board of Education for purposes of participating in federal
programs or accredited as defined by the Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education which are exempt
from taxation pursuant to the provisions of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, including materials,
supplies, and equipment used in the construction and improvement of buildings and other structures owned by
the institutions and operated for education purposes. Any person, firm, agency or entity making purchases on
behalf of any institution, agency or subdivision in this state, shall certify in writing, on the copy of the invoice of
sales ticket the nature of the purchases, and violation of this act shall be a misdemeanor as set forth in Paragraph
(9) of this section;
11. Tuition and education fees paid to private institutions of higher education and private elementary and
secondary institutions of education accredited by the State Department of Education or registered by the State
Board of Education for purposes of participating in federal programs or accredited as defined by the Oklahoma
State Regents for Higher Education which are exempt from taxation pursuant to the provisions of the Section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; and
12. Sales of tangible personal property made by public or private school for grade levels kindergarten
through twelfth grade, a public school district, public school board, public school student group or organization
or public school district personnel for purposes of raising funds for the benefit of such school, school district,
school board, student group or organization. For purposes of this paragraph, “public or private school” shall
mean any public or private institution of education accredited by the State Department of Education or registered
by the State Board of Education for purposes of participating in federal programs. Sale of tangible personal
property in this paragraph shall not include sale of admission tickets or concessions at athletic events. (Prior
Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-211 Exemptions; general.
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this chapter:
1. Transportation of school pupils to and from elementary schools or high schools in motor or other vehicles;
2. Transportation of persons where the fare of each person does not exceed One Dollar ($1.00), or local
transportation of persons within the corporate limits of a municipality except by taxicab;
3. Carrier sales of newspapers and periodicals made directly to consumers. Other sales of newspapers and
periodicals where any individual transaction does not exceed seventy-five cents ($0.75). A carrier is a person
who regularly delivers newspapers or periodicals to subscribers on an assigned route;
4. Sales for resale to persons engaged in the business of reselling the articles purchased, whether within or
without the state, provided that such sales to residents of this state are made to persons to whom sales tax permits
have been issued as provided in this chapter. This exemption shall not apply to the sales of articles made to persons
holding permits when such persons purchase items for their use and which they are not regularly engaged in
the business of reselling; neither shall this exemption apply to sales of tangible personal property to peddlers,
solicitors and other salesmen who do not have an established place of business and a sales tax permit;
5. Sales of advertising space in newspapers and periodicals and billboard advertising service, and any advertising
through the electronic media, including radio, television and cable television;
6. Eggs, feed, supplies, machinery and equipment purchased by persons regularly engaged in the business
of raising worms, fish, any insect or any other form of terrestrial or aquatic animal life and used for the purpose
of raising same for marketing. This exemption shall only be granted and extended to the purchaser when the
items are to be used and in fact are used in the raising of animal life as set out above. Each purchaser shall certify,
in writing, on the invoice or sales ticket retained by the vendor that he is regularly engaged in the business
of raising such animal life and that the items purchased will be used only in such business. The vendor shall certify
to the Oklahoma Tax Commission that the price of the items has been reduced to grant the full benefit of the
exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor;
7. Sales of medicine or drugs prescribed for the treatment of human beings by a person licensed to prescribe
the medicine or drugs. This exemption shall not apply to proprietary or patent medicines as defined by
Section 353.1 of Title 59 of the Oklahoma Statutes;
8. Transfers of title or possession of empty, partially filled, or filled returnable oil drums to any person who
is not regularly engaged in the business of selling, reselling or otherwise transferring empty, partially filled, or
filled returnable oil drums;
9. Sales of food or food products for home consumption which are purchased in whole or in part with coupons
issued pursuant to the federal food stamp program as authorized by Sections 2011 through 2029 of Title 7
of the United States Code, as to that portion purchased with such coupons. The exemption provided for such
sales shall be inapplicable to such sales upon the effective date of any federal law that removes the requirement
of the exemption as a condition for participation by the State of Oklahoma in the federal food stamp programs;
and
10. Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting or prohibiting the city from levying and collecting taxes on
the sale of natural or artificial gas and electricity, whether sold for residential or commercial purposes. Any sales
tax levied by the city on natural or artificial gas and electricity shall be in effect regardless of ordinance or contractual
provisions referring to previously imposed state sales tax on such items. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as
amended)
7-212 Exemptions; agriculture.
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this chapter:
1. Sales of agricultural products produced in this state by the producer thereof directly to the consumer or
user when such articles are sold at or from a farm and not from some other place of business, as follows:
a. Farm, orchard or garden products;
b. Dairy products sold by a dairyman or farmer who owns all the cows from which the dairy products offered
for sale are produced;
c. Livestock sold by the producer at a special livestock sale; or
d. The provisions of this paragraph shall not be construed as exempting sales by florists, nurserymen or
chicken hatcheries, or sales of dairy products by any other business except as set out herein;
2. Sale of baby chicks, turkey poults and starter pullets used in the commercial production of chickens, turkeys
and eggs, provided that the purchaser certifies, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be
retained by the vendor that the pullets will be used primarily for egg production;
3. Sale of salt, grains, tankage, oyster shells, mineral supplements, limestone and other generally recognized
animal feeds for the following purposes and subject to the following limitations:
a. Feed which is fed to poultry and livestock, including breeding stock and wool-bearing stock, for the purpose
of producing eggs, poultry, milk or meat for human consumption;
b. Feed purchased in Oklahoma for the purpose of being fed to and which is fed by the purchaser to horses,
mules or other domestic or draft animals used directly in the producing and marketing of agricultural products;
c. Any stock tonics, water purifying products, stock sprays, disinfectants or other such agricultural supplies;
d. Poultry shall not be construed to include any fowl other than domestic fowl kept and raised for the market
or production of eggs;
e. Livestock shall not be construed to include any pet animals such as dogs, cats, birds or such other furbearing
animals; and
f. This exemption shall only be granted and extended where the purchaser of feed that is to be used and in
fact is used for a purpose that would bring about an exemption hereunder executes an invoice or sales ticket in
duplicate on a form to be prescribed by the Tax Commission. The purchaser may demand and receive a copy of
the invoice or sales ticket and the vendor shall retain a copy;
4. Sales of items to be and in fact used in the production of agricultural products. Sale of the following
items shall be subject to the following limitations:
a. Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person regularly engaged, for profit, in the business of farming
and/or ranching. Each such purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained
by the vendor, that he is so engaged in farming and/or ranching and that the material purchased will be
used only in such business;
b. Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person engaged in the business of applying such materials on a contract
or custom basis to land owned or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the business
of farming and/or ranching. Each such purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales
ticket to be retained by the vendor that he is engaged in the business of applying such materials to lands owned
or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the business of farming and/or ranching, and
shall show in the certificate the name or names of such owner or lessee and operator, the location of the lands on
which the materials are to be applied to each such land, and he shall further certify that his contract price has
been reduced so as to give the farmer or rancher the full benefit of this exemption;
c. Sales of agricultural fertilizer to persons engaged in the business of applying such materials on a contract
or custom basis shall not be considered to be sales to contractors under this chapter, and the sales shall not be
considered to be taxable sales within the meaning of the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code. As used in this section, “agricultural
fertilizer” means any substance sold and used for soil enrichment or soil corrective purposes or for
promoting the growth and productivity of plants;
d. Sales of agricultural seed or plants to any person regularly engaged, for profit, in the business of farming
and/or ranching. This section shall not be construed as exempting from sales tax, seed which is packaged and
sold for use in noncommercial flower and vegetable gardens;
e. Sales of agricultural chemical pesticides to any person regularly engaged, for profit, in the business of
farming and/or ranching. For the purposes of this act, agricultural chemical pesticides shall include any substance
or mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating any insect, snail,
slug, rodent, bird, nematode, fungus, weed or any other form of terrestrial or aquatic plant or animal life or virus,
bacteria or other microorganism, except viruses, bacterial or other microorganisms on or in living man, or any
substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant or desiccant; and
f. This exemption shall only be granted and extended to the purchaser where the items are to be used and
in fact are used in the production of agricultural products. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of
the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that the material purchased will only be used in his farming
occupation. The vendor shall certify to the Oklahoma Tax Commission that the contract price of the items
has been reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or vendor shall be
a misdemeanor, and, upon violation and conviction for a second offense the Oklahoma Tax Commission shall
revoke the vendor’s sales tax permit; and
5. Sale of farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel, oil, lubricants and other substances used for operation
and maintenance of the farm machinery to be used directly on a farm or ranch in the production, cultivation,
planting, sowing, harvesting, processing, spraying, preservation or irrigation of any livestock, poultry, agricultural
or dairy products produced from such lands. Each purchaser of farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel
must certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that he is engaged
in farming or ranching and that the farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel will be used only in farming
and/or ranching. The exemption provided for herein shall not apply to motor vehicles. Each purchaser shall certify,
in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that the material purchased
will only be used in his farming occupation. The vendor shall certify to the Oklahoma Tax Commission that the
price of the items has been reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser
or vendor shall be a misdemeanor, and, upon violation and conviction for a second offense the Oklahoma Tax
Commission shall revoke the vendor’s sales tax permit. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-213 Exemptions; manufacturers.
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this chapter:
1. Goods, wares, merchandise and property purchased for the purpose of being used or consumed in the
process of manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling or preparing for sale a finished article and such
goods, wares, merchandise or property become integral parts of the manufactured, compounded, processed, assembled
or prepared products or are consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling
or preparing products for resale. The term “manufacturing plants” shall mean those establishments
primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such;
2. Ethyl alcohol when sold and used for the purpose of blending same with motor fuel on which motor fuel
tax is levied by state law;
3. Sale of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons establishing new manufacturing plants
in Oklahoma, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons in the operation of manufacturing
plants already established in Oklahoma. This exemption shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is
incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of manufacturing property subject to taxation under this
chapter. The term “manufacturing plants” shall mean those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing
or processing operations, and generally recognized as such;
4. Sales of containers when sold to a person regularly engaged in the business of reselling empty or filled
containers or when purchased for the purpose of packaging raw products of farm, garden or orchard for resale to
the consumer or processor. This exemption shall not apply to the sale of any containers used more than once and
which are ordinarily known as returnable containers, except returnable soft drink bottles. Each and every transfer
of title or possession of such returnable containers in this state to any person who is not regularly engaged in the
business of selling, reselling or otherwise transferring empty or filled containers shall be taxable under this code.
And, this exemption shall not apply to the sale of labels or other materials delivered along with items sold but
which are not necessary or absolutely essential to the sale of the sold merchandise;
5. Sale of tangible personal property manufactured in Oklahoma when sold by the manufacturer to a person
who transports it to another state for immediate and exclusive use in some other state; and
6. Machinery, equipment, fuels and chemicals incorporated into and directly used or consumed in the process
of treatment to substantially reduce the volume or harmful properties of controlled industrial waste at treatment
facilities specifically permitted pursuant to the Controlled Industrial Waste Disposal Act and operated at
the place of waste generation, or facilities approved by the State Department of Health for the cleanup of a site
of contamination. The term controlled industrial waste may include low-level radioactive waste for the purpose
of this subsection. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-214 Exemptions; corporations and partnerships.
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied in this chapter:
1. The transfer of tangible personal property, as follows:
a. From one corporation to another corporation pursuant to a reorganization. As used in this subparagraph
the term “reorganization” means a statutory merger or consolidation or the acquisition by a corporation of substantially
all of the properties of another corporation when the consideration is solely all or a part of the voting
stock of the acquiring corporation, or of its parent or subsidiary corpor-ation;
b. In connection with the winding up, dissolution or liquidation of a corporation only when there is a distribution
in kind to the shareholders of the property of such corporation;
c. To a corporation for the purpose of organization of such corporation where the former owners of the
property transferred are immediately after the transfer in control of the corporation, and the stock or securities
received by each is substantially in proportion to his interest in the property prior to the transfer;
d. To a partnership in the organization of such partnership if the former owners of the property transferred
are immediately after the transfer, members of such partnership and the interest in the partnership, received by
each, is substantially in proportion to his interest in the property prior to the transfer; or
e. From a partnership to the members thereof when made in kind in the dissolution of such partnership; and
2. Sale of an interest in tangible personal property to a partner or other person who after such sale owns a
joint interest in such tangible personal property where the state sales or use tax has previously been paid on such
tangible personal property. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-215 Tax due when; returns; records.
The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment
of the state sales tax under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-216 Payment of tax; brackets.
A. The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time and in the form and manner provided
for payment of state sales tax.
B. The bracket system for the collection of the city sales tax by the tax collector shall be the same as is
hereafter adopted by the agreement of the city and the tax collector in the collection of the city sales tax and the
state sales tax. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-217 Tax constitutes debt.
The taxes, penalty and interest due under this chapter shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount
claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (Prior
Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-218 Vendor’s duty to collect tax; penalties.
A. The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the vendor. It shall be the duty of each
and every vendor in this city to collect from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this chapter,
or an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average equivalent thereof.
B. Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent thereof, to the sales price or
charge, and when added such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer
or user to vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts.
C. A vendor, as defined hereunder, who wilfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to collect the full
amount of the tax levied by this chapter, or wilfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the
provisions or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly or indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all
or any part of the tax herein levied, or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement
which infers that he is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or
at a price including the tax, or in any manner whatsoever, is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
D. Any sum or sums collected or required to be collected in accordance with this chapter shall be deemed to
be held in trust for the city. Any person, firm, corporation, joint venture or association that wilfully or intentionally
fails, neglects or refuses to collect the sums required to be collected or paid shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-219 Returns and remittances; discounts.
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to the tax collector at the time
and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances of tax collected hereunder and
shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code for collection of state
sales taxes. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-220 Interest and penalties; delinquency.
Section 217 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter, and interest
and penalties at the rates and in amounts as therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in
cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this chapter. The failure or refusal of any taxpayer
to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this chapter shall
cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if the delinquency continues for a period of five (5) days, the taxpayer
shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-221 Waiver of interest and penalties.
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a taxpayer’s failure to pay the city tax
herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver or as applied in administration
of the state sales tax provided in Section 220 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes. To accomplish the
purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of Section 220 of Title 68 are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-222 Erroneous payments; claim for refund.
Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax herein levied may be made to any taxpayer making the erroneous
payment in the same manner and procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration
of the state sales tax as set forth in Section 227 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes. To accomplish
the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of Section 227 of Title 68 are hereby adopted by reference
and made a part of this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-223 Fraudulent returns.
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the wilful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make
reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of
avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this chapter shall be an offense,
and upon conviction thereof the offending taxpayer shall be subject to a fine and imprisonment as provided in
Section 1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-224 Records confidential.
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the city sales
tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provisions of the State Sales Tax Code,
Section 205 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted by reference
and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city sales tax as if here set forth in full. (Prior
Code, Chapter 10, as amended)
7-225 Amendments.
The people of the city, by their approval of the sales tax ordinance hereby authorize the mayor, and city council,
by ordinance duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and
manner of administering and enforcing this chapter as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness.
Neither the rate of the tax herein provided nor the use to which the revenue is put shall be changed without approval
of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended; Ord. No.
102786, 10/27/86)
7-226 Provisions cumulative.
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any or all other taxing provisions of city
ordinances. (Prior Code, Chapter 10, as amended; Ord. No. 102786, 10/27/86)
Chapter 3
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE TAX
Sections:
7-301 Fee levied on telephone exchanges.
7-302 Fee to be in lieu of other fees, taxes.
7-301 Fee levied on telephone exchanges.
There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge upon each and every person, firm, or corporation
operating a telephone exchange in the city in an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross revenues
for each current year for exchange telephone transmission service rendered wholly within the limits of the city to
compensate the city for the expenses incurred and services rendered incident to the exercise of its police power,
supervision, police regulations, and police control of the construction of lines and equipment of the telephone
company in the city. The inspection fee and charge shall be on a calendar year basis and shall be due and payable
to the city on or before May 1 in each year for the whole of the calendar year next preceding the date and shall
be paid into and appropriated and expended from the general revenue fund of the city.
State Law Reference: City powers to levy utility tax on gross receipts, 68 O.S. Sections 2601 et seq.
7-302 Fee to be in lieu of other fees, taxes.
During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this chapter by the owner of any telephone exchange,
the charge levied hereby shall be and continue to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, franchise,
license, privilege, and permit fees or taxes or assessments, except ad valorem taxes. However, it is not intended
hereby to extinguish or abrogate any existing arrangement whereby the city is permitted to use underground
conduit, duct space, or pole contacts of the company for the fire alarm or police calls systems of the city.
Chapter 4
UTILITY TAX
Sections:
7-401 Utility tax levied.
7-402 Not to apply to franchises.
7-403 Payment of tax.
7-404 Failure to pay tax.
7-405 Tax constitutes lien.
7-401 Utility tax levied.
There is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax of two percent (2%) upon the gross receipts from residential
and commercial sales of gas in the city, which tax shall be in lieu of any other franchise, license, occupation, or
excise tax levied by such city, all as provided by state law. (Ord. No. 619, 6/17/76)
State Law Reference: Utility tax authorized for municipalities, 68 O.S. Sections 2601 et seq.
7-402 Not to apply to franchises.
The tax levied under this chapter shall, when levied, apply to all persons, firms, associations, or corporations
engaged in business of furnishing gas or electricity within the city limits, except it shall not apply to any person,
firm, association, or corporation operating under a valid franchise from the city. (Ord. No. 619, 6/17/76)
7-403 Payment of tax.
The tax levied under this chapter on gas receipts shall be levied for a term of not less than one year and shall
be payable monthly and placed in the general revenue fund of the city. (Ord. No. 619, 6/17/76)
7-404 Failure to pay tax.
Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax when levied shall be regarded as a trespasser
and may be ousted from such city and in addition thereto, an action may be maintained against such person,
firm or corporation for the amount of the tax, and all expenses of collecting same, including reasonable attorneys
fees. (Ord. No. 619, 6/17/76)
7-405 Tax constitutes lien.
The tax so imposed shall constitute a first and prior lien on all the assets located within the city of any person,
firm, or corporation engaged in the business of selling gas within the city limits. (Ord. No. 619, 6/17/76)
Chapter 5
MISCELLANEOUS FEES
Sections:
7-501 Fee for certification of special assessments.
7-501 Fee for certification of special assessments.
There shall be a fee of five dollars ($5.00) collected by the city clerk for services rendered in providing a certification
as to the existence or nonexistence of special assessments by the city against any parcel of real estate.
(Ord. No. 9-6-94A)
Chapter 6
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Sections:
7-601 Title and purpose.
7-602 Definitions.
7-603 Tax imposed.
7-604 Exemptions.
7-605 Operator’s duties.
7-606 Registration.
7-607 Returns.
7-608 Payment of tax.
7-609 Bond required.
7-610 Penalties and interest.
7-611 Failure to collect and report tax; determination of tax by city clerk.
7-612 Appeal.
7-613 Records.
7-614 Refunds.
7-615 Actions to collect.
7-616 Penalty.
7-617 Effective date.
7-601 Title and purpose.
This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Transient Occupancy Ordinance.” The intent and purpose is to
impose a tax upon transient occupancy in any hotel or motel within the city and to provide a means for the collection
thereof. (Ord. No. 9-6-94B)
7-602 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of
this chapter:
“Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for
occupancy by transients for dwelling, loading, or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or
house, motel, house, rooming house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed
location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.
“Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion
thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.
“Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee,
mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through
a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an
operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance
with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered
to be compliance by both.
“Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization,
joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group
or combination acting as a unit.
“Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued
in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and
property and service of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
“Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession,
permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less,
counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed
to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between
the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy, or the occupant has paid in advance
for over thirty (30) days occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time
extending both prior and subsequent to the effect date of this chapter may be considered. (Ord. No. 9-6-94B)
7-603 Tax imposed.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of
three and one-half percent (3½%) of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the
transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay
the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate
share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to
occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the city clerk may
require that such tax shall be paid directly to the city clerk. (Ord. No. 9-6-94B: Ord. 23-070102 § 1)
7-604 Exemptions.
A. No tax shall be imposed upon:
1. Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the
tax herein provided;
2. The United States Government or any agency or division thereof; or
3. The state of Oklahoma or any political subdivision thereof.
B. No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected upon a
form prescribed by the city clerk. (Ord. No. 9-6-94B)
7-605 Operator’s duties.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the same time as the rent is collected from every
transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient
shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner,
whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator,
or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter
provided. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter, shall be held in trust for the account of the
city until payment thereof is made to the city clerk. (Ord. No. 9-6-94B)
7-606 Registration.
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter, or within thirty (30) days after commencing
business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel
with the city clerk and obtain from him a “transient occupancy registration certificate” to be at all times posted in
a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:
1. The name of the operator;
2. The address of the hotel;
3. The date upon which the certificate was issued;
4. “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof
has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the city
clerk for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting the tax to the city
clerk. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful
business in any unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all applicable laws, including
but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the city
of Bristow. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (Ord. No. 9-6-94B)
7-607 Returns.
A. Every operator shall file with the city clerk a return of occupancy, rents and taxes payable on a permonth
basis. The return shall be due from the operator and taxes payable thereon to the controller within fifteen
(15) days of the tax period accounted for in such return.
B. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. (Ord. No. 9-6-
94B)
7-608 Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return of occupancy, rents, and taxes, each operator shall pay to the city clerk the taxes
imposed by this chapter upon the rents included in such return, as well as all other monies collected by the operator
acting or purporting to act under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 9-6-94B)
7-609 Bond required.
Where the city clerk believes that any operator is about to cease business, leave the state or remove or dissipate
assets, or for any other similar reason the city clerk deems it necessary in order to protect revenues under
this chapter, the city clerk may require such operator to file with the city a bond issued by a surety company authorized
to transact business in this state in such amount as the city clerk may fix to secure the payment of any
tax or penalties and interest due, or which may become due from such operator. (Ord. No. 9-6-94B)
7-610 Penalties and interest.
A. Original delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time
required shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.
B. Continued delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period
of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency
penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten
percent (10%) penalty first imposed.
C. Fraud. If the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twentyfive
percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections
A and B of this section.
D. Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this
chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one and one-half of one percent (1½%) per month or fraction thereof on
the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until
paid.
E. Penalties merged with tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provision of
this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. No. 9-6-94B)
7-611 Failure to collect and report tax; determination of tax by city clerk.
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax and to make within the time provided in this chapter, any
report or remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the city clerk shall proceed in such
manner as the city clerk may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base the estimate of the tax
due. As soon as the city clerk shall procure such facts and information as the city clerk is able to obtain upon
which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or
refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, the city clerk shall proceed to determine and
assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination
is made, the city clerk shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving the notice personally or by
depositing the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last
known address. Such operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application
in writing to the city clerk for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing
is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the city clerk shall
become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the city clerk shall
give not less than five (5) days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at
the hearing at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified there should not be fixed for such
tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax,
interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing,
the city clerk shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in
the manner prescribed herein as such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalty. The amount
determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in SECTION
7-612 of this chapter. (Ord. No. 9-6-94B)
7-612 Appeal.
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the city clerk with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and
penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15)
days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city council shall fix a time and place for
hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of
address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the
manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due
and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. No. 9-6-94B)
7-613 Records.
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by
this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the
amount of such tax as the operator may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records
the city clerk shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. No. 9-6-94B)
7-614 Refunds.
A. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has
been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided
in subsections B and C of this section; provided, a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the
specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the city clerk within two (2) years of the date of
the payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the city clerk.
B. Any operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid,
paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed
by the city clerk that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided,
however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either
been refunded to the transient or credited to rents subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.
C. A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected
or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only
when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the city clerk, or when the transient having paid the tax to the
operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the city clerk that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from
the operator who collected the tax.
D. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right
thereto by written record showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. No. 9-6-94B)
7-615 Actions to collect.
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed
by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be
deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. No. 9-
6-94B)
7-616 Penalty.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Section
1-108 of this code for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. No. 9-6-94B)
7-617 Effective date.
All provisions within Part 7, Chapter 6, Sections 7-601 through 7-616 shall not be effective and in force until
12:01 a.m., November 15, 1994. On November 15, 1994, at 12:01 a.m., all provisions of Part 7, Chapter 6, Sections
7-601 through 7-616 shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 10-24-94 § 2)
Chapter 7
TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY EXCISE TAX
Sections:
7-701 Excise tax on storage, use or other consumption of tangible, personal property levied.
7-702 Exemptions.
7-703 Time when due--Returns--Payment.
7-704 Tax constitutes debt.
7-705 Collection of tax by retailer or vendor.
7-706 Collection of tax by retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business within state or both within and
without state permits.
7-707 Revoking permits.
7-708 Remunerative deductions allowed vendors or retailers of other states.
7-709 Interest and penalties--Delinquency.
7-710 Waiver of interest and penalties.
7-711 Erroneous payments--Claim for refund.
7-712 Fraudulent returns.
7-713 Records confidential.
7-714 Provisions cumulative.
7-715 Provisions severable.
7-716 Definitions.
7-717 Tax collector defined.
7-718 Classification of taxpayers.
7-719 Subsisting state permits.
7-720 Purposes of revenues.
7-721 Citation and codification.
7-701 Excise tax on storage, use or other consumption of tangible, personal property levied.
There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming within
the municipality tangible, personal property purchased or brought into this municipality, an excise tax on the
storage, use or other consuming within the municipality of such property at the rate of three and one-half (3 ½)
percent of the purchase price of such property. Such tax shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise
consuming, within the municipality, tangible, personal property purchased or brought into the municipality. The
additional tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time of importation or storage of the property within the municipality
and shall be assessed to only property purchased outside Oklahoma; provided, that the tax levied
herein shall not be levied against tangible, personal property intended solely for use outside the municipality, but
which is stored in the municipality, pending shipment outside the municipality or which is temporarily retained
in the municipality for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing, alteration, maintenance or other service. Any
person liable for payment of the tax authorized herein may deduct from such tax any local or municipal sales tax
previously paid on such goods or services; provided, that the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that
would have been due if the taxes imposed by the municipality had been levied on the sale of such goods or service.
(Ord. 6-15-98A § 1)
7-702 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply:
A. In respect to the use of an article of tangible, personal property brought into the municipality by a nonresident
individual visiting in this municipality for his or her personal use or enjoyment while within the municipality;
B. In respect to the use of tangible, personal property purchased for resale before being used;
C. In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property on which a tax, equal to or in excess of
that levied by the Oklahoma Use Tax Code and the city of Bristow use tax ordinance, has been paid by the person
using such tangible, personal property in the municipality, whether such tax was levied under the laws of
Oklahoma or some other state or municipality of the United States. If any article of tangible, personal property
has already been subjected to a tax by Oklahoma or any other state or municipality in respect to its sale or use, in
an amount less than the tax imposed by both the Oklahoma Use Tax Code and the city of Bristow use tax ordinance,
the provisions of this chapter shall also apply to it by a rate measured by the difference only between the
rate provided by both the Oklahoma Use Tax Code and the city of Bristow use tax ordinance, and the rate by
which the previous tax upon the sale or use was computed. No credit shall be given for taxes paid in another
state or municipality, if that state or municipality does not grant like credit for taxes paid in Oklahoma and the
municipality;
D. In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons establishing new
manufacturing or processing plants in the municipality, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by
persons to the operation of manufacturing plants already established in the municipality. Provided, this exemption
shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process
of manufacturing property subject to taxation under the sales tax code of the municipality. The term “manufacturing
plants” shall mean the establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations,
and generally recognized as such;
E. In respect to the use of tangible, personal property now specifically exempted from taxation under the
sales tax code of the municipality;
F. In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property brought into the municipality by an individual
with intent to become a resident of this municipality where such personal property is for such individual’s
personal use or enjoyment;
G. In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property used or to be used by commercial airlines
or railroads;
H. In respect to livestock purchased outside Oklahoma and brought into this municipality for feeding or
breeding purposes, and which is later resold. (Ord. 6-15-98A § 2)
7-703 Time when due--Returns--Payment.
The tax levied by this chapter is due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment
of the state use tax under the use tax code of the state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 6-15-98A § 3)
7-704 Tax constitutes debt.
Such taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount
claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (Ord. 6-15-
98A § 4)
7-705 Collection of tax by retailer or vendor.
Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without the state of Oklahoma, and
making sales of tangible, personal property from a place of business outside this state for use in this municipality
shall at the time of making such sales collect the use tax levied by this chapter from the purchaser and give to the
purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form described by the tax commission, if the tax commission
shall, by regulation, require such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with the tax commission the name and
address of all his agents operating in this municipality and location of any and all distribution or sales houses or
offices or other places of business in this city. (Ord. 6-15-98A § 5)
7-706 Collection of tax by retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business within state or both within and
without state permits.
The tax commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax herein levied
by any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business within this state but who makes sales of tangible
personal property for use in this municipality and by the out-of-state place of business both within and without
Oklahoma and making sales of tangible, personal property at such out-of-state place of business for use in this
municipality. Such retailer or vender may be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such taxes by the tax
commission in such manner and subject to such regulations and agreement as it shall prescribe. When so authorized,
it shall be the duty of such retailer or vendor to collect the tax upon all tangible, personal property sold to
his knowledge for use within this municipality. Such authority and permit may be canceled when at any time the
tax commission considers that such tax can more effectively be collected from the person using such property in
this municipality. Provided, however, that in all instances where such sales are made or completed by delivery to
the purchaser within this municipality by the retailer or vendor in such retailer’s or vendor’s vehicle, whether
owned or leased (not by common carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable
municipality sales tax at the point of delivery and the tax shall be collected and reported under taxpayer’s sales
tax permit number accordingly. (Ord. 6-15-98A § 6)
7-707 Revoking permits.
Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this state, or both within and without
this state, and authorized to collect the tax herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
or the Oklahoma Use Tax Code or any order, rules or regulations of the tax commission, the tax commission
may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in 68 O.S. 1981, Section 1408, by order revoke the use tax permit,
if any, issued to such retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation authorized to do business
in this state may, after notice and hearing above provided, cancel the corporation’s license only when such
corporation has complied with the obligations under this chapter, the Oklahoma Use Tax Code, or any order,
rules or regulations of the tax commission. (Ord. 6-15-98A § 7)
7-708 Remunerative deductions allowed vendors or retailers of other states.
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to the tax commission at the time
and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma Use
Tax Code; and remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by
said code for the collection of state use taxes. (Ord. 6-15-98A § 8)
7-709 Interest and penalties--Delinquency.
Section 217 of Title 68 O.S. 1981 is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter, and interest and penalties
at the rates and in the amounts as therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency
in reporting and paying the tax levied by this chapter. Provided, that the failure or refusal of any retailer
or vendor to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this chapter
shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five (5) days, the
retailer or vendor shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this chapter. (Ord. 6-15-98A § 9)
7-710 Waiver of interest and penalties.
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a retailer’s or vendor’s failure to pay the
municipality tax herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for such waiver or remittance
as applied in administration of the State Use Tax provided in 68 O.S. 1981, Section 227, and to accomplish
the purposes of this section the applicable provisions of said Section 227 are hereby adopted by reference
and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 6-15-98A § 10)
7-711 Erroneous payments--Claim for refund.
Refund of erroneous payment of the municipality use tax herein levied may be made to any taxpayer making
such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided
for administration of the State Use Tax as set forth in 68 O.S. 1981, Section 227, and to accomplish the purpose
of this section, the applicable provisions of said Section 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this chapter. (Ord. 6-15-98A § 11)
7-712 Fraudulent returns.
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the wilful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make
reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of
avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this chapter shall be an offense,
and upon conviction thereof the offending taxpayer shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and cost. Each day of noncompliance with this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.
6-15-98A § 12)
7-713 Records confidential.
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and tiles concerning the administration of the municipality
use tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provisions of 68 O.S. 1981, Section
205, of the State Use Tax Code, and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and made fully
effective and applicable to administration of the municipality use tax as is herein set forth in full. (Ord. 6-15-98A
§ 13)
7-714 Provisions cumulative.
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of the municipality
ordinances. (Ord. 6-15-98A § 14)
7-715 Provisions severable.
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable, and is any section, and if any section, paragraph,
sentence or clause of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or inoperative by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any other section, paragraph, sentence or clause hereof. (Ord. 6-15-
98A § 15)
7-716 Definitions.
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma Use Tax Code, Section 1401, 68 O.S.
1981, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. In addition thereto, the following words
and terms shall by defined as follows:
A. “City” means the city of Bristow, Oklahoma.
B. “Transaction” means sale. (Ord. 6-15-98A § 16)
7-717 Tax collector defined.
The term “tax collector” as used herein means the department of the municipality government or the official
agency of the state, duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law, to administer the collection
of the tax herein levied. (Ord. 6-15-98A § 17)
7-718 Classification of taxpayers.
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall be as prescribed the state law
for purposes of the Oklahoma Use Tax Code. (Ord. 6-15-98A § 18)
7-719 Subsisting state permits.
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the tax commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Use
Tax Code are for the purpose of this chapter hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement
for an additional municipality permit for the same purpose. (Ord. 6-15-98A § 19)
7-720 Purposes of revenues.
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide revenues for the support of the functions of
the municipal government of the municipality, and any and all revenues derived hereunder may be expanded by
the governing body of the municipality for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended as authorized.
(Ord. 6-15-98A § 20)
7-721 Citation and codification.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as “city of Bristow use tax ordinance”
and shall be codified as Part 7, Chapter 7 of the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 6-15-98A § 21)
PART 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapters:
1 Trash and Weeds
2 Littering
3 Food
4 Nuisances
5 Junked Motor Vehicles
6 Enforcement and Penalty
Chapter 1
TRASH AND WEEDS
Sections:
8-101 Accumulation of trash or weeds unlawful.
8-102 Definitions.
8-103 Reports of accumulation of grass, weeds or trash on property.
8-104 Receipt of report, hearing and notice.
8-105 Work done by employees or contract.
8-106 Determination and assessment of costs.
8-107 Lien on the property, civil remedy.
8-108 Service of notice.
8-109 Abandoned ice boxes or refrigerators.
8-110 Unlawful to deposit rubbish.
8-111 Removal of dead animals.
8-112 Penalty.
8-101 Accumulation of trash or weeds unlawful.
It is unlawful for any owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land situated wholly or in part within the corporate
limits of the city to allow trash or weeds to grow, stand or accumulate upon such premises and it shall be the
duty of such owner to remove or destroy any such trash or weeds. (Prior Code, Chapter 13, as amended)
8-102 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
1. “Weeds” includes but is not limited to poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac and all vegetation at any
stage of maturity which:
a. Exceeds twelve (12) inches in height, except healthy trees, shrubs or produce for human consumption or
own in a tended and cultivated garden unless such trees and shrubbery by their density or location constitute a
detriment to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and community of a hazard to traffic or create a fire
hazard to the property or otherwise interfere with the mowing of the weeds;
b. Regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposits or accumulation of refuse or trash;
c. Harbors rodents or vermin;
d. Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
e. Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or
f. Is dead or diseased.
The term “weed” does not include tended crops on land zoned for agricultural use which are planted more
than one hundred and fifty (150) feet from a parcel zoned for other than agricultural use;
2. “Trash” means any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible materials, rubbish, offal,
waste, or matter of any kind or form which is uncared for, discarded or abandoned; and
3. “Owner” means the owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the county treasurer.
(Prior Code, Chapter 13, as amended)
8-103 Reports of accumulation of grass, weeds or trash on property.
Repealed by Ord. No. 6-20-94C. (Prior Code, Chapter 13; Ord. No. 8-1-88, 8/1/88; Ord. No. 6-20-94C)
State Law Reference: Cleaning and mowing of property, procedures and powers 11 O.S. Section 22-111.
8-104 Receipt of report, hearing and notice.
Repealed by Ord. No. 6-20-94C. (Prior Code, Chapter 13; Ord. No. 8-1-88A, 8/1/88; Ord. No. 6-20-94C)
8-105 Work done by employees or contract.
Repealed by Ord. No. 6-20-94C. (Prior Code, Chapter 13, as amended; Ord. No. 8-1-88B, 8/1/88; Ord. No. 6-
20-94C)
8-106 Determination and assessment of costs.
Repealed by Ord. No. 6-20-94C. (Prior Code, Chapter 13; Ord. No. 8-1-88C, 8/1/88; Ord. No. 6-20-94C)
8-107 Lien on the property, civil remedy.
Repealed by Ord. No. 6-20-94C. (Prior Code, Chapter 13, as amended; Ord. No. 6-20-94C)
8-108 Service of notice.
Repealed by Ord. No. 6-20-94C. (Prior Code, Chapter 13, as amended; Ord. No. 6-20-94C)
8-109 Abandoned ice boxes or refrigerators.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave in a place accessible to children any abandoned,
unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator, or other container which has an air-tight door with a lock or other
fastening device which cannot be easily released for opening from the inside of the ice box, refrigerator or container,
without first removing the door, lock or fastener. (Prior Code, Chapter 13, as amended)
8-110 Unlawful to deposit rubbish.
It is unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any rubbish, trash, slop, garbage, filthy substance,
grass, weeds, trees, brush or any other refuse or waste matter in any street, avenue, alley or in any ditch or watercourse,
or upon the premises of another, or upon any public ground in this city. (Prior Code, Chapter 13, as
amended)
8-111 Removal of dead animals.
The owner or any person having charge of any animal dying in this city, shall within twenty-four (24) hours
after the death of such animal, remove its carcass, and failure so to do shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Prior
Code, Chapter 13, as amended)
8-112 Penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, either by doing that which is prohibited, or by failing
or refusing to do that which is commanded, shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. Each
day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense and upon conviction be punished accordingly. (Ord. No.
6-20-94B, 6/20/94)
Chapter 2
LITTERING
Sections:
8-201 Definitions.
8-202 Litter in public places.
8-203 Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering.
8-204 Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited.
8-205 Merchants’ duty to keep sidewalks free of litter.
8-206 Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
8-207 Truck loads causing litter.
8-208 Litter in parks.
8-209 Litter in lakes and fountains.
8-210 Throwing or distributing commercial handbills in public places.
8-211 Placing commercial and noncommercial handbills on vehicles.
8-212 Depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises.
8-213 Prohibiting distribution of handbills properly posted.
8-214 Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at inhabited private premises.
8-215 Dropping litter from aircraft.
8-216 Posting notice prohibited.
8-217 Litter on occupied private property.
8-218 Owner to maintain premises free of litter.
8-219 Litter on vacant lots.
8-220 Offensive littering.
8-221 Penalty.
8-201 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the
meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words, used in the present tense include the future,
words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include
the plural number. The work “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
1. “Aircraft” is any contrivance not known or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for
flight in the air. The word “aircraft” includes helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons;
2. “Authorized private receptacle” is a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized in
Article 1 of this chapter;
3. “Commercial handbill” is any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet,
pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature;
a. Which advertises for sale any merchandise, produce, commodity or thing;
b. Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity, for
the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
c. Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any
kind, for which an admission fee is charged or a collection is token up for the purpose of defraying the expenses
incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is
held or given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the
ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order;
provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of
any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind without license where such license is or
may be required by laws of this state or under any ordinance of this city;
d. Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially
an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of
any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor;
4. “Garbage” is putrefied animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking,
and consumption of food;
5. “Litter” is garbage, refuse, and rubbish as defined herein, and all other waste material which, if thrown
or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety, and welfare;
6. “Newspaper” is any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly
entered with the post office department of the United States, in accordance with Federal Statute or regulation,
and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and in addition
thereto, means any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and
sold to the public;
7. “Noncommercial handbill” is any printed or written matter, any sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet,
pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or other reproduced original or copies of
any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper;
8. “Park” is a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center, or any other public area in the city,
owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation;
9. “Private premises” is any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or
in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to
such dwelling house, building, or other structure;
10. “Public place” is any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or other public ways, and any and all
public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and building;
11. “Refuse” is all putrefied and nonputrefied solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish,
ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes;
12. “Rubbish” is nonputrefied solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such
as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and
similar materials; and
13. “Vehicle” is every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-202 Litter in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place within the city
except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official city dumps. (Ord. No.
4/20/82)
8-203 Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacle shall do so in such a manner so
as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place,
or upon private property. (Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-204 Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public place within city the accumulation
of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-205 Merchants’ duty to keep sidewalks free of litter.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other
public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in
front of their business premises free of litter. (Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-206 Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public
place within the city, or upon private property. (Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-207 Truck loads causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed
or loaded as to prevent any contents, or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley, or other public
place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which
carry onto or deposit in any street, alley, or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter
of any kind. (Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-208 Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a
manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park
or any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away
from the park by the person responsible for its presence and property disposed of elsewhere as provided herein.
(Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-209 Litter in lakes and fountains.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in a park
or elsewhere within the city. (Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-210 Throwing or distributing commercial handbills in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial, noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street, or
other public place within the city. Nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in
any public place. Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street, or other public place
within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial
handbill to any person willing to accept it. (Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-211 Placing commercial and noncommercial handbills on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle. Provided,
however, that it is not unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to
the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. (Ord. No.
4/20/82)
8-212 Depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises
which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-213 Prohibiting distribution of handbills properly posted.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private
premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position
near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: “No Trespassing,” “No Peddlers or Agents,” “No Advertisement,”
or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to
be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. (Ord.
No. 4/20/82)
8-214 Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at inhabited private premises.
A. No person shall throw, deposit, or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private
premises which are inhabited, except by handing in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by
handing or transmitting the handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such
private premises. Provided, however, that, in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided
in this article, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit
such handbill on the premises provided the material is adequately secured from being blown or drifted
about such premises or sidewalks, streets, or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used
when so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
B. The provision of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, not to newspapers
(as defined herein) except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent
their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place, or upon
private property. (Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-215 Dropping litter from aircraft.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop, or deposit within the city any litter, handbill, or any other object.
(Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-216 Posting notice prohibited.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster, or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of
the public, to any lamp post, public utility pole, or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as
may be authorized or required by law. (Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-217 Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by
such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by
the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public places, or upon any private property. (Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-218 Owner to maintain premises free of litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter.
Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection. (Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-219 Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city, whether owned
by such person or not. (Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-220 Offensive littering.
A. A person commits the crime of offensive littering if he creates an objectionable stench or degrades from
the natural cleanliness or safety of property by intentionally:
1. Discarding or depositing any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris or other refuse upon the land of another
without permission of the owner, or upon any public way;
2. Draining, or causing or permitting to be drained, sewage or the drainage from a cesspool, septic tank,
recreational or camping vehicle without holding tank or other contaminated source, upon the land of another
without permission of the owner, or upon public way; or
3. Permitting any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris or other refuse to be thrown from a vehicle which he is
operating.
B. As used in this section, “public way” includes but is not limited to roads, streets, alleys, lanes, trails,
beaches, parks and all recreational facilities operated by the state, county, or a local municipality for use by the
general public. (Ord. No. 4/20/82)
8-221 Penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. (Ord. No. 4/20/83)
Chapter 3
FOOD
Sections:
8-301 Milk ordinance adopted.
8-302 Grades of milk which may be sold.
8-303 Enforcement by whom.
8-304 U.S. Food Service sanitation ordinance adopted.
8-305 Permits.
8-301 Milk ordinance adopted.
The production, transportation, processing, handling, sampling, examination, grading, labeling, and sale of all
milk and milk products sold for the ultimate consumption within the city, or its police jurisdiction; the inspection
of dairy herds, dairy farms, and milk plants; the issuing and revocation of permits to milk producers, haulers, and
distributors shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of the Milk Ordinance--1965 Recommendations
of the Public Health Service Revised to Comply with Oklahoma State Statutes, a certified copy of which shall be
filed in the office of the city clerk. Sections 9 and 16 of the unabridged ordinance shall be replaced, respectively
by Sections 8-202 and 1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 15, as amended)
State Law Reference: State laws regulating milk standards, 63 O.S. Sections 1-1301 et seq.; state laws governing
milk manufacture, 2 O.S. Section 7-1.
8-302 Grades of milk which may be sold.
Only certified pasteurized and grade A pasteurized, and certified raw and/or grade A raw milk and milk products
shall be sold to the final consumer, or to restaurants, soda fountains, grocery stores, or similar establishments;
provided, that in an emergency, the sale of pasteurized milk and milk products which have not been
graded, or the grade of which is unknown, may be authorized by the health authority; in which case, such milk
and milk products shall be labeled “ungraded.” (Prior Code, Chapter 15, as amended)
8-303 Enforcement by whom.
All sampling, examining, grading, and regrading of milk and milk products, and all inspections, and issuing
and suspension or revocation of permits shall be done by the director of the county health department or his authorized
representative.
8-304 U.S. Food Service sanitation ordinance adopted.
The unabridged form of the latest edition of the “United States Public Health Service Food Service Sanitation
Ordinance and Code” is hereby adopted and incorporated in this code by reference. Three copies of the sanitation
ordinance and code shall be on file in the office of the municipal clerk. The sanitation ordinance and code
shall govern the definitions; inspection of food service establishments; the issuance, suspension, and revocation
of permits to operate food service establishments; the prohibiting of the sale of adulterated or misbranded food
or drink and the enforcement of this section. In the sanitation ordinance and code, however, all parenthetical
phrases referring to grading and the following subsections shall be understood to be deleted: Subsection H.2.e.,
H.7. and H.8. (Prior Code, Article D)
8-305 Permits.
A. It is unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant as defined in the Sanitation Code without a current
and unrevoked permit from the state. Only persons who comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be
enTitled to receive and retain such a permit.
B. Such permits shall be posted at all times in a conspicuous place and are not transferable to another person
or location. (Prior Code, Article D)
Chapter 4
NUISANCES
Sections:
8-401 Nuisance defined; public nuisances; private nuisances.
8-402 Persons responsible.
8-403 Time does not legalize.
8-404 Remedies against public nuisances.
8-405 Remedies against private nuisances.
8-406 City has power to define and summarily abate nuisances.
8-407 Certain public nuisances in the city defined.
8-408 Summary abatement of nuisances.
8-409 Abatement by suit in district court.
8-410 Nuisance unlawful.
8-411 Health nuisances; abatement.
8-412 Toilet facilities required; nuisance.
8-413 Procedure cumulative.
8-401 Nuisance defined; public nuisances; private nuisances.
A. A nuisance is unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to perform a duty, or is any thing or condition which
either:
1. Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others;
2. Offends decency;
3. Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage, any lake or
navigable river, stream, canal or basin, or any public park, square, street or other public property; or
4. In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of property.
B. A public nuisance is one which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or any
considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals
may be unequal.
C. Every nuisance not included in subsection B. above is a private nuisance. (Prior Code, Chapter 18)
State Law Reference: Power to define, abate nuisances, procedures, 50 O.S. Section 1 et seq.
8-402 Persons responsible.
Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such
property, created by a former owner, is liable therefor in the same manner as the one who first created it. (Prior
Code, Chapter 18)
8-403 Time does not legalize.
No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual obstruction of public right. (Prior
Code, Chapter 18)
8-404 Remedies against public nuisances.
The remedies against a public nuisance are:
1. Prosecution on complaint before the municipal court;
2. Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate court;
3. Civil action; or
4. Abatement:
a. By person injured as provided in Section 12 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes; or
b. By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. (Prior Code, Chapter 18)
8-405 Remedies against private nuisances.
The remedies against a private nuisance are:
1. Civil action;
2. Abatement:
a. By person injured as provided in Sections 14 and 15 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes; or
b. By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. (Prior Code, Chapter 18)
8-406 City has power to define and summarily abate nuisances.
As provided in Section 16 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes, the city has power to determine what is and
what shall constitute a nuisance within its corporate limits and, for the protection of the public health, the public
parks, and the public water supply, outside of its corporate limits. Whenever it is practical to do so, the city has
the power summarily to abate any such nuisance after notice to the owner and an opportunity for him to be
heard, if this can be done. (Prior Code, Chapter 18)
8-407 Certain public nuisances in the city defined.
A. In addition to other public nuisances declared by other sections of this code or law, the following are
hereby declared to be public nuisances:
1. The sale, or offering for sale, of unwholesome food or drink; or the keeping of a place where such sales
or offerings are made;
2. The sale, offering for sale, or furnishing of intoxicating liquor in violation of the state law or ordinances
of the city; or keeping of a place where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale, or furnished in violation of
the state law or ordinances of the city;
3. The exposure, display, sale, or distribution of obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines, papers,
documents or objects; or the keeping of a place where such are exposed, displayed, sold or distributed;
4. The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards, slot machines, punchboards or otherwise;
5. The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual intercourse, or other immoral acts are practiced;
6. The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law or ordinance are practiced or carried on;
7. The conduct or holding of public dances in violation of the ordinances of the city; or the keeping of a
place where such dances are held;
8. The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease;
9. The continued making of loud or unusual noises which annoy persons of ordinary sensibilities; or the
keeping of an animal which makes such noises;
10. The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine which materially or unduly interferes with
radio or television reception by others;
11. Any use of a street or sidewalk or a place adjacent thereto which causes crowds of people to gather so as
to obstruct traffic on such street or sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may be authorized
by law or ordinance;
12. Permitting water or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice or snow to fall, from any building or structure upon
any street or sidewalk;
13. All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies or containers of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed,
or which are so constructed, formed, conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public safety;
14. Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health or safety because of damage, decay or
other condition;
15. Any pit, hole, or other thing which is so constructed, formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger the
public safety;
16. Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public safety;
17. Any occupation or activity which endangers the public peace, health, morals, safety or welfare;
18. Any motor vehicle (whether in operating condition or not) or any trailer without a current vehicle plate
as required by law for vehicles used on the public highways, when stored or kept in a residence district;
19. Any motor vehicle whose muffler does not meet state motor vehicle equipment requirements or any
muffler cut-out;
20. Any stable or other place where animals are kept that may become obnoxious or annoying to any resident
of this city, by reason of any noise or noises made by the animal therein, or by reason of lack of sanitation,
is hereby declared to be a nuisance;
21. The keeping of any dog kennels within this city for the breeding and raising of dogs that shall become
offensive or annoying to the public by reason of the barking and noise made by the animals therein contained, is
hereby declared to be a nuisance;
22. Any vault, cesspool or sink used to receive human excrement, slops, garbage, refuse or other filthy substance,
is hereby declared to be a nuisance;
23. Any pond, slop, trash, refuse, cobs, manure, decayed or decaying vegetable matter, left, kept or maintained
in such condition as to endanger the public health is hereby declared to be a nuisance;
24. The keeping of any hog pen within the limits of this city is hereby declared to be a nuisance;
25. Every privy or water closet which shall be in an overflowing, leaking or filthy condition, or in a condition
dangerous, injurious or annoying to the comfort, health and welfare of any resident of this city is hereby declared
a nuisance;
26. Any green or unsalted hides of any animal kept in any exposed or open place within the limits of this
city is hereby declared to be a nuisance;
27. Any unclean, foul, leaking or broken or defective ditch, drain, gutter, slop, garbage or manure barrel,
box or other receptacle in this city is hereby declared to be a nuisance; and
28. Every building or other structure that shall become unsafe and dangerous from fire, decay or other cause,
or shall become hazardous from fire, by reason of age, decay or construction, location or other cause, or shall be
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of this city or its inhabitants from any cause, is hereby declared to be
a nuisance.
The above enumeration of certain public nuisances shall be cumulative and not limit other provisions of law or
ordinances defining public or private nuisances either in more general or more specific terms. (Prior Code, Chapter
18)
8-408 Summary abatement of nuisances.
A. Some nuisances are of such nature as to constitute a grave and immediate danger to the peace, health,
safety, morals or welfare of one or more persons or of the public generally. It is recognized that circumstances
may be such as to justify, and even to require the mayor or other appropriate officer or agency of the city government
to take immediate and proper action summarily to abate such nuisances, or to reduce or suspend the
danger until more deliberate action can be taken toward such abatement.
B. The chief of the fire department, the chief of police, the city attorney, the building inspector, the electrical
inspector, the plumbing inspector, or any other officer subordinate to the mayor may submit through or with
the consent of the mayor to the city council, a statement as to the existence of a nuisance as defined by the ordinances
of the city or law, and a request or recommendation that it be abated. The mayor himself, the health officer,
any councilman, or any resident or residents of the city may submit such a statement and request a recommendation
to the city council.
C. The council shall determine whether or not the alleged nuisance is a nuisance in fact. For the purpose of
gathering evidence on the subject, the council shall have power to subpoena and examine witnesses, books, papers
and other effects. Before proceeding to abate the nuisance or have it abated, the council shall give notice of
a hearing on the proposed abatement to the owner of any property concerned and to any other person alleged or
deemed responsible for or to be causing the nuisance, and an adequate opportunity to be heard, if such notice and
opportunity for a hearing can be given. Such notice to the owner and other persons concerned shall be given in
writing by mail or by service by a police officer if their names and addresses are known; but, if the names or addresses
are not known, and the peace, health, safety, morals, or welfare of the person or persons or public adversely
affected would not be unduly jeopardized by the necessary delay, a notice of the hearing shall be published
in a paper of general circulation within the city.
D. If the council finds that a nuisance does in fact exist, it shall direct the owner or other persons responsible
for or causing the nuisance to abate it within a specified time if the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of
the person or persons or public adversely affected would not be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay. If
such peace, health, safety, morals, or welfare would be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if the
owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance do not abate it within the specified time, the
council shall direct the mayor to abate the nuisance or to have it abated, if summary abatement is practical, as
authorized by Section 16 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes. The city clerk shall send a statement of the cost
of such summary abatement to the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance, as may be just
under the circumstances, if their names and addresses are known. Until paid, such cost shall constitute a debt to
the city collectible as other debts of the city may be collected. (Prior Code, Chapter 18)
8-409 Abatement by suit in district court.
In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance, the city may bring suit in the district
court of the county where the nuisance is located, as provided in Section 17 of Title 50 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
(Prior Code, Chapter 18)
8-410 Nuisance unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person, including but not limited to any owner, lessee, or other person to create or maintain
a nuisance within the city or to permit a nuisance to remain on premises under his control within the city.
(Prior Code, Chapter 18)
8-411 Health nuisances; abatement.
A. Pursuant to authority granted by Section 1-1011 of Title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes, the health officer
shall have authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises in the city to remove from such
premises, at his own expense, any source of filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of insects
or rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting
the public health, within twenty-four (24) hours, or within such other time as may be reasonable, and a failure to
do so shall constitute an offense. Such order shall be in writing and may be served personally on the owner or
occupant of the premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the health officer or by a policeman, or a copy thereof
may be left at the last usual place of abode of the owner, occupant, or agent, if known and within the state. If the
premises are unoccupied and the residence of the owner, occupant, or agent is unknown, or is without the state,
the order may be served by posting a copy thereof on the premises, or by publication in at least one issue of a
newspaper having a general circulation in the city.
B. If the order is not complied with, the health officer may cause the order to be executed and complied
with, and the cost thereof shall be certified to the city clerk, and the cost of removing or abating such nuisance
shall be added to the water bill or other city utility bill of the owner or occupant if he is a user of water from the
city water system or such other utility service. The cost shall be treated as a part of such utility bill to which it is
added, and shall become due and payable, and be subject to the same regulations relating to delinquency in payment,
as the utility bill itself. If such owner or occupant is not a user of any city utility service, such cost, after
certification to the city clerk, may be collected in any manner in which any other debt due the city may be collected.
(Prior Code, Chapter 18)
State Law Reference: Authority to abate health nuisances, 63 O.S. Section 1-1011.
8-412 Toilet facilities required; nuisance.
A. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them
herein:
1. “Human excrement” means the bowel and kidney discharge of human beings;
2. “Sanitary water closet” means the flush type toilet which is connected with a sanitary sewer line of such
capacity and construction as to carry away the contents at all times; and
3. “Sanitary pit privy” means a privy which is built, rebuilt, or constructed so as to conform with the specifications
approved by the state health department.
B. Every owner of a residence or other building in which humans reside, are employed, or congregate
within this city shall install, equip, and maintain adequate sanitary facilities for the disposal of human excrement
by use of a sanitary water closet or a sanitary pit privy. The closets and toilets hereby required shall be of the
sanitary water closet type when located within two hundred (200) feet of a sanitary sewer and accessible thereto,
and of the sanitary water closet type (notwithstanding a greater distance from a sanitary sewer) or the water
closet type emptying into a septic tank system or the pit privy type. A septic tank system or a pit privy may be
used in such cases only if it meets the standards of and is approved by the state health department.
C. All human excrement disposed of within this city shall be disposed of by depositing it in closets and
privies of the type provided for in this section. It is unlawful for any owner of property within the city to permit
the disposal of human excrement thereon in any other manner, or for any person to dispose of human excrement
within the city in any other manner.
D. All privies shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times, and the covers of the seats of privies shall be kept
closed at all times when the privies are not being used. No wash water, kitchen slop, or anything other than human
excrement and toilet paper shall be emptied into a privy. No excrement from any person suffering from typhoid
fever, dysentery, or other serious bowel disease shall be deposited in any sanitary pit privy or sanitary water
closet until it is disinfected in such a manner as may be prescribed by the health officer.
E. All facilities for the disposal of human excrement in a manner different from that required by this section,
and all privies and closets so constructed, situated, or maintained as to endanger the public health, are
hereby declared to be public nuisances, and may be dealt with and abated as such. Any person maintaining any
such nuisance is guilty of an offense, and each day upon which any such nuisance continues is a separate offense.
(Prior Code, Chapter 25)
8-413 Procedure cumulative.
The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and by other provisions of law and
ordinance shall be cumulative on to any other penalties or procedures authorized. (Prior Code, Chapter 18)
Chapter 5
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
Sections:
8-501 Definitions.
8-502 Certain vehicles prohibited.
8-502.1 Chief of police authority.
8-503 Nuisance declared.
8-504 Abatement.
8-505 Order of abatement.
8-506 Owner may regain.
8-507 Penalty.
8-508 Appeals from the enforcement official.
8-509 Appeals to the council.
8-510 Liability for costs.
8-511 Immediate removal of vehicle obstructing traffic.
8-501 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, phrases shall have the meanings given herein.
“Dismantled, junked, abandoned or inoperable vehicles” shall be deemed to include the major parts thereof,
including bodies, engines, transmissions, frames and rear ends.
“Person” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
“Private property” means any real property in the city of Bristow which is not public property.
“Public property” means any property owned or controlled in the city limits by the city of Bristow, Creek
County, state of Oklahoma, or United States Government, and shall include all streets and highways.
“Vehicle” means any motor vehicle, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, or selfpropelled
farm or construction equipment. (Ord. 2-16-98A § 1)
8-502 Certain vehicles prohibited.
No person shall deposit, store, keep or permit to be deposited, stored or kept in the open upon public or private
property, a dismantled, unserviceable, inoperable, junked or abandoned vehicle or any vehicle legally or
physically incapable of being operated, for a period exceeding forty-eight (48) hours, unless such vehicle or the
parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building or stored in connection with a business lawfully established
pursuant to the zoning ordinances of the city of Bristow, or is stored on property lawfully designated under
the zoning ordinances of the city as a place where such vehicles may be stored. (Ord. 2-16-98B § 1)
8-502.1 Chief of police authority.
The chief of police or his agent shall possess all required power and authority to enforce this chapter and shall
have authority to enter upon private property for the purposes of carrying out and enforcing this chapter. (Ord.
65-032105 § 1)
8-503 Nuisance declared.
The accumulation or storage of one or more vehicles or parts thereof as described in this chapter shall constitute
a nuisance detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. It shall be the duty of
the owner of such vehicle or parts thereof or the owner of the private property or the lessee or other person in
possession or control of the property upon which such vehicle is located to remove the vehicle from such property
or have the vehicle housed in a building where it will not be visible from the street or from other private
property. The removal or enclosure shall be made within ten (10) days after notice has been given to the owner
of the vehicle or the owner, lessee or person in control of the property upon which such vehicle is located. The
time may be extended by the chief of police in the case of an obvious hardship for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days. (Ord. 2-16-98C § 1)
8-504 Abatement.
A. In the event that a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the chief of police shall cause a written notice
to abate the nuisance be delivered to the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the property where the vehicle
is located or the person in possession or control of the property where the vehicle is located. In the event that the
owner of the vehicle or the owner of the private property or a person in possession or control of the property
where the vehicle is located cannot be located, the chief of police shall post the notice of abatement on the vehicle
constituting the nuisance. The notice shall provide that the nuisance must be abated within ten (10) days.
B. The chief of police is authorized to abate the nuisance within ten (10) days of the service or posting of
the notice to abate the nuisance unless an appeal has been filed as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2-16-
98D § 1)
8-505 Order of abatement.
In all cases where it shall have been determined that any nuisance shall be abated, and the nuisance is not
abated within the time specified in the notice, an order of abatement shall be issued by the chief of police or his
designee who shall cause the vehicle or its parts to be removed and stored in a proper place. (Ord. 2-16-98E § 1:
Ord. 64-032105 § 1)
8-506 Owner may regain.
The owner of any vehicle so removed may regain possession thereof by making application to the police department
within thirty (30) days after its removal and upon payment to the city of Bristow of all reasonable costs
of removal and storage which shall have accrued to such vehicle. If the vehicle is not reclaimed within thirty (30)
days, it may be sold without further notice and, after payment of towing and storage costs, all funds remaining
shall become the property of the city of Bristow to defray the remaining costs of abatement. (Ord. 2-16-98F § 1)
8-507 Penalty.
Any person required by the provisions of this chapter to remove a dismantled, junked or abandoned vehicle
who shall fail to do so in compliance with the notice as provided herein, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), excluding costs,
or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each and every violation
and each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 2-16-98G § 1)
8-508 Appeals from the enforcement official.
A. Right to Appeal. An appeal to the mayor may be taken by any person aggrieved (hereinafter “appellant”)
where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the chief of police.
B. Notice of Appeal. An appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days from the date of the issuance of the notice
provided for in Section 8-504, by filing with the city clerk a notice of appeal, specifying the name and mailing
address of the appellant and specifying the grounds thereof. The mayor shall set the matter for hearing not
less than seven (7) nor more than thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice of appeal. Notice of the date, time
and place of such hearing shall be mailed by first class mail to appellant at the address shown in the notice of
appeal. The vice-mayor shall serve in the mayor’s absence.
C. Stay of Proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from. (Ord. 2-
16-98H § 1)
8-509 Appeals to the council.
A. Right to Appeal. An appeal to the council may be taken by any person aggrieved where it is alleged
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the mayor.
B. Notice of Appeal. An appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days from the determination complained of
by filing with the city clerk a notice of appeal, specifying the name and mailing address of the appellant and
specifying the grounds thereof. The city clerk, upon receipt of notice, shall forthwith transmit to the members of
the city council a summary of the matter and copies of all the papers constituting the record. Upon receipt of the
appeal to the city council, the appeal shall be set for hearing not less than seven (7) nor more than thirty (30)
days from receipt of such record. Notice of the date, time and place of such hearing shall be mailed by first class
mail to appellant at the address shown in the notice of appeal.
C. Council Action. The council shall hold a hearing and may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as ought to be made. The concurring vote of a majority of the council shall be necessary
to reverse any order of the hearing officer.
D. Stay of Proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from. (Ord. 2-
16-98I § 1)
8-510 Liability for costs.
Any person or entity who fails to remove or abate any nuisance after proper notice, shall be liable to the city
for all expenses incurred in the removal and abatement of the nuisance. The city shall have its right of action to
recover all such costs, and/or a lien on the property may be imposed to secure payment of such costs. (Ord. 2-16-
98J § 1)
8-511 Immediate removal of vehicle obstructing traffic.
No provision contained within this chapter shall prevent the immediate removal of a vehicle located on public
property which constitutes an obstacle to traffic. (Ord. 2-16-98K § 1)
Chapter 6
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
Sections:
8-601 County health department designated to enforce health ordinances.
8-602 Obstructing health officer.
8-603 Quarantine; violations.
8-604 Penalty.
8-601 County health department designated to enforce health ordinances.
Anywhere in this chapter where the word or words “health officer” are used it shall be construed to mean the
director of the county health department or his duly designated representative. It is the intent and purpose of the
mayor and city council to delegate the enforcement of the health ordinances of this city as set out in this section
and any such decisions rendered under this section shall be subject to review by the governing board upon an
appeal from an offender.
8-602 Obstructing health officer.
It is unlawful f or any person to wilfully obstruct or interfere with any health officer or physician charged with
the enforcement of the health laws of this city.
8-603 Quarantine; violations.
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully violate or refuse or omit to comply with any lawful order, direction,
prohibition, rule or regulation of the board of health, or any officer charged with enforcement of such order, direction,
prohibition, rule or regulation.
8-604 Penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of Part 8 of the city code, either by doing that which is prohibited, or
by failing or refusing to do that which is commanded, shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction shall be
punished by a fine in any amount not exceeding the sum of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) plus costs. Each day
of such violation shall constitute a separate offense and upon conviction be punished accordingly. (Ord. No. 2-6-
87, 7/6/87)
PART 9
LICENSING AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapters:
1 Occupational License Tax
2 Solicitors
3 Construction Equipment Licenses
4 Garage Sales
5 Community Development, Block Grant Economic Development
6 Transient Merchants
Chapter 1
OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX
(RESERVED)
Chapter 2
SOLICITORS
Sections:
9-201 Permit and license required.
9-202 Definitions.
9-203 Application.
9-204 Bond may be required.
9-205 Investigation and issuance of license.
9-206 Appeal.
9-207 Fees.
9-208 License.
9-209 Exhibition of license.
9-210 Duty of police to enforce.
9-211 Penalty.
9-201 Permit and license required.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of solicitor as herein defined without first having obtained
a permit therefor, excepting individuals or persons soliciting on behalf of local public schools, or educational,
religious or eleemosynary institutions. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
State Law Reference: Peddlers licensing, city authority 11 O.S. Section 22-106; exservicemen exempt, 72
O.S. Section 1; state licensing of itinerant merchants, 47 O.S. Section 421.
9-202 Definitions.
“Solicitor” as used in this chapter means any individual, traveling by foot or any means whatsoever, from
place to place, from building to building, from house to house, or from street to street, for contacting persons by
telephone, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal or real property
of every nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether
or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting
advance payments on such sales or not. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
9-203 Application.
Application for permit and license hereunder must be filed with the city clerk upon sworn application showing
the following:
1. Name and description of the applicant;
2. Address;
3. A brief description and nature of the type of business to be carried on, together with the name of employer,
if any;
4. The length of time for which the license is desired;
5. Description of automobile or means of transportation to be used, if any;
6. Fingerprints of the applicant;
7. The names of at least two (2) residents of the city who will certify as to the applicant’s character and
business responsibility, or other equivalent evidence as to character and business responsibility of the applicant;
8. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor or violation
of any municipal ordinance and if so, the nature of the same and punishment assessed therefor; and
9. The names of other cities in this area where applicant has been licensed or worked as a solicitor, if any.
False statement in the application shall be grounds for non-issuance or revocation of the license. (Prior Code,
Chapter 5)
9-204 Bond may be required.
If after the investigation required by this chapter either the chief of police or the city clerk determines that
there are insufficient grounds to deny a license to the applicant, but that due to the nature of the product to be
sold or services to be rendered, or the background of the applicant or firm which he represents, the safety or financial
security of the inhabitants of the city should be further protected, either of the officials may require, as a
condition precedent to the issuance of a license, that such applicant file with the city clerk a surety bond to be
approved by him, running to the city in an amount not to exceed Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) with a
surety company licensed to do business in this state conditioned that:
1. The applicant will comply fully with all of the ordinances of the city relating to and regulating the business
of solicitor;
2. As to any citizen of the city that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied
according to the representations of the solicitor; and
3. As to any citizen of the city doing business with the solicitor, that the property purchased will be delivered
according to the representations of the solicitor or that the services to be performed will be performed as
represented by the solicitor. Any aggrieved citizen of the city shall have a right to bring an action of the bond.
(Prior Code, Chapter 5)
9-205 Investigation and issuance of license.
A. Upon receipt of such application, the chief of police shall cause such investigation of the applicant’s
business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public.
B. If, as a result of such application, the applicant’s character and business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory,
the chief of police shall so endorse on the application and return the application to the city clerk and
no license shall be issued.
C. If, as a result of such application, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to
be satisfactory, the chief of police shall so endorse the same on the application, and the city clerk shall then issue
the license upon payment of the fees herein required, and subject to the provisions of the preceding section.
(Prior Code, Chapter 5)
9-206 Appeal.
Any person denied a license may appeal to the mayor and city council by filing notice thereof with the city
clerk within thirty (30) days after receiving notice of the denial. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
9-207 Fees.
Prior to the issuance of a license as set forth in this chapter, a fee of Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) per week
and any partial week thereafter shall be tendered to the city clerk. A license shall be valid only for the week or
weeks for which the fee has been tendered. (Ord. No. 4-18-94B)
9-208 License.
The license issued to the licensee shall contain the words “Licensed Solicitor - City of Bristow, Oklahoma”, a
brief description of the licensee, the period of time for which the license is issued, the number of the license, a
brief description of the products or services to be sold by the licensee and it shall bear the signature of the city
clerk and the seal of the city. This license shall be non-assignable and shall be carried on his person by the licensee
at all times during which he is engaged in soliciting. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
9-209 Exhibition of license.
Solicitors are required to exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
9-210 Duty of police to enforce.
It is the duty of any police officer of the city to require any person seen soliciting, and who is not known by
such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his solicitors license and to enforce the provisions of this chapter
against persons found to be violating the same. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
9-211 Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of an offense and shall be fined as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 5)
Chapter 3
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT LICENSES
Sections:
9-301 Definitions.
9-302 License required.
9-303 License term, bond.
9-304 License number displayed on equipment.
9-305 Notice to owner of damages.
9-306 Revocation of license.
9-307 Penalty.
9-301 Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
1. “Bond” means an agreement executed by a licensed bonding company or by any individual or entity,
other than the equipment owner, residing in or at all times subject to service in Creek County having at all times
during the duration of the bond a net worth of Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00), whose terms shall provide
that if the particular equipment owner does not promptly pay for or promptly repair damage caused by construction
equipment to public property or public lands then the surety will pay for the damages;
2. “Construction equipment” means powered machinery or powered tools used to dig, scrape or otherwise
move earth;
3. “Equipment owner” means the owner or lessee of construction equipment;
4. “Public lands” mean land owned or leased by the city or easements and rights of way dedicated to the
public of the city; and
5. “Public property” means any personal property or improvements owned or leased by the city, by any
trust established for the benefit of the city, by any public utility or by any public service company. (Ord. No.
626)
9-302 License required.
No equipment owner shall use or direct or permit the use of any construction equipment on, below or above
any public lands unless the equipment owner has obtained a license and is properly bonded as set out in this
chapter. (Ord. No. 626)
9-303 License term, bond.
The city clerk shall issue a license to any equipment owner upon written request in such form as he may reasonably
require accompanied by a good and sufficient bond in the principal amount of Ten Thousand Dollars
($10,000.00). The license shall be good for ten (10) years or the term of the bond, whichever shall expire first.
(Ord. No. 626)
9-304 License number displayed on equipment.
The equipment owner shall be given a license number which shall be displayed prominently upon any construction
equipment used within the city limits. Failure to display the number shall constitute a violation of this
chapter. (Ord. No. 626)
9-305 Notice to owner of damages.
Any equipment owner whose construction equipment, whether owned or leased, damages or destroys public
land or public property shall immediately notify the owner of the public land or public property. (Ord. No. 626)
9-306 Revocation of license.
After reasonable notice, the city council may revoke any license for any of the following reasons:
1. Destruction of public property by the licensee in conditions which indicate a careless disregard for the
safety of the same;
2. Failure of the licensee to abide by the terms of this chapter;
3. Failure of the licensee to promptly repair damage to public property;
4. Failure of the surety to promptly pay for damage to public property; and
5. Cancellation, by the surety, of his bond. (Ord. No. 626)
9-307 Penalty.
Failure to comply with the terms of this chapter shall constitute an offense punishable as provided in Section
1-108 of this code. (Ord. No. 626)
Chapter 4
GARAGE SALES
Sections:
9-401 Garage sales--Limitation on number of days.
9-401 Garage sales--Limitation on number of days.
A. Definitions.
“Garage sale” means and includes all sales enTitled “garage sale,” “lawn sale,” “office sale,” “rummage sale,”
“porch sale” or any other similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means
whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of such sale.
“Goods” are meant to include any goods or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated
hereunder.
“Person” means and includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and corporations.
B. Length of Sale. It is unlawful for a person to conduct a yard sale for a period of time in excess of two (2)
consecutive days. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Date of Sale. It is unlawful for a person to conduct a yard sale at a residence or location in excess of one
yard sale per three month period. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Persons and Sale Excepted. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following persons
or sales:
1. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction;
2. Persons acting in accordance with their power and duties as public officials;
3. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal property which are specifically
named or described in an advertisement and which separate items do no exceed five (5) in number.
E. Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon
conviction shall be punished in Part 1, Chapter 1, Section 1-108 of this code. (Ord. No. 11584, 11/5/84; Ord. 1-
92198 § 1)
Chapter 5
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, BLOCK GRANT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Sections:
9-501 Agreement to provide employment and beneficiary information.
9-502 Time for providing information.
9-501 Agreement to provide employment and beneficiary information.
As a condition of using the Community Development Block Grant - Economic Development funded electric
utility extensions designed to First Wave Aviation located within the city of Bristow, Oklahoma, any entity so
using such must agree to and shall provide employment and beneficiary information as deemed necessary and
requested by proper governmental agencies. (Ord. 5-5-97 § 2; Ord. 72-010306 § 1)
9-502 Time for providing information.
The employment and beneficiary information to be provided shall be provided on a quarterly basis during a
period of time starting with the date the Oklahoma Department of Commerce on behalf of the state of Oklahoma,
awards the Community Development Block Grant - Economic Development funds to the city of Bristow, Oklahoma,
and ending one year after the physical completion of the Community Development Block Grant - Economic
Development funded infrastructure improvement and closeout of the project. (Ord. 5-5-97 § 3; Ord. 72-
010306 § 2)
Chapter 6
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Sections:
9-601 Definitions.
9-602 License required.
9-603 License fee.
9-604 Penalty.
9-601 Definitions.
A. A “transient merchant” means any person, firm or corporation whether as owner, consignee or employee,
or whether a resident within the city limits, that:
1. Engages in a temporary business of selling and/or delivering goods, wares or services, or who conducts
meetings open to the general public where franchises, distributorships, contracts or business opportunities are
offered to participants; or
2. Sells, offers or exhibits for sale any goods, wares or services, franchises, distributorships, contracts or
business opportunities during the course of or any time within six (6) months after a lecture or public meetings
on said goods, wares, services, franchises, business opportunities, contacts or distributorships.
B. The foregoing notwithstanding, however, a transient merchant, for the purposes of this section, shall not
include the following:
1. A person, firm or corporation who shall occupy any of the aforesaid places for the purpose of conducting
a permanent business therein; provided however, that no person, firm or corporation shall be relieved from the
provisions of this chapter by reason of a temporary association with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer,
or by conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with or as part of or in the name of
any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer; or
2. Any sates of merchandise damaged by smoke or fire, or of bankrupt concerns, where such stocks have
been acquired from merchants of the city therefore regularly licensed and engaged in business; provided, however,
no such stocks or merchandise shall be augmented by new goods; or
3. A person, firm or corporation exhibiting goods for sale concurrent with and as an adjunct to a group display,
meeting or convention;
4. A person who sells his own property which was not acquired for resale, barter or exchange and who
does not conduct such sales or act as a participant by furnishing goods in such a sale more than twice during any
calendar year;
5. Art exhibits, where participating artists sell their original works and which do not contain any sales of art
works purchased elsewhere and held for resale, providing such art exhibits are sponsored by a local, responsible
organization. Each organization which seeks an exemption under this subsection shall submit an application to
the city clerk’s office specifying the sponsoring organization, the location where such show is to be held, the
purpose of the show, and the names of participating artists. The mayor shall, upon receipt of the application, review
the application and grant or deny the exemption. A person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor may petition
the city council for their review. (Ord. 2-16-98L § 1)
9-602 License required.
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or for any agent, servant or employee of any person,
firm or corporation to engage in, carry on or conduct the business of a transient merchant without first obtaining
a license so to do. The license shall be prominently displayed and available for inspection during all times that
any person, firm or corporation or any agent, servant, or employee of such person, firm or corporation is engaged
in, carrying on or conducting the business of a transient merchant.
B. The license issued to the licensee shall contain the words “Licensed Transient Merchant - City of Bristow.”
The license shall contain the period of time for which the license is issued, a brief description of the products
or services to be sold, and shall bear the signature of the licensee and the city clerk. This license shall be
nonassignable. (Ord. 2-16-98M § 1)
9-603 License fee.
The license fee for engaging in carrying on or conducting business as a transient merchant shall be the sum of
twenty dollars ($20.00) per day payable in advance for each day such business shall continue. Prior to the issuance
of a license, all persons making application for a license shall provide a copy of a sales tax permit to the
city clerk. (Ord. 2-16-98N § 1)
9-604 Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in
accordance with the provisions of Part 1, Chapter 1, Section 1-108 of this code. (Ord. 2-16-98O § 1)
PART 10
OFFENSES AND CRIMES
Chapters:
1 Offenses In General
2 Offenses Against Property
3 Offenses Against the Public
4 Offenses Against the Health, Welfare and Morals
5 Offenses Against Persons
6 Offenses Against Public Authority
7 Penalties
Chapter 1
OFFENSES IN GENERAL
Sections:
10-101 Attempts to commit an offense.
10-102 Aiding in an offense.
10-103 “Offense” defined.
10-104 “Violation” defined.
10-105 Penalty not to excuse offense.
10-101 Attempts to commit an offense.
Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the city, and in such attempt does
any act toward the commission of such offense, but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration
thereof, is guilty of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the attempted offense itself.
(Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-102 Aiding in an offense.
When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a particular offense is expressly prescribed
by ordinance, every person who counsels or aids another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense,
or misdemeanor, and punishable in the same manner as the principal offender. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-103 “Offense” defined.
The word “offense”, whenever used in this code or in any Title, chapter or ordinance of the city means the
unlawful act of doing, or failing to do, some particular act or thing construed therein to be detrimental to the
general welfare, morals, peace, health or safety of the inhabitants of the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-104 “Violation” defined.
The doing of any of the acts or things prohibited, or failing to do any of the acts or things commanded to be
done, as more fully specified and set forth by any provision of this code or any title, or chapter hereof, or future
ordinances of the city, is hereby declared to be an offense against the good order, public peace, morals, health,
proper government and welfare of the city and unlawful. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-105 Penalty not to excuse offense.
The imposition of one penalty for any offense shall not excuse it or permit it to continue, nor prevent the imposition
of further penalties, should the offenses be continued or permitted to continue. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
Chapter 2
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Sections:
10-201 Petit larceny prohibited.
10-202 Injuring automobiles and other vehicles.
10-203 Destroying or injuring buildings and other property.
10-204 Placing signs on property of another.
10-205 Throwing or shooting at persons or property.
10-206 Tampering with or damaging public utilities, larceny.
10-207 Unlawful intrusion upon land.
10-208 Illegal entrance.
10-209 Throwing advertising on street prohibited.
10-210 Throwing injurious substances.
10-211 Injury to public plants and trees.
10-212 Public streets and trees.
10-213 Damaging, destroying trees, plants or fruit; trespass.
10-214 Altering, obstructing gutters, drains, streams and other water passages.
10-215 Trespass prohibited.
10-216 Parking on property of another person or business.
10-217 Interference with fire hydrants.
10-218 Defacing public property.
10-219 Public grounds, use of.
10-220 Surrender of city property.
10-201 Petit larceny prohibited.
A. Petit larceny is the taking of personal property of value not exceeding Fifty Dollars ($50.00) accomplished
by fraud or stealth and with intent to deprive another thereof, but it does not include the taking of such
property from the “person” of another.
B. Petit larceny is unlawful, and any person who commits larceny shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior
Code, Chapter 19)
State Law Reference: Petit larceny defined, 21 O.S. Sections 1704, 1706.
10-202 Injuring automobiles and other vehicles.
A. It is unlawful for any person to start, otherwise meddle with, molest, enter, or occupy any automobile or
other vehicle belonging to another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof.
B. It is unlawful for any person to mutilate, deface or injure any automobile or other vehicle, or to remove
therefrom any number, tag or mark indicating ownership or identity thereof. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 21 O.S. 1971, Section 1787.
10-203 Destroying or injuring buildings and other property.
A. It is unlawful for any person to purposely destroy, injure, deface, besmear, or molest any structure,
building, outbuilding, fence, or any other property, real or personal, public or private, belonging to another or to
use only such property wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person entitled to its use. It is unlawful
to interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its owner or any other person entitled to its use.
B. It is unlawful for any person to loosen or remove any plank, board, block, brick, stone, stringer, support
or other part from, or to injure or destroy, any sidewalk, crossing, bridge, culvert, viaduct, gate, sign or other
property of another, without lawful authority. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
State Law Reference: Damaging property of another, 21 O.S. Sections 1760 et seq.
10-204 Placing signs on property of another.
It is unlawful for any person to place, stick, tack, paste, post, paint, mark, write or print any sign, poster, picture,
announcement, advertisement, bill placard, device or inscription upon any public or private building, fence,
sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, post, automobile, other vehicle or other property of another, without the consent of the
owner or person in charge thereof. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-205 Throwing or shooting at persons or property.
It is unlawful for any person to throw or project any stone, bottle, brick or other object into or across any
street or alley, or in any place where he is likely to hit another person wrongfully or to injure property, or to
throw any stone or other object at any person, vehicle, structure, utility or other property of another (whether
public or private), except in case where such is done in defense of oneself, of another person or of property.
(Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-206 Tampering with or damaging public utilities, larceny.
A. It is unlawful for any person to adjust, connect, disconnect, molest, injure, destroy or in any way tamper
with any water or gas pipe, any telephone pole or apparatus, meterloop, riser or connection belonging thereto, or
any water, gas or electric meter or meter box or housing, or any pipe, wire, conduit or connection belonging
thereto, or any other part of water, gas or electrical system, or to do any act or use any contrivance to prevent or
affect correct and proper registration by any such meter. This shall not apply to officers and employees of the
city or of any person, firm or corporation owning or operating such water, gas or electric system, acting in line of
duty.
B. No person shall, without lawful authority, make any splice, tap or other connection into or on any cable,
wire, pipe or other connection into or on any cable, wire, pipe or other service furnished to the residents of the
city by the city or by any person, firm or corporation operating in the city under a valid permit issued by the city.
C. Any person who with intent to defraud, makes or causes to be made any pipe, wire, or other instrument
or contrivance and connects the same or causes the same to be connected with any pipe provided for the purpose
of conducting water or gas, or with any wire or other electrical conductor provided for the purpose of conducting
electricity, so as to conduct such gas, water or electric current, to a point where the same may be consumed,
without its passing through meters provided for registering the quantity consumed, or in any manner so as to
evade payment therefor, whether the gas, water or electrical current is furnished through a meter or not, shall be
guilty of an offense. Every person who, with like intent, injures or alters any gas, electric or water meter or obstructs
its action, is guilty of an offense. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-207 Unlawful intrusion upon land.
It is unlawful for any person to intrude or squat upon any lot or piece of land within the city without a license
or authority from the owner thereof, or to erect or occupy thereon any hut, hovel, shanty or other structure without
such license or authority, or to place, erect or occupy within the bounds of any street, alley or avenue of the
city, any hut, shanty, hovel, or other structure without authority of law or ordinance. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-208 Illegal entrance.
It is illegal for any person to enter upon the property of another or into an area or structure on such property
(whether such property, area or structure is public or private), when such entrance is plainly forbidden by signs
or otherwise or when the property, area or structure is enclosed, except when such entrance is in line of duty, or
with the expressed, or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge, or otherwise by authority of law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-209 Throwing advertising on street prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to throw, leave or deposit, or cause to be thrown, left or deposited, upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, or other public area, any handbill, circular, or other advertising matter. (Prior Code, Chapter
19)
10-210 Throwing injurious substances.
It is unlawful for any person to purposely or premeditatedly put or throw upon the person or property of another,
or upon any animal, any acid, corrosive or other irritating or harmful substance, or human or animal waste
or urine, with intent to injure or harass the person, property or animal. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-211 Injury to public plants and trees.
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully and without authority cut, pull, pluck or otherwise injure any flowers,
flowering plants, shrubs or trees growing in or around any park or public street within the city, or wilfully or
without authority to tear down, remove, cut or otherwise injure or destroy any gate or fence enclosing any such
park or ground, or wilfully injure or destroy any stand, bench, seat or other property situated upon such park or
ground. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-212 Public streets and trees.
It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Wilfully or wantonly cut, deface or in any way injure any tree or sapling standing or growing in any of
the streets, alleys or public places within the city;
2. Attach any guy wires, telephone, telegraph, or electric wire, or any wire to any live tree;
3. Dig any hole, ditch or trench in any public street, road, avenue or alley, or any other public premises or
ground within, belonging to or under the supervision or control of the city;
4. Take or remove any dirt, earth or any substance from any street, road, alley or other public place in the
city; or to cut, break or otherwise injure any pavement, curb or gutter therein; or
5. Connect any driveway to any street or other public place without first securing permission from the city
so to do.
Any such digging, removing, or driveway connection shall be done under the supervision of the street superintendent
or city engineer. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-213 Damaging, destroying trees, plants or fruit; trespass.
It is unlawful for any person to willfully cut down, root up, sever, injure or destroy any fruit tree, shade or
ornamental tree, cultivated root, plant, vine, shrub or bush whatever, which is the property of another, standing
on or attached to the land of another, or to pick, destroy or carry away therefrom or in any way interfere with any
port of the fruit thereof, or to trespass on the premises of another, without the consent of the owner or person in
charge. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-214 Altering, obstructing gutters, drains, streams and other water passages.
A. It is unlawful for any person to change, alter, deflect, destroy or injure any gutter, waterway, water outlet,
drain, ditch, stream or other water passage, either natural or artificial, in or upon the streets, avenues, alleys
or other public ways or public property within the city or to change the course or flow of any water passage or
stream running upon his property or upon the side of the street adjacent to his property in such a manner as to
cast the stream or flow of water into the public street or other public way or upon the property of another.
B. It is unlawful for any person to fill up, deflect or obstruct any gutter, waterway, water outlet, drain,
stream, ditch, sewer or other water passage, either natural or artificial, by throwing or causing to be thrown
therein any trash, rubbish, garbage, brush or other thing.
C. If it becomes necessary to change, alter or in any way interfere with any gutter, drain, ditch, stream or
other water passage, for the purpose of protecting the streets or other public ways or property, or for the protection
or preservation of the property of any person, it shall be necessary first to obtain the consent of the mayor.
(Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-215 Trespass prohibited.
A. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
1. “Public property” means that property which is dedicated to public use and over which the federal, state
or municipal government or any subdivision thereof exercises control;
2. “Private property” means any property other than public property; and
3. “Trespass” means each and every actual entry upon the premises of an owner or other person in lawful
possession of the premises without the express or the implied consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession.
Trespass shall also mean remaining upon the premises of an owner or other person in lawful possession
after having been told to leave the premises by the owner, or the agent, or employee of the owner, or other person
in lawful possession of the premises. Trespass shall also be defined as the act of remaining on private property
at any time other than during posted hours of business operation after having been directed to vacate such
premises by a police officer; provided that the provisions of this sentence shall not apply to persons, including
employees, whose presence upon such premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession
of such premises; nor shall the provisions of this sentence apply unless hours of business operations are posted
upon such premises. Trespass shall also be defined as the act of returning to private property before the posted
time of opening for business operation on the next business day after having been directed to vacate such premises
under the terms of this subsection.
B. It is unlawful for any person to trespass on private property. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-216 Parking on property of another person or business.
It is unlawful for any person to park an automobile or other vehicle, or to place any structure or object on the
driveway, parking area, yard, or any portion of the premises or property of another person or business, including
but not limited to any restaurant, gasoline/filling station or other business, when the business is not open to the
public for business and when signs are posted prohibiting such parking without the expressed or tacit consent of
the owner or person in charge thereof, or otherwise by authority of law or ordinance. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-217 Interference with fire hydrants.
A. It is unlawful for any person except one duly authorized by the city or a member of the fire department
to open, turn on or off, interfere with, attach any pipe or hose to, or connect anything with, any fire hydrant belonging
to the city.
B. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct free access to any fire hydrant in the city. The obstructions prohibited
in this section include but are not limited to those caused by placement of boxes, cartons, or other containers,
or brick, lumber or dirt, near or around such hydrants, or the growth of grass, weeds or plants near the
fire hydrants. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
Cross Reference: Fire department and services, Sections 13-201 et seq.
10-218 Defacing public property.
It is an offense for any person to maliciously or wilfully deface, injure, destroy, smear or bedaub any building,
sidewalks, streets, pavement, curbing, water or sewer lines, or other real or personal property of the city. (Prior
Code, Chapter 19)
10-219 Public grounds, use of.
Any person who, without the consent of the mayor, shall maintain, erect, or permit the erection of any building,
hut, hotel, shanty, tent or other structure under his or her control, upon any street, sidewalk, alley, avenue, or
other public grounds of the city, shall be guilty of an offense. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-220 Surrender of city property.
Each and every person who, having been an officer or employee of the city wrongfully refuses to surrender all
books, papers, or other property coming into his possession as such officer or employee, when so requested to do
so by his successor in office or his superior in authority or upon any written order of the city council or other
duly authorized city official, shall be guilty of an offense. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
Chapter 3
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC
Sections:
10-301 Disturbing the peace.
10-302 Fireworks prohibited.
10-303 Storing or keeping explosives.
10-304 Carrying weapons; exceptions.
10-305 Selling weapons and dangerous articles to minors.
10-306 Discharging weapons; throwing missiles.
10-307 Reckless conduct.
10-308 Loud noise or music prohibited, amplified sound.
10-309 Political advertising on rights of way.
10-301 Disturbing the peace.
A. It is unlawful to disturb or alarm the peace of another or others by doing any of the acts set out in Subsection
B of this section.
B. Disturbing the peace is the doing of any of the following in such a manner as would foreseeably alarm or
disturb the peace of another or others:
1. Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening, violent or insulting language or conduct;
2. Appearing in an intoxicated condition;
3. Engaging in a fistic encounter;
4. Lewdly exposing one’s person, or private parts thereof, in any public place or in any place where there
are present other persons to be offended or annoyed thereby;
5. Pointing any pistol or any other deadly weapon whether loaded or not at any other person or persons
either in anger or otherwise;
6. Holding an unlawful assembly of two (2) or more persons, including being assembled together and acting
in concert, to do any unlawful act against the peace or to the terror of others or preparing for or moving toward
such acts, or otherwise assembling unlawfully or riotously;
7. Interrupting any lawful assembly of people by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by
profane, improper or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing
distance thereof;
8. Making unnecessarily loud, offensive noises;
9. Disturbing any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for religious worship by making noise, by
rude, indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language, or in any other manner, either
within the place of worship or within hearing distance thereof; or
10. Committing any other act in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or alarm the public. (Prior Code,
Chapter 19)
10-302 Fireworks prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, offer for sale, gift or barter any fireworks within
the city limits of the city.
B. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to ignite or in any manner discharge or use fireworks
within the city limits of the city.
C. The mayor of the city is authorized to issue permits for the organized and supervised discharge of fireworks
for public display. Such permits shall be issued only upon written application therefor by the organization
desiring to stage such public display and written notification to the fire department of the city. (Prior Code, Article
E)
Cross Reference: Fire Prevention Code, Section 13-101.
State Law Reference: Bottlerockets prohibited by state law, 68 O.S. Section 1624; State fireworks licenses, 68
O.S. Sections 1621 et seq.; Municipal power to regulate, II O.S. Section 22-110.
10-303 Storing or keeping explosives.
It is unlawful for any person to store or keep within the city any nitroglycerin, dynamite, gunpowder, or any
other highly explosive material or substance, except that gunpowder may be kept in quantities of not to exceed
five (5) pounds where the same is securely kept. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-304 Carrying weapons; exceptions.
A. The terms used in this section shall be as defined in Sections 1289.1 et seq. of the Oklahoma Statutes.
B. A person shall be permitted to carry shotguns, rifles or pistols, open and not concealed, under the following
conditions:
1. When going to, during participation in or coming from hunting animals or fowl, including moving from
place to place by vehicle. However, a rifle or shotgun may be carried in a landborne motor vehicle over a public
highway or roadway when clip or magazine loaded and not chamber loaded when carried in a locked compartment
of the vehicle, such as the trunk of an automobile;
2. When going to, during competition in or practicing or coming from a safety or hunter safety class, target
shooting, skeet, trap or other recognized sporting events;
3. When unloaded, going to or coming from a gunsmith;
4. When unloaded, going to or coming from a store for purposes of repair, trade, barter or sale;
5. Going to or coming from a military function of the state military forces to be defined as the Oklahoma
Army or Air National Guard, Federal Military Reserve and active military forces;
6. Going to or coming from a recognized police function of either a municipal, county or state government
as functioning police officials;
7. When unloaded, going to or coming from a place of publicly recognized firearms display such as a “gun
show” where the public is invited;
8. When unloaded, going to or coming from a point of private trade for purposes of transferring a firearm
to another private citizen in exchange for moneys, payment for services or trade;
9. When going to, coming from and during a performance for entertainment purposes; or
10. For any legitimate purpose not in violation of this code or any legislative enactment regarding the use,
ownership and control of firearms.
State Law Reference: State firearms act, 21 O.S. Sections 1289.1 et seq.; similar provisions, 21 O.S. Section
1272; authority of city to prohibit carrying of weapons, 11 O.S. Section 22-110.
10-305 Selling weapons and dangerous articles to minors.
A. It is unlawful for any person to sell, barter, give or furnish to any minor, any blank or loaded cartridges,
or any pistol, revolver, toy or other thing made, for the purpose of exploding any blank or loaded cartridges.
B. It is unlawful for any person to sell, barter, give or furnish to any minor any pistol, revolver, dirk, bowie
knife, metal knucks or other dangerous or deadly weapon. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-306 Discharging weapons; throwing missiles.
It is unlawful for any person to discharge or fire any species of firearms, air pistol, air rifle, air gun, slingshot,
or discharge a hand grenade, bomb or similar device, or other weapon, or throw any missile within the city, except
when necessary for the protection of life or property or in accordance with law. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
State Law Reference: Discharging firearms or air rifles in public places, 21 O.S. Section 1364; authority of
city to prohibit discharge of firearms, 11 O.S. Section 655.
10-307 Reckless conduct.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in reckless conduct while having in his possession any shotgun, rifle or
pistol, such actions consisting of creating a situation of unreasonable risk and probability of death or great bodily
harm to another, and demonstrating a conscious disregard for the safety of another person. (Prior Code, Chapter
19)
10-308 Loud noise or music prohibited, amplified sound.
It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quietude of any part of the city by operating, having operated,
or permitting to be operated, any contrivance, whether electric or not, with or without a loud speaker, in
such a manner as to emit loud music, noise or words. This section shall not prohibit religious bodies from playing
chimes, bells, carillons or other religious music. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-309 Political advertising on rights of way.
A. A political advertising sign is defined as any sign, poster or placard printed, painted, made, or designed
for the purpose of furthering or advertising the candidacy of any person who is or intends to become or may be a
candidate for the election to any public office, whether such public office be in the local, state or federal government,
or any subdivision thereof.
B. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or display any advertising sign or advertising
of any other character upon any public utility easement within the city.
C. No person, firm or corporation shall place, tack, nail, staple or glue any advertising sign on any telephone,
telegraph, electric or street-lighting pole within this city.
D. Any advertising sign erected, placed or displayed in violation of the provisions hereof shall be a public
nuisance. No property right shall exist in such sign erected, placed or displayed in violation of the provisions
hereof, and such sign may be removed and destroyed by any person.
Chapter 4
OFFENSES AGAINST THE HEALTH, WELFARE AND MORALS
Sections:
10-401 Public intoxication and drinking prohibited.
10-402 Marijuana prohibited.
10-403 Drug paraphernalia.
10-404 Prostitution.
10-405 Disorderly house.
10-406 Nudity, improper dress, indecent exposure.
10-407 Definitions; obscenity regulations.
10-408 Prohibited obscene conduct.
10-409 Vagrancy defined for specific acts.
10-410 Curfew for minors.
10-411 Sleeping on the streets, depots.
10-412 Begging prohibited.
10-413 Gambling prohibited.
10-414 Being about place where gambling is going on.
10-415 Harmful deception.
10-416 False or bogus checks.
10-401 Public intoxication and drinking prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any person to appear or be upon or in any street, alley, or other public place in the city
in a state of intoxication. It is unlawful for any person to drink intoxicating or nonintoxicating beverage as defined
in this code upon or in any street, alley, or other public place within the city.
B. For the purposes of this code, a state of intoxication means the condition in which a person is under the
influence of any intoxicating, nonintoxicating, spirituous, vinous or malt liquors, or beverages to such extent as
to deprive the person of his or her full physical or mental power. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-402 Marijuana prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any person:
1. To appear or be upon or in any street, alley, place of business, or other public place while under the influence
of marijuana;
2. To use, have, or possess marijuana upon or in any street, alley, place of business, or other public place
within the city;
3. To use marijuana in any place within the city except as legally prescribed by a physician licensed to
practice in the state; or
4. To loiter about a place where marijuana is sold or furnished illegally.
B. For the purpose of this section, “marijuana” means all parts of the plant cannabis sativa L., whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof; the rosin extracted from any part of such plant; and every compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or rosin but shall not include the mature
stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the derivative, mixture or preparation
of such mature stalks (except rosin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such
plant which is incapable of germination. (Prior Code, Chapter 14)
State Law Reference: Controlled dangerous substances act, 63 O.S. Sections 2-101 et seq.
10-403 Drug paraphernalia.
A. For the purpose of this section, “drug paraphernalia” means all equipment, products and materials of any
kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the state Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, Sections
2-101 et seq. of Title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes, hereinafter referred to as “the act”, and adopted by reference
herein. It includes, but is not limited to those equipment, products and materials specified in Section 2-
101.1 of Title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes on drug paraphernalia.
B. It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of the act.
C. It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver,
drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be
used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare,
test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance in violation of the act.
D. It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any
advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement,
in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
10-404 Prostitution.
A. It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Be a prostitute;
2. Solicit, entice, or procure another to commit or engage in any act of prostitution;
3. Engage in any act of prostitution;
4. Knowingly let premises for purposes of prostitution;
5. Conduct a business or premises for prostitution;
6. Accept or receive the proceeds of any act of prostitution; or
7. Be a party to an act of prostitution or solicitation of prostitution in the limits of city.
B. For the purposes of this section:
1. Prostitution is the giving of the body for sexual intercourse or sodomy for hire or money;
2. Soliciting for prostitutes is the soliciting, inviting, inducing, directing, or transporting of a person to any
place with the intention of promoting prostitution; and
3. Letting premises for prostitution is the granting of the right of use or the leasing of any premises, knowing
that they are to be used for the practice of prostitution, or allowing the continued use of the premises with
that knowledge. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-405 Disorderly house.
A. A disorderly house means any structure or vehicle by which the peace, comfort, health, welfare or decency
of the public is disturbed by reason of the people therein committing or resorting to any of the following
acts:
1. The sale, distribution, possession or use of any controlled dangerous substance, the sale, distribution,
possession or use of which is declared unlawful by state statute;
2. The violation of any of the ordinances of this city or statutes of this state regulating the sale, distribution,
possession or use of alcoholic beverages including beer containing more than one-half of one percent (.5%) alcohol
by volume;
3. The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by state statute or city ordinance including, but not
limited to, soliciting for purposes of prostitution; or
4. The violation of any state statute or city ordinance prohibiting gambling.
B. No person shall keep or maintain, or aid, abet or assist in keeping and maintaining a disorderly house.
C. No owner, lessee, lessor, or other person, partnership or corporation having control over any house,
building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle shall knowingly use, lease, sub-lease or
otherwise permit the use of same for the purpose of keeping therein any disorderly house, and knowing or ascertaining
that such house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle is so occupied as a
disorderly house, no persons, partnership or corporation shall continue to grant permission to so use such premises
as a disorderly house.
D. No person shall knowingly reside in, enter into, or remain in a disorderly house. In any prosecution for
violation of this section, the city shall have the burden to prove such knowledge by direct evidence only and not
by circumstantial evidence. This section shall not apply to physicians or officers in the discharge of their professional
or official duties. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
State Law Reference: Municipal power to regulate disorderly houses and indecencies, 11 O.S. Section 22-109.
10-406 Nudity, improper dress, indecent exposure.
A. It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Appear in any public place in the city in a state of nudity;
2. Appear in any public place in the city in any offensive, indecent or lewd dress; or
3. Make an indecent public exposure of his or her person.
B. It is unlawful for any person to procure, counsel or assist any person to commit any of the acts in Subsection
A of this section. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 21 O.S. Section 1021.
10-407 Definitions; obscenity regulations.
The following terms when used in the chapter shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this
section:
1. “Obscene” means that to the average person applying contemporary community standards:
a. The predominant appeal of the matter taken as a whole, is to prurient interest; i.e. shameful or morbid
interest in sexual conduct, nudity, or excretion;
b. The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner sexual conduct regulated by Title 21 of
the Oklahoma Statutes; and
c. The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value;
2. “Material” means any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material or any picture,
drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording,
transcription or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction or any other articles, equipment or machines;
3. “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity;
4. “Disseminate” means to transfer possession of, with or without consideration;
5. “Knowingly” means being aware of the character and the content of the material;
6. “Nudity” means the showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with less than a fully
opaque covering, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state;
7. “Performance” means any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance or other exhibition performed before an
audience;
8. “Available to the public” means that the matter or performance may be purchased or attended on a subscription
basis, on a membership fee arrangement, or for a separate fee for each item or performance;
9. “Service to patrons” means the provision of services to paying guests in establishments providing food
and beverages; including but not limited to hostessing, hat checking, cooking, bar tending, serving, table setting
and clearing, waiter and waitressing, and entertaining; and
10. “Promote” means to cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist.
10-408 Prohibited obscene conduct.
It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Knowingly disseminate, distribute or make available to the public any obscene material;
2. Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials depicting and describing explicit
sexual conduct, nudity, or exhibition utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements and other public sales efforts
that promote such commerce primarily on the basis of their prurient appeal;
3. Knowingly engage or participate in any obscene performance made available to the public; or
4. Provide service to patrons in such a manner as to expose to public view:
a. His or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region;
b. Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair,
buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region;
c. Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof; or
d. Knowingly promote the commission of any of the above listed unlawful acts. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-409 Vagrancy defined for specific acts.
It is unlawful to be a vagrant in the limits of the city. For the purposes of this section, a vagrant means any
person who loiters or remains in or wanders about, a public or private place for any of the following purposes:
1. For the purpose of gambling with cards, dice or other gambling paraphernalia;
2. For the purpose of engaging in prostitution or soliciting prostitution or soliciting for an act of lewdness;
3. For the purpose of engaging in theft, or breaking and entering any building, property or automobile of
another;
4. For the purpose of injuring, destroying, molesting or defacing any property of another;
5. For the purpose of assaulting any person;
6. For the purpose of begging or soliciting alms, provided that this section shall not apply to persons soliciting
alms for bona fide religious, charitable or eleemosynary organizations with the authorization of such organizations;
or
7. For the purpose of selling, purchasing, trading or otherwise exchanging, procuring or making available
illegal drugs or contraband. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
State Law Reference: Power to regulate vagrancy, 11 O.S. Section 22-123.
10-410 Curfew for minors.
A. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this section:
1. “Minor” is any person under the age of eighteen (18);
2. “Parent” is the natural or adoptive parent of a minor;
3. “Guardian” is any person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of a minor;
4. “Custodian” is any person over the age of twenty-one (21) years who is in loco parentis to a minor; and
5. Public place means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or place to which the general
public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. A public place shall
include, but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drug store, pool
room, shopping center and any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall
also include the front or immediate area of the above.
B. It is unlawful for any minor to remain, wander, stroll or play in any public place on foot or to cruise
about without a set destination in any vehicle in, about or upon any public place in the city between the hours of
1:00 A.M. and 5.00 A.M. in the morning on Saturdays and Sundays and between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and
5:00 A.M. on any other day unless:
1. The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having custody or control
of such minor;
2. The minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or activity directed or permitted by his parent,
guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor; or
3. Where the presence of such minor is connected with or required by some legitimate employment, trade,
profession or occupation.
C. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating or having charge of any public place to
knowingly permit or suffer the presence of minors between the hours of curfew designated in Subsection B of
this section.
D. It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having custody or control of any
minor to suffer or permit or by inefficient control to allow such person to be on any public place within the city
between the hours of curfew designated in Subsection B of this section. The provisions of this section do not
apply if:
1. The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having the care, custody
or control of the minor;
2. The minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or activity directed by his parent, guardian,
custodian or other adult having the care and custody of the minor;
3. The parent, guardian or other adult person herein has made a missing person notification to the city police
department;
4. Within one hour following the ending, closing, adjournment or dismissal of a meeting, service or activity
of, and sponsored by, a public school, church or religious organization, which has been participated in or attended
by such minor who is returning directly to his home or place of abode; or
5. When a minor has in his possession a written exemption granted by the chief of police of the city.
E. The mayor may permit procedures for advance notice or registration with the city of special events or
functions sponsored by churches, schools, clubs or other organizations which require minors to be out at a later
time. The mayor may also prescribe the procedures for taking into custody minors found in violation of this section.
F. A parent, guardian or custodian, of such minor, may file a written application directed to the chief of
police of the city who may grant a special exemption of enforcement of the curfew provided by this section being
required as to such minor, which exemption shall not exceed five (5) consecutive days, or in the alternative,
two (2) days of any week for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. All requests shall be filed with the city clerk
of the city.
G. The chief of police shall have the authority to grant, or reject or revoke any request for an exemption to
enforcement of the curfew provided by this section or may reduce the time limit of such exemption. However,
any applicant for such exemption, feeling aggrieved by the action of the chief of police, may file a request for
hearing before the judge of the municipal court of the city who shall summarily hear same, and his judgment
shall be final.
H. Any law enforcement officer who shall witness a violation of this section may take such offender into
his custody to be prosecuted for such violation, require the posting of a sufficient bond for such minor’s appearance
in court, or may place the minor in the custody of his or her parents or some responsible person. (Ord. No.
10/19/81A)
10-411 Sleeping on the streets, depots.
It is unlawful for any person, between the hours of 12:00 A.M. midnight and sunrise, to sleep on any street, in
any other public place, or on any property of another without the express or tacit consent of the owner or person
in charge of such place.
10-412 Begging prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to beg alms for any person, organization or agency except an organization or
agency, public or private, whose purpose or one of whose purposes is to aid persons in need. (Prior Code, Chapter
19)
10-413 Gambling prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or agent or employee thereof, to do any of the following:
1. To play, to open or cause to be opened, or to operate, carry on or conduct, whether for hire or not, any
game of faro, monte, poker, roulette, craps, any banking, percentage or other game played with dice, cards, or
any device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any other thing of value;
2. To set up, operate or permit to be operated, any slot machine or other device whatsoever where money,
checks, chips, credit or any other things of value are played, when the act of playing the same might result in a
gain or loss to the party playing;
3. To gamble knowingly in any other manner; or
4. To knowingly permit his or its premises, houses, lot or other property to be used in connection with, or
for, any act declared unlawful in this section.
B. It is unlawful and an offense against the city for any person to play any roulette wheel or slot machine or
any other device or machine wherein the element of chance is involved by losing or winning money, credits,
checks or any other representatives of value.
C. Excepted from the provisions of this section is any bingo game established and conducted lawfully in
accordance with applicable state law, including 21 O.S. Sections 995.1 et seq. and activities allowed pursuant to
the Oklahoma Horse Racing Act. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
State Law Reference: Municipal power to prohibit gambling, 11 O.S. Section 22-108; gambling prohibited, 21
O.S. Sections 941 et seq.
10-414 Being about place where gambling is going on.
It is unlawful for any person to loiter about in the immediate vicinity where a person or persons are gambling,
whether by playing games, operating a slot machine or other device, or otherwise. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-415 Harmful deception.
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by impersonation, misre-presentation, or
otherwise, when such deception results in or contributes to the loss, damage, harm or injury of the person deceived
or of a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-416 False or bogus checks.
It is unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to obtain or attempt to obtain from any person,
firm or corporation, any money, property or valuable thing of the value of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) or less by
means of any false or bogus check or by any other written or printed or engraved instrument or spurious coin.
The term “false or bogus check” shall include checks or orders given for money or property which are not honored
on account of insufficient funds of the maker to pay same, as against the maker or drawer thereof. The making,
drawing, issuing or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, shall be
prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and the knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with, such bank or
other depository. Such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee the amount due thereon, together with the
protest fees, and the check or order shall be presented for payment within thirty (30) days after same is delivered
and accepted. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
Chapter 5
OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Sections:
10-501 Assault and battery prohibited.
10-502 Lawful use of force.
10-501 Assault and battery prohibited.
A. It is unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and battery within the city.
B. For the purposes of this section, an assault is any wilful and unlawful attempt or offer with force or violence
to do a corporal hurt to another. A battery is any wilful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person
of another. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 21 O.S. Sections 641, 642, 644.
10-502 Lawful use of force.
To use or to attempt to offer to use force upon or toward the person of another is not unlawful in the city in
the following cases:
1. When necessarily committed by a public officer in the performance of any legal duty, or by any other
person assisting him or acting by his direction;
2. When necessarily committed by any person in arresting one who has committed any felony, and delivering
him to a public officer competent to receive him in custody;
3. When committed either by the party about to be injured, or by any other person in his aid or defense, in
preventing or attempting to prevent an offense against his person, or any trespass or other unlawful interference
with real or personal property in his lawful possession; provided, the force used is not more than sufficient to
prevent such offense, and that the same shall be necessary for the self-defense of his person or property;
4. When committed by a parent or authorized agent of any parent, or by any guardian, master or teacher, in
the exercise of a lawful authority to restrain or correct his child, ward, apprentice or scholar, provided restraint or
correction has been rendered necessary by the misconduct of such child, ward, apprentice or scholar, or by his
refusal to obey the lawful command of such parent or authorized agent or guardian, master or teacher, and the
force used is reasonable in manner and moderate in degree;
5. When committed by a carrier of passengers, or the authorized agents or servants of such carrier, or by
any person assisting them at their request, in expelling from any carriage, interurban car, vessel or other vehicle,
any passenger who refuses to obey a lawful and reasonable regulation prescribed for the conduct of passengers,
if such vehicle has first been stopped and the force used is not more than is sufficient to expel the offending passenger,
with a reasonable regard to his personal safety; and
6. When committed by any person in preventing an idiot, lunatic, insane person or other person of unsound
mind, including persons temporarily or partially deprived of reason, from committing an act dangerous to himself
or to another, or enforcing such restraint as is necessary for the protection of his person or for his restoration
to health, during such period only as shall be necessary to obtain legal authority for the restraint or custody of
such person. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
Chapter 6
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
Sections:
10-601 Resisting a police officer.
10-602 Refusing or failing to assist an officer.
10-603 Assault or battery upon police or other law officer.
10-604 Rescuing prisoners.
10-605 Escape of prisoners.
10-606 Assisting escape of prisoners.
10-607 Unlawful communication with prisoners.
10-608 Impersonating an officer or employee.
10-609 False alarms.
10-610 False representation to an officer.
10-611 Removal of barricades.
10-612 Resisting public officials.
10-613 Eluding police officer.
10-614 Unauthorized persons not to respond to police, fire calls.
10-601 Resisting a police officer.
A. It is unlawful to resist, oppose or assault, or in any way interfere with a police officer or any person duly
authorized to act as such, while the officer or person is discharging or attempting to discharge his official duties
within the limits of the city.
B. It is unlawful for any person to warn or signal another so as to assist such other person to flee, escape or
evade an officer seeking to make an arrest or for any person to bar or lock any door or barrier in the face of or in
front of an approaching officer.
C. Resisting an officer is the intentional opposition or resistance to, or obstruction of, an individual acting
in his official capacity, and authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve any lawful
process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to know that the person arresting, seizing
property, or serving process is acting in his official capacity.
D. The words “obstruction of” shall, in addition to their common meaning, include:
1. Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer can restrain him and after notice is given
that he is under arrest;
2. Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the arresting officer after the arrested party is
actually placed under arrest and before he is under arrest; or
3. Refusal by the arrested party to give his name and make his identity known to the arresting officer.
(Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-602 Refusing or failing to assist an officer.
A. An officer of the city making or about to make an arrest, or executing or about to execute a warrant or
other process, in accordance with the ordinances of the city or with state or federal law, or suppressing or about
to suppress a riot, affray or unlawful assembly, may call upon person or persons to assist him in making such
arrest, executing such process or suppressing such riot, affray or unlawful assembly.
B. It is unlawful for any person lawfully called upon thus to assist an officer of the city to refuse or fail to
do so. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-603 Assault or battery upon police or other law officer.
It is unlawful for any person, without justifiable or excusable cause, to knowingly commit any assault, battery
or assault and battery upon the person of a police officer or other officer of the law while in the performance of
his duties.
10-604 Rescuing prisoners.
It is unlawful for any person, by use of force or in any other illegal manner, to set at liberty, rescue or attempt
to set at liberty, any prisoner from any officer or employee of the city having legal custody of such prisoner or
from the city jail or other place of confinement by the city. It is unlawful to assist such prisoner in any manner to
escape from such prison or custody either before or after conviction, including escape from a vehicle of confinement.
(Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-605 Escape of prisoners.
It is unlawful for any person confined in the city jail or other place of confinement by the city, or working
upon the streets or other public places of the city in pursuance of any judgment, or otherwise held in legal custody
by authority of the city, to break or attempt to break from any such jail, prison or custody, or to escape or
attempt to escape therefrom. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-606 Assisting escape of prisoners.
A. It is unlawful for any person, by use of force or in any other illegal manner, to set at liberty, rescue, or
attempt to set at liberty or rescue, any prisoner from any officer or employee of the city having legal custody of
such prisoner or from the city jail or other place of confinement by the city.
B. It is unlawful for any person to convey into the city jail or other city prison any instrument or other thing
useful to facilitate the escape of any prisoner therein, or to give any such instrument or thing to a prisoner in custody
or in prison, whether such escape is effected or attempted or not.
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 21 O.S. 1971, Sections 437, 441, 521.
10-607 Unlawful communication with prisoners.
It is unlawful for any person to loiter about the city jail or any other city prison with intent to communicate
unlawfully with any prisoner confined therein, or to communicate or attempt to communicate unlawfully with
any prisoner confined in such jail or prison or held in legal custody.
10-608 Impersonating an officer or employee.
It is unlawful for any person to impersonate any officer or employee of the city, falsely represent himself to be
an officer or employee of the city, or exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of an
officer or employee of the city without being duly authorized to do so. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
State Law Reference: Impersonating public officers, 21 O.S. Section 1533.
10-609 False alarms.
It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature or in any manner to deceive or attempt to
deceive the fire department, police department, emergency medical services, or any officer or employee thereof
with reference to any fire alarm or reported fire, accident or other emergency or knowingly to cause the fire department,
police department, emergency medical services, or its officers or employees to make a useless or unnecessary
run to any part of the city or outside the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-610 False representation to an officer.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or any agent or employee thereof, knowingly to make any
material misrepresentation to any officer, employee or agency of the city government in any official application
to, or official dealing or negotiation with, such officer or agency; or to commit perjury before any tribunal or
officer of the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-611 Removal of barricades.
It is unlawful for any person except by proper authority to remove any barricade, warning signs or devices, or
obstruction placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area.
(Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-612 Resisting public officials.
It is unlawful for any person knowingly or wilfully to:
1. Resist, oppose or obstruct the chief of police, any other police officer, the municipal judge, or any other
officer or employee of the city in the discharge of his official duties;
2. Threaten or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate any such officer or employee from the discharge
of his official duties; or
3. Assault or beat, or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to, use abusive or indecent language toward or about,
any such officer or employee while such officer or employee is in the discharge of his official duties. (Prior
Code, Chapter 19)
10-613 Eluding police officer.
It is unlawful for any operator of a motor vehicle who has received a visual and audible signal, a red light and
a siren from a police officer driving a motor vehicle showing the same to be an official police car, directing the
operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, and who wilfully increases his speed or extinguishes his lights in an attempt
to elude such police officer, or who does elude such police officer. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
10-614 Unauthorized persons not to respond to police, fire calls.
A. As used in this section:
1. “Police or fire department radio calls: are radio calls to and from the police or fire department or radio
calls to or from members of the police or fire departments concerning police or fire department business;
2. “Unauthorized persons” are all persons except city officials, regular members of the police or fire departments,
and members of the volunteer fire department and police auxiliary while on official business;
3. “Response to” means to travel or attempt to travel to the destination of the incident or incidents causing
the radio calls to be made or siren sounded; and
4. “Siren” shall include all mobile or permanent sirens.
B. It is unlawful for any unauthorized person or persons to respond to a police or fire department radio call
or siren. (Ord. No. 603)
Chapter 7
PENALTIES
Sections:
10-701 General penalties.
10-701 General penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this part is punishable by fine or imprisonment as provided in Section 1-
108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 19)
PART 11
PARKS, RECREATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS
Chapters:
1 Parks and Recreation
2 Libraries
3 Cemeteries
Chapter 1
PARKS AND RECREATION
Sections:
11-101 Park and recreation board created.
11-102 Terms--Members.
11-103 Park designated.
11-104 Rules and regulations.
11-105 Annual budget--Expenditures.
11-106 Board authority limited.
11-107 Outdoor events and gatherings--Permits required--Bond.
11-108 Closing hours.
11-109 Name of lake.
11-110 Entering lakebed prohibited--Penalty.
11-111 Fishing regulations.
11-112 Wakes by motorized boats prohibited.
11-113 Tennis court regulations.
11-114 Penalty.
11-101 Park and recreation board created.
There is hereby created a public recreation board which shall have all of the duties, obligations, powers and
jurisdiction as is bestowed upon it by the statutes of the state and the power to provide, establish, conduct and
maintain such recreation centers, facilities, playgrounds and parks as may now or hereafter be owned or operated
by the city. (Ord. No. 11/3/80)
State Law Reference: Park and recreation programs, boards, 11 O.S. Sections 33-101 et seq.
11-102 Terms--Members.
The present board of park commissioners is hereby appointed as the public recreation board. Each member
shall continue in office for the remainder of the term of the present mayor, or until its successors are duly appointed
and qualified. Thereafter, the public recreation board shall consist of five (5) persons, resident citizens of
the city, who shall serve without pay, and who shall be appointed by a majority of the members of this council.
The first public recreation board so appointed shall serve for the following terms: two (2) for two (2) years, two
(2) for three (3) years, and one for four (4) years. Upon the expiration of each term, their successors shall serve
for four (4) years, and shall be appointed, all as provided by Section 33-106 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
(Ord. No. 11/3/80)
11-103 Park designated.
The following described lands owned by the city and located within the city limits:
The Southeast Quarter (SE ¼) and the South half (S ½) of the Northeast Quarter (NE ¼) of Section
Twenty-five (25), Township Sixteen North (16N), Range Eight East (8E); and the West half (W ½) of the
Southwest Quarter (SW ¼) of Section Thirty (30), Township Sixteen North (16N) Range Nine East (9E) except
the lands in the South portion of the Eighty (80) acres which has previously been dedicated and designated for
cemetery purposes, and Block 14, Johnson’s Addition to the city,
are hereby designated and henceforth shall continue to be known as the “Bristow City Park.” (Ord. No. 11/3/80)
11-104 Rules and regulations.
The public recreation board is hereby authorized to adopt rules and regulations concerning the use, care and
maintenance of the city park, and to operate, maintain and care for the city park. The rules and regulations and
any amendments or additions thereto shall be filed with the city clerk, and if not overruled by the city council
within thirty (30) days thereafter, shall have the force and effect of city ordinances, violation thereof being punishable
by a fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. (Ord. No. 11/3/80)
11-105 Annual budget--Expenditures.
The chairman of the board shall submit a budget request to the city council prior to the preparation of the city
budget. The board shall thereafter, upon receiving notice of its budget allotment, prepare a plan for the expenditure
of such allotment which shall be approved by the city council. Once this plan has been approved, prior approval
of expenditures shall be obtained from the city council in the same manner as other purchases and expenditures
of the city. Claims for such expenditures shall be submitted in regular form through the office of the finance
director of the city. (Ord. No. 11/3/80)
11-106 Board authority limited.
The authority of the board shall not extend to the municipal swimming pool, the municipal cemetery, the farm
center building, the county fair buildings, or the rodeo arena, mens ball, girls softball or the country club. (Ord.
No. 11/3/80)
11-107 Outdoor events and gatherings--Permits required--Bond.
A. Each person, corporation or organization which sponsors any organized outdoor function, activity, or
event on public property within the city shall obtain a permit for the activity, function or event from the director
of finance for a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The sponsoring organization at the same time shall post a
cash bond of three hundred dollars ($300.00) with the director. This bond of three hundred dollars ($300.00)
shall be retained until after the event, function or activity is completed. At that time, so much of the three hundred
dollars ($300.00) as is necessary shall be used by the city to fund the necessary clean-up of the area occupied
by the activity, function or event. Should the sponsoring organization elect to be responsible for the cleanup
activity it may so inform the city at the time of the obtaining of the permit. In that instance upon completion
of the event, function or activity, the sponsoring organization shall clean-up or cause to be cleaned up the premises
and may then request a refund of the cash bond of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) posted. This cash
bond or a portion of the cash may be refunded by the city clerk upon authorization, after inspection of the premises
by the director of public works.
B. Any person, firm or organization failing to comply with the provisions of this section shall be subject to
a fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. (Ord. No. 8/16/82B)
11-108 Closing hours.
There is hereby established closing hours for the city park described in Section 11-103 hereof. The city park
shall be closed during the hours from eleven p.m. until six a.m. each and every day, and no one shall enter
thereon during the times. Violators will be charged with trespassing and punished by a fine as provided in Section
1-108 of this code. The chief of police is authorized to issue permits for responsible parties, groups and organizations
to use portions of the property during the closed hours for reasonable purposes. (Ord. No. 61785,
6/17/85)
11-109 Name of lake.
The name of the lake located in the city park as described in Section 11-103 of this code shall be known as
George Horany Lake. (Ord. No. 6-18-90A)
11-110 Entering lakebed prohibited--Penalty.
Repealed by Ordinance Number 9-21-92, 9/21/92.
11-111 Fishing regulations.
A. No person shall harvest, catch, retain, creel or remove from George Horany Lake:
1. Any large mouth bass whose length does not exceed fourteen (14) inches;
2. More than three (3) largemouth bass per day whose length exceeds fourteen (14) inches;
3. More than six (6) channel catfish per day; or
4. Any fish by any device or method other than by:
a. Rod and reel; or
b. Pole and line.
B. No person shall use, employ or fish with more than two (2) rods and reels or two (2) poles and lines
upon George Horany Lake at one time, or one rod and reel and one pole and line in combination. (Ord. No. 6-18-
90C)
11-112 Wakes by motorized boats prohibited.
No person shall operate or cause a motorized boat to attain a speed upon George Horany Lake sufficient to
cause a wake therein. (Ord. No. 6-18-90B)
11-113 Tennis court regulations.
A. All persons entering or utilizing any tennis court owned, operated or maintained by the city of Bristow
shall at all times during such entry or utilization wear tennis shoes or spikeless athletic shoes.
B. No person shall ride, operate or use upon any tennis court owned, operated or maintained by the city a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, bicycle, inline skates, rollerblades, rollerskates, or any other apparatus with wheels
except for
1. Officers or employees of the city doing work for the city;
2. Any contractor or subcontractor working under contract for the city. (Ord. 6-5-95B § 1)
11-114 Penalty.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of the code.
Chapter 2
LIBRARIES
Sections:
11-201 Library established.
11-202 Terms of office.
11-203 Organization and rules.
11-204 Expenditures, budget.
11-201 Library established.
There shall be maintained in the city a public library and reading room and adequate quarters provided therefor.
There is hereby created a board of directors for the government and control of the public library, to consist
of six (6) members to be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. (Prior Code, Chapter 14)
State Law Reference: Library boards authorized, membership, 11 O.S. Sections 31-101 et seq.
11-202 Terms of office.
The directors shall hold office for three (3) years, provided that only two (2) directors’ terms of office shall
expire each year and new directors appointed, effective the first day of May of each year. Vacancies in the board
of directors shall be filled for the unexpired terms as hereinbefore provided for the original members. (Prior
Code, Chapter 14)
11-203 Organization and rules.
The directors shall organize their own group and make such by-laws and rules for their own guidance and for
the government of the library as they may deem expedient. They shall have authority to buy supplies, books,
magazines and other materials, to establish rules for rentals, to provide for penalties and to do all other things
necessary for the operation of the library. (Prior Code, Chapter 14)
Charter Reference: Library board, members, terms, Section 4-2 of the Charter.
11-204 Expenditures, budget.
A. All monies collected by the library, with the exception of donations given to the board of directors as
trustees, shall be deposited in the treasury of the city and placed to the credit of the library fund of the city. Before
the 1st day of July of each year the board of directors of the library shall submit to the city council, their
proposed budget for the coming year and the budget as finally allowed shall be the operating budget of the library.
All disbursements from the library fund of the city shall be made by the proper officers of the city upon
claims duly approved by the board of directors of the library which approval shall be certified by the president or
secretary of the board.
B. The board of directors shall have the power to appoint a suitable librarian and necessary assistants, and
shall also have power to remove such appointees. The board shall have such other and further powers as are
granted to them by the statutes of the state governing city libraries. (Ord. No. 557, 4/6/70; Ord. No. 8-21-89)
Chapter 3
CEMETERIES
Sections:
11-301 Cemetery designated.
11-301.1 Cemetery board created.
11-301.2 Duties of board.
11-302 Opening, closing graves--Fees.
11-303 Lots--Price.
11-304 Grades not to be altered.
11-305 Trees--Shrubs--Approval required.
11-306 Curbing prohibited.
11-307 Flowers to be removed when.
11-308 Decorations--Approval.
11-309 Monuments plan to be submitted.
11-310 Cemetery rules.
11-311 Concrete box or vault required.
11-312 Penalty.
11-301 Cemetery designated.
The name of the cemetery located south of the city park shall be known as the Bristow City Cemetery. (Prior
Code, Chapter 6; Ord. No. 11-15-88A, 11/15/88)
State Law Reference: Municipal cemeteries, organization and powers, 11 O.S. Sections 26-101 et seq.
11-301.1 Cemetery board created.
A city cemetery board is hereby created. It shall consist of five (5) appointed members, all of whom shall be
citizens of the city. The five (5) appointed members shall be nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the
council. Each appointed member shall serve for a term of three (3) years, or until his successor takes office. Of
the original appointed members, one shall serve a term of one year; two (2) shall serve a term of two (2) years;
and two (2) shall serve a term of three (3) years, thereafter the terms of members shall be three (3) years. Vacancies
occurring other than by expiration of the term shall be filled only for the unexpired terms by the mayor. The
members shall serve without compensation. The council may remove a member of the cemetery board only for
inefficiency, and neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. (Ord. No. 11-15-88B, 11/15/88)
11-301.2 Duties of board.
The board shall act in an advisory capacity and its functions and duties shall be to assist the city in all operations,
maintenance, management and development of the cemetery, including advice regarding improvements,
equipment and other property used in connection with the cemetery. (Ord. No. 11-15-88B, 11/15/88)
11-302 Opening, closing graves--Fees.
A. A grave may be opened or closed with the permission of the sexton by other than city employees in the
case of burial of indigent persons in grave spaces owned by the decedent or his family prior to his death where
the next of kin or legal representative of the decedent shall make and file with the city clerk a sworn affidavit to
the effect that neither the estate of the decedent nor his surviving family is able to pay for such services by reason
of their poverty; and provided further that any such grave opening or closing by other than city employees
shall be done under the supervision and direction of the sexton.
B. Any person willfully swearing falsely in making the affidavit aforesaid, shall, on conviction, be deemed
guilty of an offense and shall be fined as provided in Section 1-108 of this code, including costs, in addition to
the usual fees for the opening or closing of the grave in question. (Prior Code, Chapter 6)
11-303 Lots--Price.
A. Cemetery lots shall be conveyed by a certificate signed by the mayor and countersigned by the city
clerk, under seal of the city after full payment of the purchase price has been received by the city clerk. The certificate
shall:
1. Show the price for which the lot is sold;
2. Describe the lot by number as laid down in the plat;
3. Specify that the person to whom the certificate is issued is the owner of the lot; and
4. Vest in the person to whom the certificate is issued and his or her heirs a right to the lot for the sole purpose
of internment under the ordinances, resolutions or regulations set forth by the city council.
B. The purchase price for each lot in the Bristow City Cemetery shall be three hundred fifty dollars
($350.00).
C. No certificate shall be reissued or transferred until a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) has been received
by the city clerk for each lot’s certificate which has been reissued or transferred.
D. The sexton shall keep a complete record of all lots sold and certificates issued. (Ord. No. 11-15-88C,
11/15/88; Ord. No. 12-20-93; Ord. 27-061603 § 1)
11-304 Grades not to be altered.
A. No person shall alter the grades or elevation of any lot in the cemetery without obtaining prior written
approval of the cemetery board.
B. No person shall construct any ditch or drain upon, within or near any lot in the cemetery without obtaining
prior written approval of the cemetery board.
C. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the cemetery board under this section may appeal such decision
to the city council. All appeals must be made in writing and delivered to the city clerk within fifteen (15) days
after the cemetery board issues its decision. (Prior Code, Chapter 6; Ord. No. 11-15-88E, 11/15/88; Ord. 2-22-
96H § 1)
11-305 Trees--Shrubs--Approval required.
A. No person shall plant or place any trees, shrubs or plants on or near any lot in the cemetery without obtaining
the prior written approval of the cemetery board.
B. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the cemetery board under this section may appeal such decision
to the city council. All appeals must be made in writing and delivered to the city clerk within fifteen (15) days
after the cemetery board issues its decision. (Prior Code, Chapter 6; Ord. No. 11-15-88E, 11/15/88; Ord. 2-22-
96G § 1)
11-306 Curbing prohibited.
A. No person shall construct any curbing around, on, in or about any lot or lots in the cemetery without first
obtaining the approval of the cemetery board.
B. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the cemetery board under this section may appeal such decision
to the city council. All appeals must be made in writing and delivered to the city clerk within fifteen (15) days
after the cemetery board issues its decision. (Prior Code, Chapter 6; Ord. No. 11-15-88D, 11/15/88; Ord. 2-22-
96I § 1)
11-307 Flowers to be removed when.
It is the duty of any person placing any real or artificial flowers in the cemetery to immediately remove the
flowers upon their becoming withered or dead. It is the duty of any person placing artificial flower arrangement(
s) to remove such arrangement(s) when they become faded, tattered or unsightly. It is the duty of any person
placing holiday decorations to remove such decorations within ten (10) days from the date of the holiday. In
the event that such flower arrangements or decorations are not removed as provided above, employees or authorized
agents of the city may order the removal and destruction of the flower arrangements or decorations. (Prior
Code, Chapter 6; Ord. No. 11-15-88G, 11/15/88; Ord. No. 4-5-93A)
11-308 Decorations--Approval.
No decorations except flowers shall be placed on or near any grave in the cemetery unless the decorations
have been first exhibited to the sexton, and determined to be dignified and proper. Any person feeling aggrieved
by the determination of the sexton may appeal the sexton’s decisions to the city council. The decision of the city
council regarding the placement or appropriateness of any decoration shall supersede the determination of the
sexton. All appeals shall be mailed by certified mail or delivered to the city clerk. The city council shall hear the
appeal within twenty-five (25) days of the city clerk’s receipt of the appeal. (Prior Code, Chapter 6; Ord. No. 9-
17-90; Ord. No. 4-5-93B)
11-309 Monuments plan to be submitted.
A. No monument, tombstone or foundation thereof shall be placed within the cemetery until the person or
entity desiring to set such monument, tombstone or foundation thereof has:
1. Tendered a ten dollar ($10.00) application fee to the city clerk; and
2. Submitted a written application to the sexton setting forth:
a. The name, address, and phone number of the applicant; and
b. A description of the size and weight of the proposed monument, tombstone or foundation thereof.
B. No monument, tombstone or foundation thereof shall be placed within the cemetery until the sexton:
1. Has specified in writing the required dimensions for the foundation of the proposed monument or tombstone;
2. Has marked the site where the monument and tombstone shall be placed; and
3. Has given written authorization to commence placement, installation and construction of such monument,
tombstone and foundation.
C. All tombstones or monuments shall be placed upon a concrete foundation which has been constructed in
accordance with the sexton’s specifications.
D. The city shall not be liable or responsible for the placement, modification, improvements or damage to
any monument, tombstone or foundation thereof. (Prior Code, Chapter 6; Ord. No. 11-15-88H, 11/15/88; Ord.
No. 4-5-93C; Ord. No. 2-22-94)
11-310 Cemetery rules.
A. No person shall loiter upon the grounds of the city cemetery or be about the premises when closed or
when entry is unauthorized.
B. No person shall drive or permit a three-wheel vehicle or all-terrain-vehicle within the confines of the city
cemetery.
C. No person shall possess or consume alcohol or alcoholic beverages within the confines of the city cemetery.
(Ord. Nos. 11-15-881, 11-15-88J, 11-15-88K, 11/15/88)
11-311 Concrete box or vault required.
A. Upon the opening of any grave space within the confines of the city cemetery, there shall be placed
within such opening a concrete box or vault prior to the interment of any remains of sufficient size and diameter
to contain the same.
B. Prior to the closing of any grave space within the confines of the city cemetery, there shall be securely
affixed to the concrete box or vault a concrete lid whose dimensions shall be commensurate in length and width
as that of the concrete box or vault. (Ord. No. 1-24-89)
11-312 Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of the sections of this chapter or violating any of the provisions,
restrictions, regulations and limitations contained in any section of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter
6; Ord. No. 11-15-88L, 11/15/88)
PART 12
PLANNING, ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT
Chapters:
1 Boards and Commissions
2, 3 Zoning Regulations
4 Subdivision Regulations
5 Airport Zoning
6 Telecommunications Towers and Facilities
Chapter 1
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Sections:
Article A. City Planning Commission
12-101 City planning commission, creation and membership.
12-102 Quorum.
12-103 Organization, meetings, rules.
12-104 Personnel hiring authority.
12-105 General advisory duties of commission.
12-106 General powers of commission.
12-107 Comprehensive plan.
12-108 Purposes of plan.
12-109 Contents of plan.
12-110 Adoption of parts of plan may be recommended.
12-111 Recommending amendments to plan.
12-112 Procedure for adoption of plan.
12-113 Approval by commission of improvements.
12-114 Subdivision of land.
12-115 Zoning commission, regulations.
12-116 Purpose of zoning plan.
Article B. Board of Adjustment
12-121 Creation and authority.
12-122 Meetings and procedures.
12-123 Appeals.
12-124 Powers, appeals.
12-125 Powers to grant variances.
12-126 Powers relative to exceptions.
12-127 Uses permitted on review.
12-128 Exercise of powers.
12-129 Appeal to district court.
Article A. City Planning Commission
12-101 City planning commission, creation and membership.
A city planning commission is hereby created. It shall consist of five (5) appointive members, all of whom
shall be citizens of the city. The mayor shall serve as ex-officio member of the commission. The five (5) appointive
members shall be nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the council. Each appointed member shall
serve for a term of three (3) years, or until his successor takes office. Of the original appointive members, however,
one shall serve a term of one year; two (2) shall serve a term of two (2) years and two (2) shall serve a term
of three (3) years. Thereafter the terms of members shall be three (3) years. Vacancies occurring other than by
expiration of the term shall be filled only for the unexpired terms by the mayor. The members shall serve without
compensation. The council may remove a member of the planning commission only for inefficiency, neglect of
duty, or malfeasance in office. Members shall be appointed solely with reference to their fitness and not party
affiliation.
State Law Reference: Municipal planning commissions, 11 O.S. Sections 45-101 to 45-105.
12-102 Quorum.
Three (3) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business; provided,
however, that no action shall be taken which is binding upon the commission, unless concurred in by not less
than a majority of all members comprising the commission.
12-103 Organization, meetings, rules.
The commission shall elect a chairman and a secretary and may create and fill such other offices as it may
deem necessary. The planning commission shall adopt rules for the transactions of business and keep a record of
its regulations, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record.
12-104 Personnel hiring authority.
The planning commission may recommend such employees as it deems necessary for its work, whose appointment,
promotion, demotion and removal shall be at the pleasure of the mayor. The commission may also
recommend to the city council the employment of city planners, engineers, architects and consultants for such
other services as it may require. The city council may provide funds for the salaries of employees and the expenses
of the commission as for other functions of the city government.
12-105 General advisory duties of commission.
The commission shall, from time to time, recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public
structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. It shall be part of its duties to consult and advise with
public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional, and other organizations,
and citizens with relation to the protecting or carrying out of the plan. All public officials shall, upon request,
furnish the commission within a reasonable time such available information as it may require for its work.
12-106 General powers of commission.
In general, the commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill its functions,
promote municipal planning and carry out the purposes of this chapter.
12-107 Comprehensive plan.
The commission shall have the power and duty to prepare and recommend to the council for adoption a comprehensive
plan for the physical development and betterment of the city, including any areas outside its boundaries
which, in the commission’s judgment, bear relation to the planning of the city.
12-108 Purposes of plan.
The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs,
best promote the health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency
and economy in the process of development, including, among other things, adequate provisions for traffic, the
promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provisions for light and air, the promotion of healthful
and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, and wise and
efficient expenditure of public funds.
12-109 Contents of plan.
The comprehensive plan with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter shall show the
commission’s recommendations for the development of the territory, including, among other things, the general
location, character and extent of streets, viaducts, subways, bridges, waterways, waterfronts, boulevards, parkways,
playgrounds, squares, parks, aviation fields and other public ways, grounds and open spaces, and the general
location of public buildings and other public property; also the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing,
vacating, abandonment, change of property, as well as a zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location
and use of buildings and premises.
12-110 Adoption of parts of plan may be recommended.
As the work of making the whole comprehensive plan progresses, the planning commission may recommend
to the city council from time to time adopting and publishing a part or parts thereof, any such part to cover one
or more major sections or divisions of the city or one or more of the aforesaid or other functional matters to be
included in the plan.
12-111 Recommending amendments to plan.
The planning commission may, from time to time, recommend to the city council amendments, extensions or
additions to the plan.
12-112 Procedure for adoption of plan.
The city council may adopt the plan as a whole by a single ordinance, or may, by successive ordinances, adopt
successive parts of the plan, such parts corresponding with major geographic sections or divisions of the city, or
with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan, and may adopt any amendment or extension
thereof or addition thereto. Before the city planning commission recommends to the city council the adoption of
the plan or any such part, amendment, extension or addition, the planning commission shall hold at least one
public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city. The adoption of the plan or of any part or amendment or extension or addition
shall be by ordinance of the city council carried by the affirmative votes of a majority of the city council. The
ordinance shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and other matter intended by the commission to form
the whole or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the map and plan and descriptive matter
by the identifying signature of the chairman of the commission. An attested copy of the plan or part thereof shall
be certified to the city council for the approval of the city council.
12-113 Approval by commission of improvements.
Whenever the city council shall have adopted the comprehensive plan of the city or of one or more major sections
or districts thereof, no street, square, park or other public way, ground or open space, or public building or
structure, or other governmental enterprise shall be constructed or authorized in the city, or in such planned section
and district until the location, character or extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the
commission; provided, that in case of disapproval, the commission shall communicate its reason to the city
council, which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of a majority of its membership.
12-114 Subdivision of land.
The commission may prepare and recommend to the council for adoption rules and regulations governing
subdivision of land within the city limits. All plans, plats and replats of land laid out in two (2) or more lots,
plats or parcels, or streets or alleys, or other ways intended to be dedicated for public use shall be first submitted
to the commission for its recommendations. The commission shall check the proposed dedication or subdivision
to insure compliance with the comprehensive plan. The disapproval of any plan, plat or replat by the city shall be
deemed the refusal of the dedication thereon. No plat or replat or subdivision of land, or dedication of street or
alley, or other easement shall be entitled to record unless it bears the signature of the mayor, attested by the city
clerk, certifying the approval and acceptance by the city council.
12-115 Zoning commission, regulations.
A. The planning commission shall also act as the zoning commission, which shall have the power to prepare
and recommend to the council, for adoption a zoning plan to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories,
the size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lots that may be occupied, the size of yards,
courts and other open spaces, the density of population, the location and use of building structures and land for
trade, industry, residences or other purposes.
B. The commission may recommend the division of the city into districts of such number, size and area that
may be deemed best suited to carry out the zoning plan. All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or
kind of building throughout the district, but the regulations from one district may differ from those of other districts.
Nothing in this subsection B shall be construed to apply to telephone exchange buildings.
12-116 Purpose of zoning plan.
Zoning regulations shall be made in accordance with the comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion
in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to promote health and the general welfare,
to promote adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population,
to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and the public requirements,
such regulations to be made with a reasonable consideration among other things as to the character of the
district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses and with a view to conserving the value of buildings, and
encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
Article B. Board of Adjustment
12-121 Creation and authority.
There is hereby created a zoning board of adjustment consisting of five (5) members, citizens of the city, each
to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council for a term of three (3) years. Vacancies shall be
filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. For the
first appointments under the provisions of this article, however, one member shall be appointed for a term of one
year; two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years; and two (2) members shall be appointed
for a term of three (3) years. All appointments thereafter shall be for a term of three (3) years. At least two (2)
members of the board shall be appointed from the membership of the city planning commission. The board shall
elect a chairman from its membership to serve for a term of two (2) years. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
State Law Reference: Creation and powers of board of adjustment, 11 O.S. Sections 44-101 to 44-110.
12-122 Meetings and procedures.
The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the board shall be
held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence,
the acting chairman, may administer oaths and require the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The
board shall keep the minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions,
all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be a public record. A concurring
vote of three (3) members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision
or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant or any matter
upon which it is required to pass under any such ordinance or code, or to effect any variation in such ordinance
or code. (Ord. 21-111901 § 1)
12-123 Appeals.
A. Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department,
board or bureau of the municipality affected by any decision of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be
taken within thirty (30) days after the decision by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with
the city clerk notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefor, and by paying a filing fee at the office of the city
clerk at the time the notice is filed. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the
board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom
the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In
such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
board of adjustment or by a court of record on application and notice to the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and on the cause shown.
C. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred
to it, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide same within a reasonable
time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
12-124 Powers, appeals.
The board of adjustment shall have the powers to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error
in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrative officer in the enforcement of
the zoning regulations set forth in Sections 12-201 et seq. of this code.
12-125 Powers to grant variances.
The board of adjustment shall have the power to authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from
the terms of the zoning regulations in Sections 12-201 et seq. of this code as will not be contrary to the public
interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the zoning regulations, will
in any individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the zoning regulations shall be observed,
public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variances may be granted in such
individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of adjustment that:
1. At the time of the original adoption of the regulations there are extraordinary and exceptional conditions
pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography, or other extraordinary
or exceptional situation or condition of a specific piece of property;
2. The strict application of the zoning regulations to this particular and exceptional piece of property would
create an unnecessary hardship, not self-imposed by the owner or developer;
3. Such conditions are peculiar only to the particular piece of property involved and not generally prevalent
in the area; and
4. Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and
intent of the zoning regulations, provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building
or structure that is prohibited by the zoning regulations set forth in Sections 12-201 et seq. of this code.
12-126 Powers relative to exceptions.
The board shall have the power to hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this title upon which the
board is required to pass under this title. Upon appeal, the board is empowered to permit the following exceptions:
1. To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot in single ownership
as shown of record;
2. To interpret the provisions of this title where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the
street layout as shown on the map fixing the several districts, which map is on file in the office of the city clerk;
3. To grant exceptions to the off-street parking requirements set forth in Sections 12-201 et seq. of this
code when it is determined that the size and shape of the lot to be built on is such that off-street parking provisions
could not be complied with, and that the proposed use will not create undue traffic congestion in the adjacent
streets; and
4. To review the uses listed in Article IV of the specific district regulations as “Uses Permitted on Review.”
These are so classified because they are more intensely dominant in the area in which they are located than other
uses permitted in the district; however, the nature of such uses may make it desirable that they be permitted to
locate therein.
12-127 Uses permitted on review.
The following procedure is established to integrate properly the uses permitted on review with the other land
uses located in the district, pursuant to the board’s powers granted in the preceding section. These uses shall be
reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following procedures:
A. A verified application shall be filed with the board of adjustment for review. The application shall show
the location and intended use of the site, the name of all owners of record, as shown by the current year’s tax
rolls in the office of the county treasurer, of real property within three hundred (300) feet in each direction from
the platted tract or portion thereof for which the application is made. Attached to the application shall be the certificate
of a bonded abstractor listing the names and mailing addresses of all persons required to be notified as set
forth in this section;
B. The applicant shall cause (1) a copy of the application; (2) a notice of the date, time, and place of the city
council meeting; and (3) the date, time, and place of the initial board of adjustment hearing, to be mailed to all
owners of record, as shown by the current year’s tax tolls in the office of the country treasurer, of real property
within three hundred (300) feet in each direction from the platted tract or portion thereof for which the application
is made. At the time of mailing notice to any property owners, applicant shall obtain a receipt of mailing
from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the names and addresses of all persons
to whom notices were mailed. All notices shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the initial
public hearing before the city council. The receipts of mailing shall be filed with the city clerk five (5) days prior
to the initial public hearing held by the city council regarding the application;
C. Within seven (7) days of the filing of the verified application, the applicant shall cause a sign to be
placed on the subject premises. The sign shall state the applicant’s desired use of the premises. The sign must
remain in place until the first public hearing of the board of adjustment. The dimensions of the sign shall be no
smaller than three (3) feet in height and five (5) feet in width. The lettering on the sign shall be no smaller than
two (2) inches in height;
D. The city council shall hold one or more public meetings;
E. The board of adjustment shall hold one or more public hearings. The board of adjustment shall cause
notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Creek County at least ten (10) days before each
hearing;
F. Within forty-five (45) days of the date of filing of the application, the city council shall forward its recommendation
to the board of adjustment;
G. The board of adjustment, within sixty (60) days of the date of application, shall study the effect of such
proposed buildings or use upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utilities and other
matters pertaining to the general welfare, and authorized or deny the issuance of a permit for the use of land or
buildings as requested;
H. Within sixty (60) days of the date of the filing of the application, the board of adjustment shall enter if
final decision;
I. An appeal from the board of adjustment’s final decision may be had in the manner set forth in Section
12-129 of this code. (Ord. No. 9-7-93: Ord. 9-031901 § 1)
Cross Reference: See also Section 45.6.6 of the zoning regulations.
12-128 Exercise of powers.
In exercising its powers the board may, in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decisions or determination appealed from and may make
such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers
of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. In considering all appeals from rulings made under this chapter,
the board shall, in making its findings on any specific case, determine the effect of the proposed change upon the
supply of light and air to adjacent property, upon the congestion of the public streets, upon the public safety from
fire and other hazards, upon the established property values within the surrounding area, and upon other factors
relating to the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and general welfare of the people of the city. Every ruling
made upon any appeal to the board shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact based upon the testimony
received at the hearing afforded by the board, and shall specify the reason for granting or denying the appeal.
12-129 Appeal to district court.
A. An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the board of adjustment may be taken
by any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or
bureau of the city to the district court by filing notice of appeal with the city clerk and with the board of adjustment
within ten (10) days from the filing of the decision of the board, which notice shall specify the grounds of
such appeal. Upon filing of the notice of appeal as herein provided, the board shall transmit to the court clerk the
original or certified copy of all the papers constituting the record in the case, together with the order, decision or
ruling of the board.
B. An appeal to the district court from the board of adjustment stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the chairman of the board of adjustment from which the appeal is taken certifies to
the court clerk, after the notice of appeal has been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order which may be granted by the district court or superior court upon application
or notice to the administrative officer in charge of the enforcement of the terms and provisions of this title, and
upon notice to the chairman of the board of adjustment from which the appeal is taken, and upon due cause being
shown, the court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the decision brought up for review.
Chapters 2 and 3
ZONING REGULATIONS
Sections:
Article A. General Provisions
12-201 Citation.
12-202 Purpose and necessity.
12-203 Nature of zoning plan.
12-204 Regulation of use, height, area, yards and open spaces.
12-205 Zones.
12-206 Definitions.
12-207 Interpretation of district boundaries.
12-208 Vacation of public easements.
Article B. Specific District Regulations
12-210 R-1 single-family dwelling district, general description.
12-211 Uses permitted.
12-212 Uses permitted on review.
12-213 Area regulations.
12-214 Height regulations.
12-220 R-2 two-family dwelling district, general description.
12-221 Uses permitted.
12-222 Uses permitted on review.
12-223 Area regulations.
12-224 Height regulations.
12-230 R-3 multiple-family dwelling district, general description.
12-231 Uses permitted.
12-232 Uses permitted on review.
12-233 Area regulations.
12-234 Height regulations.
12-235 Mobile home park or court.
12-236 Uses permitted.
12-240 C-0 commercial office district, general description.
12-241 Uses permitted.
12-242 Uses permitted on review.
12-243 Area regulations.
12-244 Off-street parking and loading.
12-245 Height regulations.
12-250 C-1 local commercial district, general description.
12-251 Uses permitted.
12-252 Uses permitted on review.
12-253 Area regulations.
12-254 Height regulations.
12-255 Screening regulations.
12-260 C-2 highway commercial district, general description.
12-261 Uses permitted.
12-262 Area regulations.
12-263 Height regulations.
12-264 Screening regulations.
12-270 C-3 General commercial district, general description.
12-271 Uses permitted.
12-272 Area regulations.
12-273 Height regulations.
12-280 C-4 Open display commercial district, general description.
12-281 Uses permitted.
12-282 Area regulations.
12-283 Height regulations.
12-290 I-1 Restricted light industrial district, general description.
12-291 Uses permitted.
12-292 Area regulations.
12-293 Height regulations.
12-300 I-2 Light industrial district, general description.
12-301 Uses permitted.
12-302 Area regulations.
12-303 Height regulations.
12-310 I-3 Heavy industrial district, general description.
12-311 Uses permitted.
12-312 Area regulations.
12-313 Height regulations.
12-320 F-1 Flood plain district, general description.
12-321 Uses permitted.
12-322 Uses permitted on review.
12-340 A-1 Agricultural district, general description.
12-341 Uses permitted.
12-342 Uses permitted on review.
12-343 Area regulations.
12-344 Height regulations.
Article C. Additional District Provisions
12-350 Conditions of a more restricted district.
12-351 Open space.
12-352 Height.
12-353 Group housing projects.
12-354 Animals.
12-355 Storage of liquefied petroleum gases.
12-356 Trailer court regulations.
12-357 Satellite television receiving antennas.
Article D. Off-Street Automobile and Vehicle
Parking and Loading
12-360 General intent and application.
12-361 Required open space.
12-362 Location.
12-363 Ownership.
12-364 Size of off-street parking space.
12-365 Amount off-street parking and loading required.
12-366 Off-street parking lots in residential districts.
Article E. Nonconforming Buildings, Structures
and Uses of Land
12-370 Intent.
12-371 Non-conforming lots of record.
12-372 Uses of land (or land with minor structures only).
12-373 Non-conforming structures.
12-374 Non-conforming uses of structures or of structures and premises in combination.
12-375 Repairs and maintenance.
12-376 Uses under special exceptions not non-conforming uses.
Article F. Administration
12-380 Procedure for authorizing uses permitted on review.
12-381 Violations and penalties.
12-382 Amendments.
12-383 Passage by the city council.
12-384 Classification of new additions.
12-385 Official zoning map.
Article A. General Provisions
12-201 Citation.
This ordinance, in pursuance of the authority granted by the Legislature of the state of Oklahoma in Title 11,
Chapter 7, Sections 401-425 of the Oklahoma Statutes, shall be a part of master plan for the city of Bristow and
shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance and may be cited as such. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-202 Purpose and necessity.
The regulations contained herein are necessary to encourage the most appropriate uses of land; to maintain
and stabilize the value of property; to reduce fire hazards and improve public safety and safeguard the public
health; to decrease traffic congestion and its accompanying hazards; to prevent undue concentration of population;
and to create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses upon which to plan for transportation, water
supply, sewerage, schools, parks, public utilities, and other facilities. In interpreting and applying the provisions
of this ordinance they shall be held to be necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience
and general welfare. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-203 Nature of zoning plan.
This ordinance classifies and regulates the use of land, buildings, and structures within the city limits of the
city of Bristow, state of Oklahoma, as hereinafter set forth. The regulations contained herein divide the city into
zones and regulate therein the use of the land and the use of buildings and the size of buildings as to height and
number of stories, the
coverage of the land by buildings, the size of yards and open spaces, the location of buildings, and the density of
population. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-204 Regulation of use, height, area, yards and open spaces.
Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, no land shall be used and no building, structure, or improvement
shall be constructed, moved, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt which is designed, arranged or intended to be used or
maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with the requirements established in the district
in which such land, building, structure, or improvement is located, and in accordance with the provisions of
the articles contained herein relating to any or all districts. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-205 Zones.
A. The City of Bristow is hereby divided into zones as shown on the city’s zoning map filed with the city
clerk. The map and all explanatory material thereon is hereby made a part of this chapter.
B. Zones shall be designated as follows:
1. Residential
a. R-1 One-family district;
b. R-2 two-family district; or
c. R-3 multiple-family district.
2. Commercial
a. C-0 commercial office district;
b. C-1 neighborhood commercial district;
c. C-2 highway commercial district;
d. C-3 general commercial district; or
e. Open display commercial district.
3. Industrial
a. I-1 restricted light industrial district;
b. I-2 light industrial district; or
c. I-3 heavy industrial district.
4. Other
a. F-1 flood plain district; or
b. A-1 agricultural district.
C. Specific district regulations are set forth in Article B. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-206 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future tenses; words in the singular number include the plural
and words in the plural number include the singular, except where the natural construction of the writing indicates
otherwise. The word “shall” is mandatory and not directory.
1. “Accessory building” means a building customarily incidental and subordinate to the main building and
located on the same lot with the main building;
2. “Accessory use” means a use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of
land or buildings located upon the same premises;
3. “Advertising sign or structure” means any cloth, card, paper, metal, painted, glass, wooden, plastic, plaster,
stone sign or other sign, device or structure of any character whatsoever, including statuary, placed for outdoor
advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building or structure. The
term “placed” shall include erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking,
carving or otherwise fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever. The area of an advertising
structure other than a sign shall be determined as the area of the largest cross-section of such structure. Neither
directional, warning nor other signs posted by public officials in the course of their public duties nor merchandise
or materials being offered for sale shall be construed as advertising signs for the purpose of this definition;
4. “Alley” means a public passage or way affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting
property and not intended for general traffic circulation;
5. “Apartment house or multiple-family dwelling” means a single detached dwelling designed for and occupied
by three (3) or more families living independently of each other as separate housekeeping units, including
apartment houses, apartment hotels and flats, but not including auto or trailer courts or camps, hotels, or resort
type hotels;
6. “Basement” means a story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height measurement a basement
shall be counted as a story when more than one-half of its height is above the average level of the adjoining
ground on when subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor employed on
the premises;
7. “Boarding house” means a dwelling other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement
for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are provided for three (3) or more but not exceeding twelve (12)
persons;
8. “Building” means any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel.
When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of such structure so separated, shall be deemed
a separate structure;
9. “Building height” means the vertical distance from the average line of the highest and lowest points of
that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point of coping of a flat roof, or the deckline of a
mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof;
10. “Building, main” means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
In any residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated;
11. “Building site” means a single parcel of land under one ownership, occupied or intended to be occupied
by a building or structure;
12. “Child care center” means any place, home or institution which receives three (3) or more children under
the age of sixteen (16) years, and not of common parentage, for care apart from their natural parents, legal
guardians or custodians, when received for regular periods of time for compensation; provided, however, this
definition shall not include public and private schools organized, operated or approved under the laws of this
state, custody of children fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction, children related by blood or marriage within
the third degree to the custodial person, or to churches or other religious or public institutions caring for children
within the institutional building while their parents or legal guardians are attending services or meetings or
classes or engaged in church activities;
13. “Coverage” means the percentage of the lot area covered by the building. The building area shall include
all overhanging roofs;
14. “District” means any section or sections of Bristow for which regulations governing the use of buildings
and premises or the height and area of buildings are uniform;
15. “Dwelling” means any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters for one
or more families, but not including house trailers;
16. “Dwelling, single-family” means a dwelling designed to be occupied by one family;
17. “Dwelling, two-family” means a dwelling designed for occupancy by two (2) families living independently
of each other;
18. “Dwelling, multiple” a dwelling designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently
of each other, exclusive of auto or trailer courts or camps, hotels or resort type hotels;
19. “Family” means one or more persons related by blood or marriage, including adopted children, or a
group of not to exceed five (5) persons (excluding servants) not all related by blood or marriage, occupying
premises and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding
or lodging house, hotel, club, or similar dwelling for group use. A family shall be deemed to include domestic
servants employed by the family;
20. “Garage apartment” means a dwelling unit for one family erected above a private garage;
21. “Garage, private” means an accessory building or a part of a main building used for storage purposes
only for not more than three (3) automobiles, or for a number of automobiles which does not exceed one and a
half times the number of families occupying the dwelling unit to which such garage is accessory, whichever
number is the greater. Such space shall not be used for storage of more than one commercial vehicle which does
not exceed one and one-half
(1 1/2) tons rated capacity, per family living on the premises, and not to exceed two (2) spaces shall be rented to
persons not residing on the premises for storage of noncommercial passenger vehicles only;
22. “Garage, public” means any garage other than a private garage, available to the public, used for the care,
servicing, repair, or equipping of automobiles or where such vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire
or sale;
23. “Gasoline service or filling station” means any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used for
the sale of gasoline or oil fuels, but not butane or propane fuels, or other automobile accessories, and which may
or may not include facilities for lubricating, washing, cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but not including
the painting thereof;
24. “Help-yourself laundry” means a laundry providing home type washing, drying and ironing machines
for hire to be used by the customers on the premises;
25. “Home occupation” means an occupation conducted in a dwelling unit provided that:
a. No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation;
b. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its
use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of
the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation;
c. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, other visible evidence of
the conduct of such home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding one square-foot in area, nonilluminated,
and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building;
d. No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building;
e. There shall be no sales in connection with such home occupation;
f. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected
in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation
shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard; or
g. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare,
fumes, odors, or electrical interferences detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted
in a single family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which
creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations
in line voltage off the premises.
26. “Hotel” means a building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six (6) or more sleeping
rooms occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without meals for
compensation, but not including trailer court or camp, sanatorium, hospital, asylum, orphanage or building
where persons are housed under restraint;
27. “Kennel” means any lot or premises on which are kept three (3) or more dogs, more than six (6) months
of age;
28. “Lot” means any plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one main building, and accessory
buildings and uses, including such open spaces as are required by this chapter and other laws or ordinances, and
having its principal frontage on a street;
29. “Lot, corner” means a lot which has at least two (2) adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths on a
street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty-five
degrees (135°);
30. “Lot, depth” means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines;
31. “Lot, double frontage” means a lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets, as distinguished
from a corner lot;
32. “Lot, interior” means a lot other than a corner lot;
33. “Lot, area” means the total area measured on a horizontal plane, included within lot lines;
34. “Lot, frontage” means that dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side
dimension of a corner lot;
35. “Lot lines” means the lines bounding a lot;
36. “Medical facilities”:
a. Convalescent, rest, or nursing home means a health facility where persons are housed and furnished with
means and continuing nursing care;
b. Dental clinic or medical clinic means a facility for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human
outpatients, provided that patients are not kept over night except under emergency conditions;
c. Dental office or doctors office means same as dental or medical clinic;
d. Hospital means an institution providing health services primarily for human in-patient medical or surgical
care for the sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training
facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities;
e. Public health center means a facility primarily utilized by a health unit for providing public health services
including related facilities such as laboratories, clinics and administrative offices operated in connection
therewith; or
f. Sanatorium means an institution providing health facilities for inpatient medical treatment or treatment
and recuperation making use of natural therapeutic agents.
37. “Nonconforming use” means a structure or land lawfully occupied by a use that does not conform to the
regulations of the district in which it is situated;
38. “Off-street parking space” means a parking space not on or extending over any public easement or rightof-
way;
39. “Parking space” means a permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store
one automobile together with a permanently surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley;
40. “Rooming house” means a building where lodging only is provided for compensation to three (3) or
more, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons. A building which has accommodations for more than twenty (20)
persons shall be defined as a hotel under the terms of this chapter;
41. “Self-service laundry or dry cleaning establishment” means any attended or unattended place, building
or portion thereof, available to the general public for the purpose of washing, drying, extracting moisture from,
or dry cleaning wearing apparel, cloth fabrics, and textiles of any kind by means of a mechanical appliance
which is operated by the customer;
42. “Stable, private” means a stable with a capacity for not more than two (2) horses or mules;
43. “Stable, public” means a stable, other than a private stable, with a capacity for more than two (2) horses
or mules;
44. “Story” means that portion of a building, other than a basement included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor
and the ceiling next above it;
45. “Story, half” means a space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and
wall face not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds
(2/3) of the floor area is finished off for use. A half story containing independent apartment or living quarters
shall be counted as a full story;
46. “Street” means any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting
property;
47. “Street, intersecting” means any street which joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses
the other;
48. “Structure” means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or
which is attached to something having a location on the ground;
49. “Structural alterations” means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing
walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls;
50. “Tourist court or motel” means an area containing one or more buildings designed or intended to be used
as temporary sleeping facilities of one or more transient families and intended primarily for automobile transients;
51. “Tourist home” means a dwelling occupied as a permanent residence by an owner or renter in which
sleeping accommodations in not more than four (4) rooms are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation;
52. “Trailer court or mobile home park” means a parcel of land under single ownership which has been designed
or improved or is intended to be rented for occupancy by one or more trailer houses or mobile homes;
53. “Trailer or mobile home space” means a plot of ground within a trailer court designed for the accommodation
of one mobile home;
54. “Mobile home” means any manufactured home or a manufactured home dwelling;
55. “Travel trailers” means all vehicles and portable structures built on a chassis up to and including thirtytwo
(32) feet in length designed as a temporary or permanent dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use
(not included in the definition of independent mobile homes). For purposes of regulation under this chapter, a
dependent trailer shall be considered to be the same as a travel trailer, unless otherwise indicated;
56. “Yard” means open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed
(by any portion of a structure) from the ground upward, except where otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter than an accessory building or structure may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main
building. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard
or the depth of a rear yard, the shortest horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be
used;
57. “Yard, front” means a yard located in front of the front elevation of the building and extending across a
lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the side yard lines and being
the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and the outside wall of the main building. In
unplatted areas or in any such instance where there is a question as to the orientation of the front yard, the front
yard shall be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission;
58. “Yard, rear” means a yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between the lot lines and being the
minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the outside wall of the main building. On
both corner lots and interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases be the opposite end of the lot from the front yard;
59. “Yard, side” means a yard between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front
lot line to the rear lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the outside wall
of the side of the main building; and
60. “Manufactured home” means any structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles. (Prior Code, Chapter 23; Ord. No. 749, 6-16-70; Ord.
39-040504 § 1; Ord. 40-040504 § 1)
12-207 Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts as shown on the zoning map,
the following rules shall apply:
1. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets or highways,
street lines or highway right-of-way lines, such center lines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines
shall be construed to be such boundaries;
2. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines
shall be construed to be the boundaries;
3. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the center lines or
street lines of streets, or the center lines or right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed
as being parallel thereto and at such scaled distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map; and
4. Where the boundary of a district line follows a railroad line such boundary shall be deemed to be located
on the easement line to which it is closest, which shall completely include or exclude the railroad easement
unless otherwise designated. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-208 Vacation of public easements.
Whenever any street, alley or other public easement is vacated, the district classifications of the property to
which the vacated portions of land accrue shall become the classification of the vacated land. (Prior Code, Chapter
23)
Article B. Specific District Regulations
12-210 R-1 single-family dwelling district, general description.
This is the most restrictive residential district. The principal use of land is for single-family dwellings and related
recreational, religious, and educational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced
and attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment
of uses not performing a function necessary to the residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order
and efficiency is encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related
facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of each element. (Prior Code, Chapter
23)
12-211 Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in an R-1, single-family dwelling district, shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Detached one-family dwelling;
2. Church;
3. Public school or school offering general educational courses the same as ordinarily given in public
schools and having no rooms regularly used for housing and sleeping;
4. Public park or playground;
5. Library;
6. General purpose farm or garden, but not the raising of livestock;
7. Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main buildings, including a private garage or accessory
buildings which are a part of the main building, including a private garage;
8. Bulletin board or sign, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area appertaining to the lease, hire or
sale of a building or premises, which board or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are leased, hired, or
sold; and
9. Municipal property which is used as a hospital and/or medical facility. (Prior Code, Chapter 23; Ord. 44-
092004 § 1)
12-212 Uses permitted on review.
The following uses may be permitted on review by the city planning commission in accordance with provisions
contained in Article F, Section 12-380 of this code:
A. Municipal use, public building and public utility;
B. Plant nursery in which no building or structure is maintained in connection therewith;
C. Golf club; and
D. Home occupation.
(Prior Code, Chapter 23: Ord. 42-040504 § 1)
12-213 Area regulations.
A. Front yard: all buildings shall be setback from street right-of-way lines to comply with the following
front yard requirements:
1. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet;
2. If twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side of the street between two (2) intersecting
streets are improved with buildings all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than twentyfive
(25) feet, and no building varies more than five (5) feet from this average setback line, then no building shall
be erected closer to the street line than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this
regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than forty (40) feet; and
3. When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets.
B. Side yard:
1. For dwellings of one story located on interior lots there shall be a side yard on each side of the main
building of not less than five (5) feet and of not less than eight (8) feet for dwellings of more than one story, except
as hereinafter provided in Article C of this code. For unattached buildings of accessory use there shall be a
side yard of not less than five (5) feet; provided, however, that unattached one-story buildings of accessory use
shall not be required to set back more than three (3) feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory
building are located not less than ninety (90) feet from the front property line;
2. For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots there shall be a side yard setback from the
intersecting street of not less than fifteen (15) feet in case such lot is back to back with another corner lot, and
twenty-five (25) feet in every other case. The interior side yard shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory
buildings on an interior lot; and
3. Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings, and buildings accessory to dwellings,
shall set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
C. Rear yard: there shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than twenty (20) feet or twenty percent
(20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be
located in the rear yard of a main building.
D. Lot width: for dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width of sixty (60) feet at the front building line,
and such lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
E. Intensity of use:
1. For each dwelling, and building accessory thereto there shall be a lot area of not less than seven thousand
(7,000) square feet;
2. Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the boundary lines of that lot touch lands under
other ownership on the effective date of this chapter that lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches,
permitted by this section; and
3. For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings,
the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off-street parking
areas required in Article D.
F. Coverage: main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot
area on interior lots, and thirty percent (30%) of the lot area on corner lots; accessory buildings shall not cover
more than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-214 Height regulations.
No building shall exceed two and one half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height except as provided in
Article C, Section 12-352. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-220 R-2 two-family dwelling district, general description.
This is a residential district to provide for a slightly higher population density but with basic restrictions similar
to the R-1 district. The principal use of land is for single-family and two-family dwellings and related recreational,
religious and educational facilities normally required to provide a balanced and attractive residential area.
These areas are intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function
necessary to the residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by
providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through the consideration
of the proper functional relationship and arrangement of each element. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-221 Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in an R-2, two-family dwelling district shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Any uses permitted in R-1, single-family dwelling district;
2. Two-family dwelling or a single-family dwelling and a garage apartment; and
3. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses when located on the same
lot. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-222 Uses permitted on review.
The following uses may be permitted on review by the city planning commission in accordance with provisions
contained in Article F, Section 12-380:
Any use permitted on review in R-1, single-family dwelling district. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-223 Area regulations.
A. Front yard: all buildings shall be set back from street right-of-way lines to comply with the following
front yard requirements:
1. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet;
2. If twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side of the street between two (2) intersecting
streets are improved with buildings all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than twentyfive
(25) feet, and no building varies more than five (5) feet from this average setback line, then no building shall
be erected closer to the street line than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this
regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than forty (40) feet; and
3. When a yard has double frontage the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets.
B. Side yard:
1. For dwellings of one story located on interior lots there shall be a side yard on each side of the main
building of not less than five (5) feet and of not less than eight (8) feet for dwellings of more than one story and
for garage apartments, except as hereinafter provided in Article C.
For unattached buildings of accessory use there shall be a side yard of not less than five (5) feet; provided,
however, that unattached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than three
(3) feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory building are located not less than ninety (90)
feet from the front property line;
2. For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots there shall be a side yard setback from the
intersecting street of not less than fifteen (15) feet in case such lot is back to back with another corner lot and
twenty-five (25) feet in every other case. The interior side yard shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory
buildings as for an interior lot; and
3. Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings,
shall set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
C. Rear yard:
For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet or
twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller. Garage apartments may be located in the rear
yard of a single-family dwelling, but shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to the rear lot line. Unattached
buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building.
D. Lot width: for single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings or singlefamily dwellings and garage
apartments, there shall be a minimum lot width of sixty (60) feet at the front building line, and the lot shall abut
on a street for a distance of not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
E. Intensity of use:
1. For each single-family dwelling and accessory buildings there shall be a lot area of not less than seven
thousand (7,000) square feet;
2. For each two-family dwelling and accessory buildings there shall be a lot area of not less than nine thousand
(9,000) square feet. A lot for a garage apartment and a single-family dwelling shall have the same area requirements
as a two-family dwelling. In all other cases a garage apartment shall be provided with the same lot
area required by a single-family dwelling;
3. Where a lot has less area than herein required and all boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other
ownership on the effective date of this chapter that lot may be used for any use, except churches, permitted in the
R-1 single-family district; and
4. For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings,
the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off-street parking
area required in Article D.
F. Coverage: main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than thirty percent (30%) of the lot area.
Accessory buildings shall not cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-224 Height regulations.
No buildings shall exceed two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, except as provided
in Article C, Section 12-352. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-230 R-3 multiple-family dwelling district, general description.
This is a residential district to provide for medium and high population density. The principal use of land can
range from single-family to multiple-family and garden apartment uses. Certain uses which are functionally
more compatible with intensive residential uses than with commercial uses are permitted, as are recreational,
religious and educational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive
residential area. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate
light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional
relationship of each element. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-231 Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in an R-3 district shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Multiple-family dwelling, apartment house;
2. Rooming or boarding house; and
3. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses when located on the same lot.
(Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-232 Uses permitted on review.
The following uses may be permitted on review by the city planning commission in accordance with provisions
contained in Article F, Section 12-380.
1. Any use permitted on review in an R-1 or R-2 residential district;
2. Child care center;
3. Medical facility;
4. Mobile home court or park in compliance with Section 12-235.
5. Business college, trade, vocational school; and
6. An off-street parking lot associated with a C-Commercial use as required under the provisions of Article
D of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-233 Area regulations.
A. Front yard: all buildings shall be set back from street right-of-way lines to comply with the following
front yard requirements:
1. The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet;
2. If twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side of the street between two (2) intersecting
streets are improved with buildings all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than twentyfive
(25) feet, and no building varies more than five (5) feet from this average setback line, then no building shall
be erected closer to the street line than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this
regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than forty (40) feet;
3. When a yard has double frontage the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets; and
4. There shall be no parking allowed in the front yard (for other parking restriction see Article D).
B. Side yard:
1. For dwellings located on an interior lot a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet shall be provided on
both sides of the main dwelling for the first story and an additional five (5) feet of side yard shall be provided for
each additional story or thereof;
For unattached buildings of accessory use there shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet.
2. For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots there shall be a side yard setback from the
intersecting street of not less than fifteen (15) feet in case such lot is back to back with another corner lot, and
twenty-five (25) feet in every other case. The interior side yard shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory
buildings on an interior lot.
3. Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings
and trailers, shall set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than twenty-five (25)
feet.
C. Rear yard:
1. For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty (20)
feet or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller. Garage apartments may be located in
the rear yard of another dwelling, but shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to the rear lot line. Unattached
buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building.
D. Lot width: there shall be a minimum lot width of fifty (50) feet at the front building line for singlefamily
and two-family dwellings, and ten (10) feet additional width at the front building line for each family,
more than two (2) occupying a dwelling. However, a lot width at the front building line shall not be required to
exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet. A lot shall abut on a street not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
E. Intensity of use:
1. There shall be a lot area of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet for a single-family dwelling,
not less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet for a two-family dwelling, and not less than two thousand (2,000)
square feet for each family, more than two (2), occupying a dwelling;
2. There shall be a lot area of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet where a garage apartment is
located on the same lot with a single-family dwelling. When a garage apartment is located on the same lot with a
two-family or multiple-family dwelling the lot area shall provide not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet
more than is required for the two-family or multiple-family dwelling;
3. Where a lot has less area than herein required and all boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other
ownership on the effective date of this chapter that lot may be used for any use, except churches, permitted in the
R-1 single-family dwelling district; and
4. For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings,
the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off-street parking
area required in Article D.
F. Coverage: main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the lot
area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard. (Prior Code, Chapter
23)
12-234 Height regulations.
No buildings shall exceed two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, except as provided
in Article C, Section 12-352. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-235 Mobile home park or court.
A. Upon compliance with the provisions as set forth herein, a mobile home trailer park will be allowed
within the R-3 multi-family residential district.
B. The applicant, upon making application for a zoning clearance permit, must submit a detailed site plan
locating all mobile home stand, screening or fencing, and plans and specifications for the proposed park in a
form suitable for making the determinations required herein.
C. The proposed site shall be a minimum of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in size and shall contain no
more than fifteen (15) mobile home stands per acre. The proposed site shall have a minimum frontage of two
hundred (200) feet on a street designated as a major street or collector street in the trafficways plan. All ingress
or egress by automobile will be on such major streets. The proposed site shall be a minimum of one-hundred and
fifty (150) feet in depth.
D. It is the intention of the proposed plan for the mobile home park to accommodate primarily permanent
occupants with no more than ten percent (10%) of the mobile home stands devoted to purely transient purposes.
These purely transient stands are to be located in one area of the park so they will in no way interfere with the
permanent residents.
E. The proposed site shall have a front yard of not less than twenty (20) feet from the corner or line of any
mobile home stand to the street boundary of the park. The site shall have side and rear yards of ten (10) feet from
any solid fencing, screen planting or wall of six (6) feet in height.
F. The proposed site shall provide one off-street parking space for each mobile home stand, plus one additional
off-street parking space for each four (4) mobile home stands.
G. The proposed site shall provide a connection for each mobile home stand to all public utilities considered
necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the public. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-236 Uses permitted.
A mobile home may only be placed or located in a mobile home park or court. (Ord. 41-040504 § 1)
12-240 C-0 commercial office district, general description.
This commercial district is to provide for a strict office commercial category which will be a transitional use
between a less restrictive commercial district and a residential district. The design of commercial offices shall be
compatible to the surrounding properties as to traffic ingress and egress, building orientation, landscaping, position
of off-street parking, and other amenities as deemed necessary to the particular site. (Prior Code, Chapter
23)
12-241 Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in a C-0, Commercial Office District, shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Multi-family residential;
2. Business college or trade school;
3. Clinics;
4. Museums;
5. Funeral homes;
6. Office buildings in which no retail sales are carried on or stock of goods is maintained for sale to customers;
7. Photography studio;
8. Employment agency;
9. Apothecary (limited to sale of pharmaceutical and medical supplies);
10. Dance studio;
11. Churches; and
12. Public services.
(Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-242 Uses permitted on review.
Any uses permitted on review in R-districts. Laboratories for research and testing. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-243 Area regulations.
A. Front yard: there shall be a minimum of a ten (10) foot front yard except for residential uses.
B. Side yard: there shall be required a fifteen (15) foot side yard on corner lots and no side yard required on
interior lots except for residential uses.
C. Rear yard: there is not a rear yard required except for those residential uses.
D. Lot width: a lot width shall be required of fifty (50) feet for office commercial uses, except residential
uses. (All multi-family residential uses constructed in this district shall abide by the area regulations found in R-
3).
E. Coverage: the maximum lot coverage permitted is seventy percent (70%).
F. Height regulations: the height of any structure within the C-0 District shall not exceed thirty-five (35)
feet. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-244 Off-street parking and loading.
Off-street parking and loading must meet the requirement outlined in Article D of this chapter. (Prior Code,
Chapter 23)
12-245 Height regulations.
No building shall exceed two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, except as hereinafter
provided in Article C, Section 12-352. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-250 C-1 local commercial district, general description.
This commercial district is intended for a unified grouping, in one or more buildings, of retail shops and stores
and personal services that provide for the regular needs and are for the convenience of the people residing in the
adjacent residential neighborhoods. It is intended that the suburban convenience center be developed as a unit
with adequate off-street parking space for customers and employees, and with appropriate landscaping and
screening. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-251 Uses permitted.
A. All buildings or uses hereinafter established or enlarged shall comply with the conditions and restrictions
enumerated herein.
B. Any of the following uses shall be permitted provided that the gross floor area of the use does not exceed
twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. Ornamental screening shall be provided by fencing or evergreen
planting of not less than seven (7) feet in height when abutting an R-District.
1. Artist supplies and hobby shop;
2. Bakery shop;
3. Barber and beauty shops;
4. Book store;
5. Clothing or wearing apparel shops;
6. Drug store;
7. Dairy products store;
8. Delicatessen;
9. Florist shop;
10. Gift shop;
11. Grocery store;
12. Hardware store;
13. Jewelry shop;
14. Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up stations;
15. Medical facility;
16. Office general;
17. Pharmacy;
18. Public uses;
19. Restaurants;
20. Self-service laundries;
21. Shoe repair shop;
22. Tailor shop;
23. Toy shop; and
24. Variety store.
(Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-252 Uses permitted on review.
The following uses may be permitted on review by the board of adjustment:
1. Bars;
2. Clubs;
3. Liquor stores; and
4. Filling stations.
(Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-253 Area regulations.
The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in this district:
1. Front yard: all buildings shall setback from the street right-of-way line to provide a front yard having not
less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth;
2. Side yard: on the side of a lot adjoining a dwelling district there shall be a side yard of not less than
twenty-five (25) feet. Whenever the rear lot line of a corner lot abuts a dwelling district, the side yard adjacent to
the street shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet in width. In all other cases no side yard shall be required;
3. Rear yard: where a commercial building is to be serviced from the rear there shall be provided an alleyway,
service court, rear yard, or combination thereof of not less than thirty (30) feet; and
4. Minimum area: the parcel of land on which a convenience commercial center is located shall not be less
than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet or more than two (2) acres in area. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-254 Height regulations.
No building shall exceed two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, except as hereinafter
provided in Article C, Section 12-352. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-255 Screening regulations.
Ornamental screening shall be provided by all uses permitted by providing a solid wall of not less than seven
(7) feet in height when abutting an R-District. For the purposes of this chapter, abutting shall include a R-District
separated by an alley. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-260 C-2 highway commercial district, general description.
This commercial district is intended to provide commercial lodging, recreation, personal services for both the
citizens and to nonresidents traveling through the city on state and federal highways that traverse the area. Businesses
and facilities of this district will provide for the traveling public and requires more ribbon development
and direct passenger vehicle access than would be desirable in other commercial districts. (Prior Code, Chapter
23)
12-261 Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in the C-2 Highway Commercial District shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Any use permitted in a C-1 Convenience Commercial Zone;
2. Advertising signs and structures;
3. Permanent commercial amusement enterprises;
4. Any of the following uses:
a. Ambulance service, office and garage;
b. Automobile sales, service, repair and showroom (provided all service and other activity relating to the
operation thereof shall be conducted entirely in an enclosed building);
c. Bath house;
d. Bait sales;
e. Drive-in restaurant;
f. Drive-in theater;
g. Indian goods retail;
h. Museums - indoor and outdoor;
i. Novelty shop retail;
j. Parking lot;
k. Recreation center, public or private;
l. Roller skating rink;
m. Sightseeing tour depot;
n. Swimming pool, commercial;
o. Theater;
p. Tourist homes and courts;
q. Mini-storage building; or
r. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses. (Prior Code, Chapter 23; Ord.
No. 5-3-93)
12-262 Area regulations.
A. Tourist commercial uses must have a side yard when abutting a residential district of ten (10) feet.
B. Rear yard: where a commercial building is to be serviced from the rear there shall be provided an alleyway,
service court, rear yard, or combination thereof of not less than thirty (30) feet in width. In all other cases
no rear yard is required.
C. Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet the off-street parking requirements set
forth in Article D. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-263 Height regulations.
No buildings shall exceed two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height except as hereinafter
provided in Article C, Section 12-352. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-264 Screening regulations.
The above enumerated uses shall comply with the following:
All of the above uses shall be screened by ornamental fencing or evergreen planting of not less than seven (7)
feet in height when abutting an R-District. For the purposes of this chapter, abutting shall include those dwellings
across an alley. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-270 C-3 General commercial district, general description.
This commercial district is intended for the conduct of personal and business services and the general retail
business of the community. Persons living in the community and in the surrounding trade territory require direct
and frequent access. Traffic generated by the uses will be primarily passenger vehicles and only those trucks and
commercial vehicles required for stocking and delivery of retail goods. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-271 Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in a C-3 general commercial district shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Any use permitted in a C-2 highway commercial district;
2. Amusement enterprises;
3. New automobile sales and services, new machinery sales and service, and public garages, provided no
gasoline is stored above ground; used automobile and machinery sales, used automobile and machinery repairing
if conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, but not including automobile or machinery wrecking
establishments or junk yards. Automobile repair shop;
4. Advertising signs or structures;
5. Auto court or tourist court;
6. Ambulance service office or garage;
7. Bakery;
8. Bowling alley;
9. Boat sales;
10. Bus terminal;
11. Carpenter and cabinet shop;
12. Cleaning and dyeing works;
13. Clothing or apparel store;
14. Commercial school or hall;
15. Dance hall;
16. Department store;
17. Drive-in theater or restaurant;
18. Electric transmission station;
19. Feed and fuel store;
20. Frozen food locker;
21. Furniture repair and upholstery;
22. Funeral parlor or mortuary;
23. Gasoline station;
24. Gasoline and oil retail distributing plants;
25. Golf course, miniature or practice range;
26. Heating, ventilating or plumbing supplies, sales and services;
27. Interior decorating store;
28. Ice storage locker plant or storage house for food;
29. Key shop;
30. Kennel;
31. Laboratories, research testing and experimental;
32. Laundry;
33. Leather goods shop;
34. Liquor store;
35. Music, radio or television shop;
36. Night club;
37. Nursery or garden supply store;
38. Outdoor advertising signs;
39. Pawn shop;
40. Pet shop;
41. Printing plant;
42. Recreation center;
43. Research laboratories;
44. Roller skating rink;
45. Sign painting shop;
46. Hospital for small animals;
47. Sporting goods store;
48. Stock and bond broker;
49. Storage warehouse;
50. Theater;
51. Tavern;
52. Toy store;
53. Trailer camp;
54. Used automobile sales;
55. Wholesale distributing center;
56. Buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily incidental to any of the above uses, provided
that there shall be no manufacture, processing or compounding of products other than such as are customarily
incidental and essential to retail establishments;
57. Any other store or shop for retail trade or for rendering personal, professional or business service which
does not produce more noise, odor, dust, vibration, blast or traffic than those enumerated above; and
58. No article or material stored or offered for sale in connection with uses permitted under subsections (1)
through (36), 38 through (53), and (55) through (57) of this section shall be stored or displayed outside the confines
of a building unless it is so screened by permanent ornamental walls, fences, or planting that it cannot be
seen from adjoining streets or lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level, provided, however, that
no screening in excess of seven (7) feet in height shall be required. (Prior Code, Chapter 23; Ord. 22-030402 § 1;
Ord. 67-101705 § 1)
12-272 Area regulations.
A. There are no specific front or side yard requirements except when abutting an R-District. Then there
shall be a side yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
B. Rear yard: where a commercial building is to be serviced from the rear there shall be provided an alleyway,
service court, rear yard, or combination thereof of not less than thirty (30) feet in width. In all other cases
no rear yard is required.
C. Buildings shall be provided with a yard are adequate to meet the off-street parking requirements set forth
in Article D. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-273 Height regulations.
No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height, except as hereinafter provided in Article C, Section 12-352.
(Prior Code, Chapter 23: Ord. 71-101705 § 1)
12-280 C-4 Open display commercial district, general description.
This commercial district is intended to provide a location for the limited amount of merchandise, equipment
and material being offered for retail sale that because of the type of material or transportation requirements are
suitable for display and storage outside the confines of an enclosed building. There will be more assembly of
equipment and incidental activity that would prevail in the general commercial district. Persons of the community
and surrounding trade territory will require direct access. However, the concentration of shoppers will be
much smaller and visits less frequent than in the general commercial district. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-281 Uses permitted.
A. Property and buildings in a C-4 open display commercial district shall be used only for the following
purposes:
1. Boat sales;
2. Farm implement and machinery, new and used, sales;
3. House trailer sales;
4. Metal and wood fencing, ornamental grillwork and decorative wrought iron work and play equipment
sales;
5. Monument sales;
6. New and used car and truck sales;
7. Prefabricated house sales; and
8. Trailers for hauling, rental and sales.
B. The above enumerated uses shall comply with the following provisions:
1. All open storage and display of merchandise, material and equipment shall be so screened by ornamental
fencing or evergreen planting that it cannot be seen by a person standing on ground level in an R-residential or a
C-0, C-1, C-2 or C-3 commercial district when located to the side or rear of the lot on which the open storage or
display occurs; provided, however, that screening shall not be required in excess of seven (7) feet in height. All
planting shall be kept neatly trimmed and maintained in good condition at all times. Merchandise and materials
which are not completely assembled or which are not immediately and actively being offered for sale shall, in
addition to complying with the above screening requirements, be so screened by ornamental fences or evergreen
planting or by permanent buildings that it cannot be seen from a public street;
2. All yards unoccupied with buildings or merchandise or used as traffic ways shall be landscaped with
grass and shrubs and maintained in good condition the year round;
3. All of the lot used for the parking of vehicles, for the storage and display of merchandise and all driveways
used for vehicle ingress and egress shall be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a
manner that no dust will be produced by continued use;
4. All servicing of vehicles and assembly of equipment carried on as an incidental part of the sales operation
shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building;
5. Driveways used for ingress and egress shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width, exclusive of curb
returns; and
6. Outdoor lighting, when provided, shall have an arrangement of reflectors and an intensity of lighting
which will not interfere with adjacent land uses or the use of adjacent streets, and shall not be of a flashing or
intermittent type. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-282 Area regulations.
The area regulations shall be as follows:
1. There are no specific front or side yard requirements except when abutting an R-District. Then there
shall be a side yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet;
2. Rear yard: where a commercial building is to be serviced from the rear there shall be provided an alleyway,
service court, rear yard, or combination thereof of not less than thirty (30) feet in width. In all other cases
no rear yard is required; and
3. Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet the off-street parking requirements set
forth in Article D. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-283 Height regulations.
No building shall exceed two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height except as hereinafter
provided in Article C, Section 12-352. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-290 I-1 Restricted light industrial district, general description.
This industrial district is intended primarily for production and assembly plants that are conducted so the
noise, odor, dust, and glare of each operation is completely confined within an enclosed building. These industries
may require direct access to rail, air or street transportation routes; however, the size and volume of the raw
materials and finished products involved should not produce the volume of freight generated by the uses of the
light and heavy industrial districts. Buildings in this district should be architecturally attractive and surrounded
by landscaped yards. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-291 Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in an I-1 restricted light industrial district shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Any use, permitted in a C-4 open display commercial district. No dwelling use, except sleeping facilities
required by caretakers or nightwatchmen employed on the premises, shall be permitted in an I-1 restricted light
industrial district;
2. Any of the following uses:
a. Bakery;
b. Bottling works;
c. Book bindery;
d. Candy manufacturing;
e. Engraving plant;
f. Electrical equipment assembly;
g. Electronic equipment assembly and manufacture;
h. Food products processing and packing;
i. Furniture manufacturing;
j. Garment manufacturing;
k. Instrument and meter manufacturing;
l. Jewelry and watch manufacturing;
m. Laboratories experimental;
n. Laundry and cleaning establishment;
o. Leather goods fabrication;
p. Optical goods manufacturing;
q. Paper products manufacturing;
r. Sporting goods manufacturing;
s. Wholesale or warehouse; or
t. Wholesale distributing center.
3. All of the uses permitted under this section shall be their primary operations conducted entirely within
enclosed buildings, and shall not emit any dust or smoke, or noxious odor or fumes outside of the building housing
the operation, or produce a noise level occurring on the adjacent street. Any article or material stored temporarily
outside of an enclosed building as an incidental part of the primary operation shall be so screened by ornamental
walls and fences or evergreen planting that it cannot be seen from adjoining public streets or adjacent
lots when viewed by a person standing on the ground level. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-292 Area regulations.
A. Front yard: all buildings shall set back from the street right-of-way line to provide a front yard having
not less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth.
B. Side yard: no building shall be closer than twenty-five (25) feet to a side lot line, except when abutting
an R-District. Then it shall have a thirty-five (35) foot side yard.
C. Rear yard: no building shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the rear lot line, except when
abutting an R-District. Then it shall have a rear yard of fifty (50) feet.
D. Coverage: main and accessory buildings and off-street parking and loading facilities shall not cover
more than eighty (80) percent of the lot area. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-293 Height regulations.
No building or structure shall exceed three and one-half (3½) feet in height, except as hereinafter provided in
Article C, Section 12-352 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-300 I-2 Light industrial district, general description.
This industrial district is intended primarily for the conduct of light manufacturing, assembling and fabrication
and for warehousing, wholesale and service uses. These do not depend primarily on frequent personal visits of
customers or clients, but may require good accessibility to major rail, air or street transportation routes. (Prior
Code, Chapter 23)
12-301 Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in an I-2 light industrial district shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Any use, permitted in the I-1 restricted light industrial district. No dwelling use, except sleeping facilities
required by caretakers or nightwatchmen employed on the premises, shall be permitted in an I-2 light industrial
district.
2. Any of the following uses:
a. Building material sales yard and lumber yard, including the sale of rock, sand, gravel and the like as an
incidental part of the main business, but not including a concrete batch plant or transit mix plant;
b. Contractor’s equipment storage yard or plant, or rental of equipment commonly used by contractors;
c. Freighting or trucking yard or terminal;
d. Oilfield equipment storage yard;
e. Public utility service yard or electrical receiving or transforming station; or
6. Sale barn.
No article or material permitted in this district shall be kept, stored or displayed outside the confines of a building
unless it be so screened by fences, walls or planting that it cannot be seen from adjoining public streets or
adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level.
3. The following uses when conducted within a completely enclosed building:
a. The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as bakery goods,
candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries, and food
products;
b. The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or merchandise from the following
previously prepared materials: bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fibre, fur, glass, hair, horn,
leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stone, shell, textiles, tobacco, wood, yarn, and paint
not employing a boiling process;
c. The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products, using only previously pulverized
clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas;
d. The manufacture and maintenance of electric and neon signs, commercial advertising structures, light
sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating ducts and equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like;
e. Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and rubber and metal stamps;
f. Automobile assembling, painting, upholstering, rebuilding, reconditioning, body and fender works, truck
repairing and overhauling, tire retreading or recapping, and battery manufacturing;
g. Blacksmith shop and machine shop, excluding punch presses over twenty (20) tons rated capacity, drop
hammers, and automatic screw machines;
h. Foundry casting lightweight nonferrous metal not causing noxious fumes or odors; or
i. Assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs, including
the manufacture of small parts only, such as coils, condensers, transformers, crystal holders, and the like.
4. Buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily incidental to any of the above uses.
The uses permitted under this section shall be conducted in such a manner that no noxious odor, fumes or dust
will be emitted beyond the property line of the lot on which the use is located. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-302 Area regulations.
A. There are no specific front or side yard requirements for uses in this district, except when abutting an RDistrict.
Then a side yard of fifty (50) feet shall be required.
B. Rear yard: where a building is to be serviced from the rear there shall be provided an alleyway, service
court, rear yard or combination thereof of not less than fifty (50) feet in width or of adequate area and width to
provide for maneuver of service vehicles, whichever is the greater. In all other cases no rear yard is required.
C. Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet the off-street parking requirements set
forth in Article D. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-303 Height regulations.
No building shall exceed three and one-half (3½) stories or forty-five (45) feet in height, except as hereinafter
provided in Article C, Section 12-352. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-310 I-3 Heavy industrial district, general description.
This industrial district is intended to provide for heavy industrial uses and other uses not otherwise provided
for in the districts established by this chapter. The intensity of uses permitted in this district makes it desirable
that they be located downwind and separated from residential and commercial uses. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-311 Uses permitted.
A. Property and buildings in an I-3 heavy industrial district may be used for any use except the following:
1. All residential uses except sleeping facilities required by nightwatchmen and caretakers employed upon
the premises;
2. All uses not complying with this chapter, or any other county, state or federal regulation or law; and
3. All of the following uses until they have been, studied by the planning commission and have received
the express approval of the city commission. The commission may require approval of the city or county health
department, the state fire marshal and other state and county regulating agencies and may attach to the approval
specific restrictions designed to protect the public welfare.
a. Acid manufacture;
b. Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture;
c. Explosives, manufacture or wholesale storage;
d. Gas manufacture;
e. Petroleum or its products, or the refining thereof; and
f. Wholesale or bulk storage of gasoline, propane or butane, or other petroleum products.
B. Property and building in an I-3 heavy industrial district, when used for the following purposes shall have
the uses thereon conducted in such a manner that all operation, display or storage of material or equipment is so
screened by ornamental fences, walls, or permanent evergreen planting that it cannot be seen from a public
street:
a. Automobile salvage or junk yard;
b. Building materials salvage yard;
c. Junk or salvage yard of any kind; and
d. Scrap metal storage yard. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-312 Area regulations.
A. There are no specific front or side yard requirements for uses in this district, except when abutting an RDistrict.
Then a one-hundred (100) foot side yard shall be required.
B. Rear yard: where a building is to be serviced from the rear there shall be provided an alleyway, service
court, rear yard or combination thereof of not less than one hundred (100) feet in width or of adequate area and
width to provide for maneuver of service vehicles, whichever is the greater. In all other cases no rear yard is required.
C. Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet the off-street parking requirements set
forth in Article D. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-313 Height regulations.
No building shall exceed three and one-half (3½) stories or forty-five (45) feet in height except as hereinafter
provided in Article C, Section 12-352. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-320 F-1 Flood plain district, general description.
This district is intended to comprise those areas which are subject to periodic or occasional inundation and
therefore are unsuited for all residential uses and the usual commercial and industrial uses. (Prior Code, Chapter
23)
12-321 Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in the F-1 Flood Plain zone shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. The growing of agricultural crops and nursery stock, and gardening;
2. The keeping of agricultural livestock in accordance with the municipal ordinances relating thereto;
3. Public recreation; and
4. Private open space. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-322 Uses permitted on review.
Special or temporary commercial or industrial may be permitted subject to review by the planning commission.
(Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-340 A-1 Agricultural district, general description.
This district is designed to protect open areas from being urbanized in a manner effecting developing areas.
This district allows new areas to be added to the city which are suitable for development. (Prior Code, Chapter
23)
12-341 Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in an A-1 Agricultural District shall be limited to those enumerated below:
1. Agricultural or undeveloped land (not including commercial feed lots);
2. Single-family dwelling;
3. Public services and utilities;
4. Plant nursery;
5. Accessory agricultural buildings;
6. A temporary bulletin board or sign, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area pertaining to the lease,
hire, or sale of a building on the premises;
7. Golf course;
8. Open space recreation; and
9. Airport.
(Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-342 Uses permitted on review.
The following uses may be permitted on review by the city planning commission in accordance with provisions
contained in Article F, Section 12-380:
Any use permitted on review in the R-1, single-family dwelling district. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-343 Area regulations.
A. Front yard: the minimum depth of the front yard shall be fifty (50) feet.
B. Side yard: there shall be a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet.
C. Rear yard: there shall be a minimum rear yard of fifty (50) feet.
D. Lot width: there shall be a minimum lot width of one hundred fifty (150) feet for all uses except the single-
family dwelling and it may be one hundred (100) feet.
E. Intensity of use: there shall be a minimum of five (5) acres for all uses.
F. Coverage: the maximum building coverage shall be twenty percent (20%) of the land area. (Prior Code,
Chapter 23)
12-344 Height regulations.
No building shall exceed two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, except as provided in
Article C, Section 12-352. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
Article C. Additional District Provisions
12-350 Conditions of a more restricted district.
Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district permit the uses of a more restricted district,
such uses shall be subject to the conditions as set forth in the regulations of the more restricted district
unless otherwise specified. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-351 Open space.
No open space or lot area required for a building or structure shall during its life be occupied by, or counted as
open space for any other building or structure:
1. Open eaves, cornices, window sills, and belt courses may project into any required yard a distance not to
exceed one foot. Open porches may project into a front or rear yard a distance not to exceed five (5) feet;
2. Where the dedicated street right-of-way is less than fifty (50) feet, the depth of the front yard shall be
measured starting at a point of twenty-five (25) feet from the center line of the street easement;
3. No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at least one street for at least thirty-five
(35) feet and have a width of at least fifty (50) feet at the building line. A street shall form the direct and primary
means of ingress and egress for all dwelling units. Alleys, where they exist, shall form only a secondary means
of ingress and egress. A garage apartment may be built to the rear of a main dwelling if all other provisions of
these regulations are complied with;
4. No minimum lot sizes and open spaces are prescribed for commercial and industrial uses. It is the intent
of this chapter that lots of sufficient size be used by any business or industry to provide adequate parking and
loading and unloading space required for operation of the enterprise;
5. On any corner lot on which a front and side yard is required, no wall, fence, sign, structure or any plant
growth having a height in excess of three (3) feet above the elevation of the lowest point of the crown of the adjacent
roadway shall be maintained in a triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front
and exterior side lot lines a distance of thirty (30) feet along the front and side lot lines and connecting the points
so established to form a sight triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection; and
6. An attached or detached private garage which faces on a street shall not be located closer than twentyfive
(25) feet to the street easement line. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-352 Height.
The regulations herein set forth qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations appearing
in Article B.
1. In measuring heights, a habitable basement or attic shall be counted as a story, provided that a story in a
sloping roof, the area of which story at a height of our (4) feet above the floor does not exceed two-thirds (2/3)
of the floor area of the story immediately below it and which does not contain on independent apartment shall be
counted as a half story.
2. Chimneys, elevators, poles, spires, tanks, towers, and other projections not used for human occupancy
may extend above the height limit; and
3. Churches, schools, hospitals, sanatoriums and other public and semi-public buildings may exceed the
height limitation of the district if the minimum depth of rear yards and the minimum width of the side yards required
in the district are increased one foot for each two (2) feet by which the height of such public or semipublic
structure exceeds the prescribed height limit. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-353 Group housing projects.
In the case of a housing project consisting of a group of two (2) or more buildings to be constructed on a plot
of ground of at least two (2) acres not subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and which will not be so
subdivided, or where the existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it impracticable to apply the requirements
of this chapter to the individual buildings in such housing projects, the application of such requirements
to such housing project shall be done by the city council in a manner that will be in harmony with the
character of the neighborhood, will insure a density of land use no higher and a standard of open space at least as
high as required by this chapter in the district in which the proposed projects is to be located. In no case shall a
use or building height or density of population be permitted which is greater than the requirement of the district
in which the housing project is to be located. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-354 Animals.
Animals in any district shall be kept only in accordance with Bristow City Ordinances. (Prior Code, Chapter
23)
12-355 Storage of liquefied petroleum gases.
The use of land or building for the commercial wholesale or retail storage of liquefied petroleum gases shall
be in accordance with the ordinances of the city and the regulations of the Liquefied Petroleum Gas Administration
of the State of Oklahoma. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-356 Trailer court regulations.
Trailer parks shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the ordinances of the city relating
thereto. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-357 Satellite television receiving antennas.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person or entity to erect a parabolic satellite television receiving
antenna on the front yard of any property within the city limits. It being understood that any such antenna structure
must be located not nearer the street than any building is allowed under subsection A of Section 12-213 of
this code. Each day of violation hereof shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. 85-04A, 4/15/85)
Article D. Off-Street Automobile and Vehicle Parking and Loading
12-360 General intent and application.
It is the intent of these requirements that adequate parking and loading facilities be provided off the street for
each use of land within the city. Requirements are intended to be based on the demand created by each use.
These requirements shall apply to all uses in all districts. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-361 Required open space.
A. Off-street parking or loading space shall be a part of the required open space associated with the permitted
use and shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any manner.
B. The area required for off-street parking shall be in addition to the yard areas herein required, except that
the front yard required in a C-1 neighborhood commercial district, C-2 Highway Commercial District or I-1 restricted
light industrial district may be used for uncovered parking area and the front yard required in a residential
district, except R-3, may be used for the uncovered parking, for four (4) or less vehicles associated with a
residential use when the area is surfaced with a pavement adequate to prevent the occurrence of mud and dust
with continued use and may be used for uncovered parking area for more than four (4) vehicles in accordance
with the provisions of Section 12-365. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-362 Location.
The off-street parking lot shall be located within two hundred (200) feet, exclusive of street and alley widths,
of the principal use and shall have direct access to a street or alley. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-363 Ownership.
The ownership of land upon which the off-street parking is provided shall be the same as the ownership of
land on which the principal use is located. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-364 Size of off-street parking space.
The size of a parking space for one vehicle shall consist of a rectangular area having dimensions of not less
than nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet plus adequate area for ingress and egress. (Prior Code, Chapter 23: Ord.
68-101705 § 1)
12-365 Amount off-street parking and loading required.
A. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in all districts in accordance with the following
schedule:
1. Dwelling units:
a. Two (2) parking spaces, shall be required for each single-family detached unit and for each unit of a
two-family unit; or
b. Multi-family structure shall have: one and one-half (1 1/2) parking spaces for each two (2) bedroom
unit, and two (2) parking spaces for each three (3) bedroom unit.
2. Motel, rooming house or hotel: one parking space for each guest provided overnight accommodations;
3. Hospitals: one space for each four (4) patient beds, exclusive of bassinets, plus one space for each staff
or visiting doctor, plus one space for each three (3) employees including nurses, plus adequate area for the parking
of emergency vehicles;
4. Medical or dental clinics or offices: four (4) spaces per doctor plus one space for each (2) employees;
5. Sanatoriums, convalescent or nursing homes: one space for each six (6) patient beds plus one space for
each staff or visiting doctor plus one space for each four (4) employees including nurses;
6. Community center, theater, auditorium, church sanctuary: one parking space for each five (5) seats,
based on maximum seating capacity;
7. Convention hall, lodge, club, library, museum, place of amusement or recreation: one parking space for
each fifty (50) square feet of floor area used for assembly or recreation in the building.
8. Office building: one parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area in the
building, exclusive of the area used for storage, utilities and building service area;
9. Commercial establishments not otherwise classified: one parking space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of floor space in the building used for retail trade, or used by the public, whichever is greater; and
10. Industrial establishments: adequate area to park all employees and customers vehicles at all times and
adequate space for loading, unloading and storing all vehicles used incidental to or as a part of the primary operation
of the establishment.
B. For all uses not covered in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(10) of this section, the planning commission
shall make a determination of the parking demand to be created by the proposed use, and the amount of parking
thus determined shall be the off-street parking requirement for the permitted use. (Prior Code, Chapter 23; Ord.
69-101705 § 1)
12-366 Off-street parking lots in residential districts.
Whenever off-street parking lots for more than four (4) vehicles are to be located within or adjacent to a residential
district, the following provisions apply:
1. All sides of the lot abutting the residential district shall be enclosed with an opaque ornamental fence,
wall or dense evergreen hedge having a height of not less than six (6) feet. Such fence, wall, or hedge shall be
maintained in good condition;
2. No parking shall be permitted within a front yard setback line established ten (10) feet back of the property
line of interior and corner lots wherever the parking lot is located in a residential district or immediately
abuts the front yard of a residential unit. In all other cases no setback shall be required: provided, however, that
on any corner lot formed by two (2) intersecting streets no parking shall be permitted and no wall, fence, sign,
structure or plant growth having a height in excess of three (3) feet above the elevation of the crown of the adjacent
roadway surface shall be maintained in a triangle formed by measuring a distance of thirty (30) feet along
the front and side lot lines, from their point of intersection, and connecting the points so established to form a
triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection;
3. All yards shall be landscaped with grass, shrubs and evergreen ground cover and maintained in good
condition the year round;
4. Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to and shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in
width, exclusive of curb returns;
5. All of the lot used for parking and driveway purposes shall be paved with a sealed surface pavement and
maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced by continued use;
6. The intensity of light and arrangement of reflectors shall be such as not to interfere with residential district
uses;
7. No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used to guide traffic and to state the conditions
and terms of the use of the lot. Only nonintermittent incandescent lighting of signs shall be permitted.
(Prior Code, Chapter 23)
Article E. Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and Uses of Land
12-370 Intent.
A. Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that may later be adopted there exist:
1. Lots;
2. Structures;
3. Uses of land and structures; and
4. Characteristics of use; which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended, but which would
be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendment. It is the intent of this
chapter to permit these non-conformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival.
It is further the intent of this chapter that non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, not
be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
B. Non-conforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts
involved. A non-conforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a non-conforming use of structure
and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this chapter by attachment on a
building or premises, of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other
uses, of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved.
C. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction,
or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building construction has been carried
on diligently. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent
position and fastened in a permanent manner. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-371 Non-conforming lots of record.
A. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary
accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this chapter, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. Such lots must be in separate
ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply
even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the
district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of
the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements
shall be obtained through action of the board of adjustment.
B. If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single
ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not
meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided
parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and no portion of the parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which
diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of
any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this chapter. (Prior
Code, Chapter 23)
12-372 Uses of land (or land with minor structures only).
Where at the time of passage of this chapter lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the
regulations imposed by this chapter, and where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost
exceeding One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
provided:
1. No such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of
land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
2. No such non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other
than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
3. If any such non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than thirty (30) days,
any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in
which such land is located; and
4. No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be erected in connection
with such non-conforming use of land. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-373 Non-conforming structures.
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not
be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location
on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. No such non-conforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity,
but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its non-conformity;
2. Should such non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion of structure be destroyed by any
means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter; and
3. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-374 Non-conforming uses of structures or of structures and premises in combination.
If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or
more, or if structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued
so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located
shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use
of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located;
2. Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly
arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be
extended to occupy any land outside such building;
3. If no structural alterations are made, any non-conforming use of a structure, or structure and premises,
may as a special exception be changed to another non-conforming use provided that the board of adjustment,
either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate
or more appropriate to the district than the existing non-conforming use. In permitting such change, the
board of adjustment may require appropriate conditions and safe guards in accord with the provisions of this
chapter;
4. Any structure, or structure and land in combination in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded
by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the non-conforming use may
not thereafter be resumed;
5. When a non-conforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or
abandoned for six (6) consecutive month or for eighteen (18) months during any three-year period (except when
government action impedes access to the premises), the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall
not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located; and
6. Where non-conforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction
of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this
subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) (or other figure) of the replacement
cost at time of destruction. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-375 Repairs and maintenance.
A. On any non-conforming structure or portion of a structure containing a non-conforming use, work may
be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing
walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten percent (10%) of the current replacement
cost of the non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion of the structure as the case may be,
provided that the cubic content existing when it becomes non-conforming shall not be increased.
B. If a non-conforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically
unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized officials
to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt
except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of
any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon
order of such official. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-376 Uses under special exceptions not non-conforming uses.
Any use which is permitted as a special exception in a district under the terms of this chapter (other than a
change through board of adjustment action from a nonconforming use to another use not generally permitted in
the district) shall not be deemed a non-conforming use in such district, but shall without further action be considered
a conforming use. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
Article F. Administration
12-380 Procedure for authorizing uses permitted on review.
The uses listed under the various districts herein as “Uses Permitted on Review” are so classified because they
more intensely dominate the area in which they are located than do other uses permitted in the district; however,
the nature of such uses make it desirable that they be permitted to locate therein. The following procedure is established
to integrate properly the uses permitted on review with the other land uses located in the district. These
uses shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following procedures:
1. An application shall be filed with the city planning commission for review. The application shall show
the location and intended use of the site, the names of all the property owners and existing land uses within three
hundred (300) feet, and any other material pertinent to the request which the planning commission may require;
2. The city planning commission shall hold one or more public hearings thereon; and
3. The planning commission shall within forty-five (45) days of the date of application, transmit to the city
council its report as to the effect of such proposed building or use upon character of the neighborhood, traffic
conditions, public utilities and other matters pertaining to the general welfare, and the recommendation of the
planning commission concerning use thereon. Thereupon the city council may authorize or deny the issuance of
a building permit for the use of land or buildings as requested. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-381 Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine. Any person, firm,
or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as provided
in Section 1-108 of this code. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-382 Amendments.
A. The city council may on its own motion or on petition from a property owner, or on recommendation of
the planning commission, amend the regulations and districts herein established. No change in regulations, restrictions,
or district boundaries shall become effective until after a public hearing held in relation thereto, at
which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be published two (2) times in an official paper or paper of general circulation in the city.
B. Subject public notice shall be in substantially the following form:
NOTICE OF A REQUESTED ZONING CHANGE
Notice is hereby given that a public hearing will be held before the Bristow Zoning and Planning Commission at
the Municipal Building, City Council Chambers, 110 West 7th Street, Bristow, Oklahoma on the ______ day of
____________, 19 ___, at _________ o’clock, at ___.M. At that time and place, consideration will be given to
the proposed change of zoning classification of:
(legal description of property)
The property is commonly known as _____________, in Bristow, Oklahoma. The request is that the zoning be
changed from _________________ to _______________.
All persons interested in this matter may be present at this hearing and present their objections to or arguments
for the proposed amendment.
C. In addition to the publication, at least ten (10) days prior to the time of the hearing, the applicant shall
post a sign upon the property in question, of size no smaller than eighteen (18) inches high and three (3) feet
wide, which shall bear the following language:
NOTICE
The owner of this property has requested that it be rezoned from to ___________________ to
____________________.
The sign shall be posted in a conspicuous location upon the lot easily visible from the adjacent street. In the
event that the property in question is bordered by more than one street, the sign shall be posted facing the most
heavily traveled street. The sign shall be kept in place until a final decision has been made by the city council.
(Ord. No. 5586 B, 5/5/86)
12-383 Passage by the city council.
A. Every such proposed amendment shall be referred by the city planning commission for report. If a protest
against such amendment be presented, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent
(20%) or more of the land within such area proposed to be altered, or by the owner of twenty percent (20%) or
more of the area of the lots immediately abutting either side of the territory included in such proposed change, or
separated therefrom only by an alley or street, such amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote
of three-fourths (3/4) of the city council.
B. Whenever the owners of fifty-one percent (51%) of the land in any area shall present a petition duly
signed and acknowledged to the city council requesting an amendment of the regulations prescribed for such
area, it is the duty of the city council to vote upon such amendment within ninety (90) days of the filing of same
by the petitioners with the city clerk.
C. In the event that the construction, erection or placement of building(s) as submitted by the property
owner in Section 12-382 above has not commenced within sixty (60) days or the construction, erection or
placement has not been completed within two (2) years of the city council’s approval thereof, the regulation or
district reclassification shall revert back to its prior district classification or regulation upon publication of such
reversion two (2) times in an official paper or paper of general circulation in the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 23;
Ord. No. 3-15-93B; Ord. 70-101705 § 1)
12-384 Classification of new additions.
A. All new additions and annexations of land to the city shall be in an A-1 Agricultural zone unless otherwise
classified by the city council; for a period of time not to exceed one year from the effective date of the
chapter annexing the addition.
B. Within this one-year period of time the city council shall instruct the city planning commission to study
and make recommendations concerning the use of land within the annexation to promote the general welfare and
in accordance with the comprehensive city plan, and upon receipt of such recommendations the city council
shall, after public hearings as required by law, establish the district classification of the annexation; provided,
however, that this shall not be construed as preventing the city council from holding public hearings prior to annexation
and establishing the district classification at the time of the annexation. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-385 Official zoning map.
A. The city is hereby divided into zones or districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map which, together
with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
B. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the city clerk, and
bearing the seal of the city under the following words: “We hereby certify that this map was adopted as a part of
Ordinance No. 598 the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Bristow, introduced on the 15th day of July, 1974, and
passed and adopted on the 15th day of July, 1974.”
C. If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Title 11 O.S., Sections 401-425, changes are
made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be made on
the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council, together with an
entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows: “On _______, by official action of the city council the following
(change) changes were made in the Official Zoning Map: (brief description of nature of change),” which entry
shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk. The amending chapter shall provide that such
changes or amendments shall not become effective until they have been duly entered upon the Official Zoning
Map. No. ______ amendment to this chapter which involves matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map shall
become effective until such change and entry has been made on the map.
D. No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in
conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person
or persons shall be considered a violation of this chapter and is punishable under Section 12-381 of this
chapter.
E. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may from time to time
be made or published, the Official Zoning Map which shall be located in the office of the city clerk shall be the
final authority as the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the city.
F. In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because
of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city council may by resolution adopt a new Official
Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct
drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect
of amending the original Zoning Ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official Zoning
Map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the city
under the following words: “This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official
Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of Ordinance No. ___________ of the
City of Bristow, Oklahoma.” (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
Chapter 4
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Sections:
Article A. General Provisions
12-401 Application of chapter.
12-402 Approvals necessary for subdivision plats.
12-403 Definitions.
Article B. Minimum Design Standards
12-410 Blocks.
12-411 Streets and alleys.
12-412 Lots.
12-413 Easements.
12-414 Dedications for public sites and open spaces.
12-415 Improvements.
12-416 Permanent markers and monuments.
Article C. Plats, Submission and Approval
12-420 Pre-application plans and data.
12-421 Preliminary plat.
12-422 Final plat.
12-423 Certifications required on final plats.
12-424 Supplementary documents and information to accompany the final plat.
12-425 Submission of final plat.
Article D. Administration and amendment
12-430 Enforcement and administration.
12-431 Illustrations.
12-432 Modifications.
12-433 Amendment.
12-434 Enforcement.
12-435 Violation.
12-436 Penalties.
12-437 Judicial review.
12-438 Vacation of plats.
12-439 Approval by planning commission.
12-440 Fees.
Article E. Improvements
12-450 Improvements, standards.
12-451 Improvements installation.
12-452 Improvements and maintenance bonds.
12-453 Utility and street improvements.
12-454 Underground utilities.
12-455 Public water supply.
12-456 Public sewage disposal.
12-457 City connections.
12-458 Storm drainage.
12-459 Oil or gas wells.
12-460 Fire hydrants.
12-461 Planting, street lighting, street name signs.
12-462 Monuments.
12-463 Construction plans.
12-464 Completion of construction.
Article A. General Provisions
12-401 Application of chapter.
A. Any plat, hereafter made for each subdivision or each part thereof lying within the city shall be prepared,
presented for approval, and recorded as herein prescribed.
B. The requirements contained herein shall apply to the subdivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two
(2) or more lots or other divisions of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development, whether immediate
or future, including all changes in street or lot lines, provided, however, that divisions of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or more, as permitted in the A-1 Agricultural District, and
not involving any new street or non-public utility easement of access, shall be exempt from the requirements of
this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-402 Approvals necessary for subdivision plats.
Before any plat shall be recorded or be of any validity, it shall have been reviewed by the planning commission
and either approved or rejected and shall have been approved by the city council as having fulfilled the requirements
of this chapter and the zoning ordinance of the city, the approval of the city council must be clearly
affixed on all pages of the plat along with the date thereof. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-403 Definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms used herein are defined as follows:
1. “Alley” means a minor way, dedicated to public use, which is used primarily for vehicular access to the
back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street;
2. “Block” means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways, streets, streams, railroad
rights-of-way, or parks, or a combination thereof;
3. “City” means the City of Bristow;
4. “Court” means a secondary designation following a street name, used only when street alignment is such
that a short street is created that does not warrant a new street name;
5. “Cul-de-sac” means a street having one end open to traffic, and the other end being permanently terminated
by a vehicle turnaround;
6. “Easement” means a grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation, or persons of the use of a
strip of land for specific purposes;
7. “Improvements” means street pavements, with curbs and sidewalks, pedestrian ways, water mains, sanitary
and storm sewers, permanent street monuments, trees or other appropriate items;
8. “Lot” means a portion of a subdivision, or other parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership
or for development;
9. “Master plan” means the comprehensive plan made and adopted by the planning commission indicating
the general locations recommended for the major thoroughfares, streets, parks, and public buildings, zoning districts,
and other public improvements;
10. “Monument” means a post made of iron pipe filled with concrete, the lower end of the pipe being split
and spread to form a base, and the upper end being fitted with a brass end for identifying marks;
11. “Pedestrian way” means a right-of-way dedicated to public use which cuts across a block to facilitate
pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties;
12. “Place” means a secondary designation following a street name, used only when street alignment is such
that a short street is created that does not warrant a new street name;
13. “Plat, preliminary” means a map of a proposed subdivision showing the character and proposed layout
of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the suitability of the proposed development;
14. “Plat, final” means a map of a land subdivision giving in form suitable for filing in the office of the recorder
of deeds necessary affidavits, dedications, and acceptances;
15. “Setback lines or building lines” means a line on a plat generally parallel to the street right-of-way, indicating
the limit beyond which building or structures may not be erected;
16. “Staff” means any person or persons, hired or retained by the planning commission as an employee or
consultant;
17. “Street” means a right-of-way, dedicated to public use, or a private right-of-way serving more than one
ownership, which provides principle vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties;
18. “Street, dead end” means a street, similar to a cul-de-sac, but providing no turnaround at its closed end;
19. “Street, major thoroughfare” means a street which serves or is intended to serve as a major trafficway
and is designated as such on the trafficways plan. It will have controls on access and specific construction requirements;
20. “Street, residential collector” means a street which serves or is intended to serve as a principal trafficway
between separated areas or districts and which is the main access to the primary street system;
21. “Street, access or service” means a minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to major streets, trafficways,
highways or railroad rights-of-way and which provides access to abutting properties and protection
from through traffic;
22. “Street, residential” means a street of limited length, which serves or is intended to serve the local needs
of a neighborhood;
23. “Subdivider (developer)” means a person, firm or corporation undertaking the subdividing or the resubdividing
of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, or other divisions of land for the purpose of
transfer of ownership or development, whether immediate or future, including all changes in street or lot lines;
24. “Subdivision” means a division of lot, tract, parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or other division of
land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development, whether immediate or future, including all changes
in street or lot lines, provided, however, that divisions of land for agricultural purposes into parcels or tracts of
five (5) acres or more, as permitted in an A-1 Agricultural District, and not involving any new street or easement
of access, shall not be deemed a subdivision. The division of land into parcels or tracts of ten (10) acres or less,
for purposes other than agricultural as permitted in an A-1 Agricultural District, shall be deemed a subdivision;
and
25. “Superblock” means a block of exceptionally large size in both dimensions, with access to interior lots
by cul-de-sacs branching in from surrounding streets and providing one or more open spaces. (Prior Code, Chapter
23)
Article B. Minimum Design Standards
12-410 Blocks.
A. In general, intersecting streets, determining block lengths, shall be provided at such intervals as to serve
cross traffic adequately and to meet existing streets or customary subdivision practices in the neighborhood.
Where no existing plats control, the blocks in residential districts shall normally not exceed one thousand three
hundred twenty (1,320) feet in length, except that in outlining subdivisions a greater length may be permitted
where topography or other conditions justify a departure from this maximum. In blocks longer than eight hundred
(800) feet, pedestrian ways or easements shall be provided and shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet.
Blocks for business use should normally not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length.
B. The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth.
Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be of such width as may be considered most suitable for their
prospective use, including adequate space for off-street parking and deliveries. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-411 Streets and alleys.
A. Arrangement of major streets in the subdivision shall conform as nearly as possible to the master plan
adopted by the city planning commission, and provision shall be made for the extension of major and secondary
thoroughfares. Except for courts, places and cul-de-sacs, streets normally shall connect with streets already dedicated
in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions, or provide for future connections to adjoining unsubdivided tracts, or
shall be a reasonable projection of streets in the nearest subdivided tracts.
B. Minor streets should be so planned as to discourage their use by non-local traffic. Dead end streets are
prohibited, but places, courts, or cul-de-sacs will be permitted where topography or other conditions justify their
use. Cul-de-sacs shall normally not be longer than five hundred (500) feet, including a turnaround which shall be
provided at the closed end, with an outside curb radius of at least forty (40) feet and right-of-way radius of not
less than fifty (50) feet.
C. Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned or intended for development by the
subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed future street system for the unsubdivided portion shall be prepared and
submitted by the subdivider.
D. When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or parcels, such lots or parcels shall be
so arranged as to permit the logical location and opening of future streets and appropriate resubdivisions, with
provision for adequate utility connections for such resubdivision.
E. Under normal conditions, streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles,
except where topography or other conditions justify variations. The minimum angle of intersection of streets
generally shall be sixty degrees (60°).
F. Wherever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way or the right-of-way
of a limited access major thoroughfare, provision should be made for a marginal access street approximately
parallel and adjacent to the boundary of such rights-of-way, or for a street at a distance suitable for the appropriate
use of land between such street and the right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with the consideration
of the minimum distance required for approach connections to future grade separations, or for lot depths.
G. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that this requirement may be
waived where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading
and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. Except where justified by special conditions,
such as the continuation of an existing alley in the same block, alleys will be discouraged in residential districts.
Alleys, where provided, shall not be less than twenty (20) feet wide. Intersecting alleys shall have corner cutoffs
of at least twenty (20) feet on a side, dead end alleys shall be avoided wherever possible, but if unavoidable,
such dead end alleys may be approved if adequate turnaround facilities are provided at the closed end.
H. Dedication of half streets will not be approved, except where it is essential to the reasonable development
of the subdivision and in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations. Where it is found
that it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, or
where it becomes necessary to acquire the remaining half by condemnation so it may be improved in the public
interest.
I. For all public ways hereafter dedicated and accepted, the minimum right-of-way widths for streets and
alleys included in any subdivision shall not be less than the minimum. Dimensions for each classification as follows:
1. MAJOR THOROUGHFARE
All 80 feet;
2. COLLECTOR STREETS
Residential 60 feet;
3. MINOR STREETS
Residential
Frontage Streets
50 feet;
40 feet;
and
4. ALLEYS
All 20 feet.
Where existing or anticipated traffic on primary and secondary thoroughfares warrants greater widths of rightsof-
way, these shall be required.
J. A drainage easement, in addition to the provided right-of-way width, may be required where streets parallel
streams of drainage areas. The width of such drainage easements shall be determined by the city engineer,
the city engineer shall notify the developer and the planning commission, in writing of his determination.
K. Minimum pavements widths for all streets, measured from the face of curb, and for all alleys and walks
included in any subdivision shall not be less than the minimum dimension for each classification as follows:
1. MAJOR
THOROUGHFARES
All
48 feet (4 lanes-
12’ each);
2. COLLECTOR STREETS
Residential 34 feet;
3. MINOR STREETS
Residential
Frontage Street
30 feet; and
32 feet.
L. The grades in all streets, alleys, and pedestrian ways or pedestrian ways included in any subdivision
shall not be greater than the maximum grades for each classification as follows, except where topographical
conditions unquestionably justify a departure from this maximum:
1. MAJOR THOROUGHFARE
All 5%;
2. COLLECTOR STREETS
Residential 7%; and
3. MINOR STREETS
All 10%.
M. The horizontal and vertical alignment on all streets, except in unusual cases, shall be as follows:
1. HORIZONTAL
Radii of centerline
2. MAJOR THOROUGHFARE
All 500 feet;
3. COLLECTOR STREETS
Residential 250 feet;
and
4. MINOR STREETS
All 140 feet.
There shall be a tangent between all reversed curves of a length in relation to the radii of the curves so as to provided
for a smooth flow of traffic.
N. All changes in street grade shall be connected by vertical curves of such length as to provide for the
minimum sight distances required. The minimum sight distances required are as follows:
1. MAJOR THOROUGHFARE
All 600 feet;
2. COLLECTOR STREETS
Residential 300 feet;
and
3. MINOR STREETS
All 200 feet.
O. Where two (2) minor streets intersect at approximately right angles, so that the smallest angle of intersection
is not less than eighty degrees (80°), the curb at each block corner shall be rounded with a radius of not
less than fifteen (15) feet. At all other intersections or where minor streets intersect at an angle of less than
eighty degrees (80°), or where a minor street intersects with a major or secondary thoroughfare, or where two (2)
or more secondary or major thoroughfares meet, cross or otherwise intersect in any combination, the curb radii at
such intersections shall be subject to the approval of the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-412 Lots.
A. The minimum width of a lot for residential development shall be sixty (60) feet for a rectangular lot and
not less than sixty (60) feet at the front building line for lots whose side lines are radial to curved streets and the
depth of the lot shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet, except in unusual situations. In no case shall a lot
in a residential district contain less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet. Excessive depth in relation to width
shall be avoided.
B. In subdivisions where septic tanks or other individual sewerage disposal devices are to be installed, the
size of all lots included in such subdivision shall be subject to the approval of the county health department. The
approval of the health department shall be based upon the Oklahoma State Board of Health requirements. The
health department shall notify the developer and the planning commission in writing of his finding.
C. Corner lots for residential use shall have additional width to permit appropriate building setback from
both streets.
D. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to street lines or radial to curved street lines.
E. Double frontage lots shall be avoided.
F. Every lot shall abut on a street other than an alley.
G. Setback or building lines shall be shown on all lots intended for residential use and shall not be less than
the setback required by the zoning ordinance. On those lots which are intended for business use, the setback shall
be at least that required by the zoning ordinance, unless special plans for the location of buildings and parking
area are approved by the planning commission, and also approved by the city council at the time of approval of
the plat. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-413 Easements.
A. To facilitate underground installation, an easement for utilities, at least ten (10) feet wide, shall be provided
along each side of a side line of lots or the rear line of lots where necessary to form a continuous right-ofway
at least twenty (20) feet in width. If necessary for the extension of main water or sewer lines or similar utilities,
easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots.
B. Utility easements shall connect with easements established in adjoining properties. These easements,
when approved, shall not thereafter be changed without the approval of the city council by ordinance, upon recommendation
of the planning commission.
C. Additional easements for pole guys should be provided at the outside of turns. Where possible, lot lines
shall be arranged to bisect the exterior angle so that pole guys will fall along the side lot lines.
D. Drainage easements for storm sewers may be required. Easements for open channel drainage may be
required where the cost for the installation of storm sewers is considered to be prohibitive. These easements may
be along the side lot lines, but usually the design should be such that the drainage will be carried along the rear
of the lots, if open channel drainage is to be carried in the street right-of-way, additional right-of-way width shall
be provided. When the drainage is carried down the rear lot lines, the easement shall be adequate width for
workmen (with trucks if need be) to enter the easement and keep it cleaned out. The size and location of such
easements for open channel drainage shall be determined by the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-414 Dedications for public sites and open spaces.
In subdividing land or resubdividing an existing plat, due consideration must be given by the subdivider to the
dedication or reservation of suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, or other public recreational areas or
open spaces. Any areas so dedicated or reserved shall conform as nearly as possible to the recommendations of
the planning commission in its master plan. All areas to be reserved for or dedicated to public use shall be indicated
on the preliminary plat in order that it may be determined when and in what manner such areas will be
dedicated to or acquired by the appropriate agency. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-415 Improvements.
All improvements, when constructed by the owner or developer, shall comply with the rules and specifications
of the city, and the requirements set forth in Article E of this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-416 Permanent markers and monuments.
A. Permanent markers shall be placed at each corner of every block or portion of a block, points of curvature
and points of tangency on street lines, and at each angle point on the boundary of the subdivision. A permanent
marker shall be deemed to be a steel rod or pipe, one-half (½) inch or larger in diameter extending at least
three (3) feet below the finished grade. In situations where conditions prohibit the placing of markers in the locations
prescribed above, offset markers will be permitted. The exact location of all markers shall be shown on the
final plat, together with accurate interior angles, bearings and distances.
B. Permanent monuments shall be placed at all quarter section points within the subdivision or on its perimeter.
These monuments shall be set according to the specifications of the city for such work. (Prior Code,
Chapter 23)
Article C. Plats, Submission and Approval
12-420 Pre-application plans and data.
A. Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit to the
office of the planning commission plans and data showing his ideas and intentions in the platting of the proposed
subdivision.
B. He shall outline and describe the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development to supplement
the drawings and sketches required in Subsections C and D of this section.
C. A general location map shall be prepared and submitted and shall show the proposed subdivision and its
relationship to existing community facilities. Such location map shall show the location and name of the subdivision,
existing main traffic arteries, public transportation lines, schools, parks and playgrounds.
D. A sketch plan drawn to scale shall be prepared and submitted showing the proposed layout of streets,
lots, and other features in relation to existing utilities and other conditions. This plan may be submitted in the
form of a freehand pencil sketch.
E. Within thirty (30) days of the submission of the pre-application plan, the subdivider shall be informed by
the planning commission whether such plans and the data submitted meet the objectives of these regulations. If
the planning commission finds the plans and data do not meet the objectives of these regulations it shall express
its reasons therefore. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-421 Preliminary plat.
A. After reaching preliminary conclusions regarding the proposed subdivision as provided in Section 12-
420 of this code, the subdivider shall prepare and submit a preliminary plat, together with any necessary supplementary
information.
B. Five (5) copies of a preliminary plat and one copy of a vicinity sketch of any proposed subdivision shall
be filed with the city clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to a meeting of the commission at which consideration
is requested.
C. The following shall be included:
1. Proposed name of subdivision. Names shall not duplicate or too closely resemble names of existing subdivision;
2. Location of boundary lines in relation to section, quarter section or quarter section lines and any adjacent
corporate boundaries, comprising a legal description of the property;
3. Names and addresses of the developer and the surveyor making the plat;
4. Scale of plat, one inch equals two hundred (200) feet or larger; and
5. Date and north point.
D. Existing conditions shall be included:
1. Location, width and name of each existing or platted street or other public way, railroad and utility rightof-
way, parks and other public open spaces, and permanent buildings, within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision;
2. All existing sewers, water mains, gas mains, culverts, or other underground installations within the proposed
subdivision or immediately adjacent thereto, with pipe size, grades and locations shown;
3. Names of adjacent subdivision and owner or adjacent parcels of unsubdivided land; and
4. Topography (unless specifically waived) with contour intervals of not more than (5) feet, referred to city
datum; also the locations of water courses, ravines, bridges, lakes, wooded areas, approximate acreage, and such
other features as may be pertinent to subdivision.
E. Proposed development shall include:
1. The location and width of proposed streets, roadways, alleys, pedestrian ways and easements;
2. The location and character of all proposed public utility lines, including sewers, (storm and sanitary)
water, gas and power lines. If a community sewage treatment plant, or other type of community disposal system
is to be installed or constructed to serve all or certain portions of the proposed subdivision, the general plan for
such community type sewage treatment or disposal system shall be shown and so identified on the preliminary
plan;
3. Layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of lots and the number or letter of each block;
4. Location and size of proposed parks, playgrounds, churches, or school sites or other special uses of land
to be considered for dedication to public use, or to be reserved by deed of covenant for the use of all property
owners in the subdivision and any conditions of such dedication or reservation;
5. Building setback lines with dimensions; and
6. Indication of any lots on which use other than residential is proposed by the subdivider.
F. Supplementary requirements are:
1. Two (2) copies of profiles shall be furnished for each proposed street, showing existing grades and proposed
approximate grades and gradients on the center line and along the property lines on the street. The location
of proposed culverts and bridges shall also be shown; and
2. Vicinity sketch, at a legible scale, to show the relation of the plat to its surroundings shall be shown on
the preliminary plat, or accompany it. Utility connections too remote to be shown on the preliminary plat shall be
shown on this sketch.
G. Approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat will be conveyed to the subdivider in writing within five
(5) days after the meeting of the planning commission at which such plat was considered. In case the plat is disapproved,
the subdivider shall be notified of the reasons and what requirements will be necessary to meet approval
of the planning commission. The approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute an acceptance of the
subdivision, but is deemed to be an authorization to proceed with the preparation of the final plat. This approval
of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one year, unless an extension is granted by the city planning
commission. If the final plat has not been submitted for approval within this period, a preliminary plat must
again be submitted to the commission for approval. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-422 Final plat.
A. After approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall prepare and submit to the commission a final
plat for recording purposes, together with other supplementary information and certificates. The final plat shall
be submitted to the city clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to a regular meeting of the commission. Public notice
of time and place of the meeting shall be given at least five (5) days prior to the meeting.
B. Six (6) copies of such final plat shall be furnished which shall bear the original signatures of the owner
or owners and be duly acknowledged. One of these three (3) shall be on cloth or suitable material for filing at the
office of the county clerk.
C. The final plat prepared for recording purposes shall be drawn at a scale of at least one inch equals one
hundred (100) feet. The size of sheets on which such final plats are submitted shall be at least sixteen and onequarter
(16¼) inches by nineteen (19) inches. Each sheet shall have a one and one-quarter (1¼) inch border
along all other sides. Where the proposed plat is of unusual size, the final plat shall be submitted on two (2) or
more sheets of the same dimensions. If more than two (2) sheets are required, an index sheet of the same dimensions
shall be filed, showing the entire development at a smaller scale.
D. The final plat shall show and contain the following information:
1. Name of subdivision (not to duplicate or to closely approximate the name of any existing subdivision);
2. Location by section, township, range, county and state, and including descriptive boundaries of the subdivision,
based on an accurate traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions which must mathematically close,
the allowable error for closure on any portion of a final plat shall be one foot in five thousand (5,000);
3. The location of monuments shall be shown and described on the final plat. Locations of such monuments
shall be shown in reference to existing official monuments or the nearest established street lines, including
true angles and distances to such reference points or monuments;
4. Location of lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks and other features, with accurate dimensions in
feet and decimals of feet, with the length of radii or arcs of all curves, and with all other information necessary to
reproduce the plat on the ground. Dimensions shall be shown from all angle points and points of curve to lot
lines;
5. Lots shall be numbered clearly. If blocks are to be numbered or lettered, these should be shown clearly
in the center of the block;
6. The exact locations, widths, and names of all streets to be dedicated;
7. Location and width of all easements to be dedicated;
8. Boundary lines and description of boundary lines of any areas other than streets and alleys which are to
be dedicated or reserved for public use;
9. Building setback lines on front and side streets with dimensions;
10. Name and address of developer and surveyor making the plat;
11. Scale of plat (the scale to be shown graphically and in feet per inch), date and northpoint;
12. Statement dedicating all easements; and
13. Statement dedicating all streets, alleys, and other public areas not previously dedicated. (Prior Code,
Chapter 23)
12-423 Certifications required on final plats.
The following are required:
1. Certificate by parties having any title interest in the land subdivided, consenting to the preparation and
recordation of the plat as submitted. All copies shall carry the original signatures of the owner or owners and
notary public;
2. Certification by registered engineer or licensed land surveyor that details of the plat are correct; and
3. Space for certificates of approval to be filled in by the signatures of the chairman and secretary of the
planning commission and the city clerk. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-424 Supplementary documents and information to accompany the final plat.
A. Tax certificates from both the city and county shall be submitted stating that all taxes and encumbrances
have been satisfied of record on the land to be dedicated as streets or alleys or for other public purposes.
B. Two (2) copies of any private restrictions affecting the subdivision or any park thereof shall be submitted.
(Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-425 Submission of final plat.
A. After review of the final plat by the planning commission, such plat, together with the recommendation
of the commission, shall be submitted to the city council for approval. If accepted, the final plat shall be approved
by ordinance, which ordinance shall provide for the acceptance of all streets, alleys, easements or other
public ways, and parks, or other open spaces dedicated to public purposes.
B. If the planning commission rejects or withhold approval of plat, the subdivider may request that the plat
be submitted to the city council. The secretary of the planning commission shall forward the proposed plat, together
with the report of the commission, stating the reason or reasons for the action taken. The city council may
make such findings and determinations as are deemed proper. (Prior Code Chapter 23)
Article D. Administration and amendment
12-430 Enforcement and administration.
The primary responsibility for the adoption, amendment, interpretation and administration of this chapter shall
be that of the planning commission. It is the intent of the planning commission that the public interest be protected
by a thorough review of all proposed plats without undue delay to developers. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-431 Illustrations.
Illustrations identified as figures in this chapter are intended to aid in interpretation. In the event of conflict
with the text, the text shall be determinative. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-432 Modifications.
A. Upon written request to the planning commission, modifications to the procedures and requirements of
the regulations may be granted by an affirmative vote of not less than a three quarter (3/4) majority of the full
planning commission at a regular meeting in the following instance.
B. In any particular case where the developer can show by plan and written statement that, by reason of
exceptional topographic or other physical conditions, literal compliance with any requirement of the chapter
would cause practical difficulty or exceptional and undue hardship, the planning commission may modify such
requirement to the extent deemed just and proper, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such relief
may be granted without detriment to the public interest and without impairing the intent and purpose of this
chapter or the desirable general development of the neighborhood and the community in accordance with the
comprehensive plan and the zoning ordinance. Any modification thus granted shall be spread upon the minutes
of the planning commission setting forth the reasons which in the opinion of the planning commission, justified
the modification. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-433 Amendment.
A. This chapter may be amended by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the city
council at a public hearing, notice to the public of which appeared at least fifteen (15) days prior thereto in a
newspaper of general circulation within the county.
B. Amendments may be proposed in writing by the planning commission or any interested party. Costs of
public hearing and publication of notice shall be deposited by any non-governmental person proposing an
amendment.
C. Prior to its consideration by the city council, a proposed amendment shall be approved as to legality by
counsel for the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-434 Enforcement.
The responsibility of enforcing these regulations is as follows:
1. The building inspector of the city is designated as the enforcing official and shall make the inspections
and investigations necessary for the enforcement of this regulations within the city limits; and
2. Upon receipt of a written, signed complaint upon forms provided by the planning commission or by the
appropriate enforcing official, the official shall investigate the complaint and notify the complainant within thirty
(30) days of the action taken or decision thereon. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-435 Violation.
No zoning, building or electrical permit shall be issued for any new structure or change, improvement or alteration
or any existing structure or any tract of land which does not comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-436 Penalties.
A violation of this chapter or failure to comply with the provisions herein specified shall subject the person,
firm, or corporation to the following penalties:
1. Violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine as provided in Section 1-108
of this code. Each day in which a violation continues, prior to instigation of appeal, shall constitute a separate
offense;
2. The city council or the planning commission, or any person whose value of property if affected by a violation,
may institute a civil suit to prevent or remove a violation of this chapter; and
3. The planning commission may, upon application of the staff, an enforcing official, or any person whose
property value is adversely affected, withdraw their approval of a plat when a violation of this chapter is found to
exist after public hearing and due notice to the affected persons. In such event, the planning commission shall
file notice of the withdrawal of approval in the office of the building inspector in a manner which will be reflected
in his records and he shall immediately cease the further issuance of any permits in the affected area.
(Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-437 Judicial review.
A judicial review in the district court may be had of any ruling provision, interpretation, order, requirement,
refusal, permit, approval or decision made under the terms of these regulations. The basis for such review is that
action of the planning commission or enforcing official is arbitrary, capricious, or unreasonable and unnecessary.
(Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-438 Vacation of plats.
No vacation of a plat or any parts thereof, except by action of the district courts, shall be valid or impart notice
until after the consent of all of the owners of such platted area is presented to the commission and the approval
of the commission is entered thereon. All partial vacations or alterations of a final approved, filed plat shall require
the approval of the commission and the filing of a corrected plat. Alteration of a plat previously approved
by the commission, without reapproval shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-439 Approval by planning commission.
The approval of the commission, by majority vote of the full commission, or the refusal to approve, shall take
place within forty-five (45) days from and after the submission of the plat for final approval, unless the developer
agrees in writing to an extension of this time period; otherwise, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved
and the certificate of the planning commission as to the date of the submission of the plat for approval
and as to the failure to take action thereon within such time shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement
or evidence of approval herein required. The grounds for refusal of any plat submitted or regulations violated by
the plat shall be stated upon the record of the planning commission. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-440 Fees.
Fees connected with the administration and enforcement of regulations shall be as follows:
1. For each preliminary or tentative plat, the planning commission shall collect a fee of Ten Dollars
($10.00) or a fee of fifty cents ($ .50) per lot plus Five Dollars ($5.00), whichever is largest;
2. For each final plat, the commission shall collect a fee of Ten Dollars ($10.00);
3. For each request for a public hearing before the commission on a subdivision matter, the commission
shall collect a fee of Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00); and
4. The city council may establish fees for inspections and investigation of subdivisions. (Prior Code, Chapter
23)
Article E. Improvements
12-450 Improvements, standards.
All subdivisions shall install improvements in accordance with or in excess of the minimum requirements of
this chapter, and the duly adopted regulations of the city council pertaining to the construction, surfacing and
maintenance of trafficways, streets, roads, and highways. The developer shall acknowledge the several improvement
requirements as set forth herein by notation of the final plat. The notation shall be worded substantially
as follows:
“All streets shall be graded, and improved, in accordance with the standards and specifications required by the
Subdivision Regulations of the City of Bristow pertaining to and including curbs and gutters, street name signs
erected, planting screens established and trees planted, utilities and street lights installed. Sidewalks constructed,
drainage structures constructed in accordance with the approved plans on file in the office of the enforcing official,
by the developer at his expense. All required improvements shall be constructed or installed within two (2)
years of approval of the final plat by the planning commission and the same shall be maintained and kept in good
repair by the subdivider for a period of five (5) years after construction thereof and has been approved in writing
by the enforcing official.” (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-451 Improvements installation.
Improvements required under this chapter shall not be constructed prior to the final plat approval and filing of
the plat in accordance with the specifications and under the supervision of the official having jurisdiction. Bond
shall be provided to guarantee the performance and maintenance thereof prior to final approval of the plat. (Prior
Code, Chapter 23)
12-452 Improvements and maintenance bonds.
The improvement and maintenance bonds shall:
1. Be in the favor of the City of Bristow, Oklahoma;
2. Be in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the cost, as estimated by bona fide contractor
approved by the city council and approved by the enforcing official, of all improvements and installations as required
by these standards and reasonable maintenance thereof; excluding however, the cost of any required improvements
and installations which have been constructed, installed, and completed by utility companies or the
city for which separate completion contracts are furnished;
3. Provide surety satisfactory to the planning commission and the city; and
4. Performance bonds shall be in force until and terminate ninety (90) days after the filing with the city
council of a completion affidavit obtained from the enforcing official, unless within the ninety (90) days period,
the enforcing official determines that the requirements, standards, and specifications of these standards applicable
to the construction, installation and completion of the improvements and installations have not been met and
notified the applicant of such determination by certified/registered mail sent to the applicant’s address appearing
on the application for plat or lot split approval, in which event the bond shall continue to run until the filing of
proof that, and the enforcing officials determination of the standards, requirements, and specifications have been
met. Maintenance bonds shall run for a period of five (5) years from the date of release of performance bond.
(Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-453 Utility and street improvements.
A. Utility and street improvements shall be provided in each new subdivision in accordance with the standards
and requirements prescribed by the enforcing official and the city.
B. Every lot within a subdivision shall have access to a public street. Private streets, as permitted in planned
unit or mobile home subdivisions, must comply with the improvements requirements of applicable public streets.
C. Reserve strips, when described and provided or designated on the plat, shall be maintained in a manner
prescribed in the plat restriction.
D. Commercial and industrial developments shall have access to arterial or collector streets. Vehicular access
shall be prohibited to minor residential and residential collector streets. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-454 Underground utilities.
Electric, telephone and TV cable lines shall be installed underground in the easements provided. After installation
of such lines “as installed” diagrams shall be furnished by the installer to the city, drawn to scale and indicating
the location of the lines. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-455 Public water supply.
Where an approved public water supply is reasonably accessible, or procurable, the subdivider shall connect
with such water supply and make it available for each lot within the subdivided area. Pending the availability of
a public water supply, the subdivider shall construct wells or a water supply system in such a manner that an
adequate supply of potable water will be available to every lot within the subdivision. The final plat shall not
receive planning commission approval until it is certified by the health department that there has been compliance
with the regulations of the Oklahoma State Board of Health and where indicated, meets other jurisdictional
governing bodies requirements. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-456 Public sewage disposal.
Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall connect with such sanitary sewer
and provide adequate sewer lines to each lot. Sewer connections and the subdivision sewer system shall comply
with this chapter and with the regulations of the Oklahoma State Board of Health. Where a sanitary sewer system
is not reasonably accessible, but where plans for the installation of sanitary sewers in the vicinity of the subdivision
have been prepared and approved by the appropriate agency, the subdivider shall install sewers in conformity
with such plans. Where immediate connection is not possible, and until such connection is made with the
sewer system of the district, the use of a private sewage treatment plant may be permitted; provided, such disposal
facilities are constructed in accordance with the regulations and requirements of the governing bodies and
the Oklahoma State Board of Health. Where no sewers are accessible and no plans for the same have been prepared,
the subdivider shall either install a sewer line and disposal system in accordance with the requirements of
the preceding paragraph, or if the subdivided lots have a minimum width of one hundred (100) feet with no lot
less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet where individual water supply systems are used, and fourteen
thousand (14,000) square feet if community water supply systems are used, individual sewage disposal devices
may be provided for each lot. The planning commission, with the concurring approval of the health department,
may adjust these lot requirements in accordance with their findings in the particular subdivision. All such individual
systems shall be constructed in accordance with the regulations and requirements of the health department
and the State Board of Health. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-457 City connections.
In all cases where the water supply or sewage disposal systems will be connected to lines or mains owned or
operated by a city or town, construction as to the facilities shall be made according to the plans, specifications
and requirements and subject to the inspection, supervision and approval of the governing bodies, water and
sewer department or the State Health Department. Approval of the plans for any such water or sewer system by
the above shall satisfy the requirements of this chapter with respect to water and sewer facilities. (Prior Code,
Chapter 23)
12-458 Storm drainage.
Provisions shall be made for the disposal of all storm water. Where initial construction does not provide for
storm sewers, drainage ditches of adequate capacity shall be constructed. Facilities for storm drainage should be
of adequate capacity to take care of surface runoffs originating within the subdivision or flowing across it. (Prior
Code, Chapter 23)
12-459 Oil or gas wells.
A. Where there is found to be a producing oil or gas well which is in, or within one hundred fifty (150) feet
of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision, or an abandoned oil or gas well which is not adequately plugged
according to the standards established by state law and the Oklahoma Corporation Commission and so certified
by the Corporation Commission and which is outside the boundaries of a proposed subdivision but within one
hundred fifty (150) feet thereof, there shall be a building setback line so placed on the plat so as to prevent the
erection of a building within one hundred fifty (150) feet of such wells.
B. Where there is found to be a abandoned oil or gas well which is not adequately plugged according to the
standards established by the state law and the Oklahoma Corporation Commission, which well is within the
boundaries of a proposed subdivision, the well shall be adequately plugged according to the standards and so
certified by the Oklahoma Corporation Commission before the plat of such addition is given final approval. In
any event, a certificate or clearance shall be obtained from the Oklahoma Corporation Commission as to the existence
of any wells reflected in their records. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-460 Fire hydrants.
Fire hydrants shall comply with the specifications of the city or the American Insurance Association. (Prior
Code, Chapter 23)
12-461 Planting, street lighting, street name signs.
A. All landscaped strips, parkways and screening areas dedicated to the public or reserved in private common
ownership shall be graded, seeded and planted in an appropriate manner.
B. Provisions shall be made by the developer for adequate lighting of public streets within the proposed
subdivision, in accordance with standards and specifications of the city.
C. Street name signs shall be installed in accordance with the specifications of the city. (Prior Code, Chapter
23)
12-462 Monuments.
A. Permanent and other monuments shall be placed in accordance with the following requirements and under
the supervision of the city.
B. Monuments shall be set at the intersection of all streets and the beginning and end of all curves along
street centerlines.
C. The monuments shall be made of one inch I.D. Galvanized iron pipe thirty (30) inches long.
D. A metal reinforcing steel stake the size of three-eighths (3/8) inches in diameter and twenty-four (24)
inches long shall be set at all lot corners; top to be set not more than two (2) inches above ground with registered
engineer’s tags set on all stakes at beginning and end of all curves. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-463 Construction plans.
Construction plans for improvements to be installed shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer
and submitted in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the officials having jurisdiction and no
improvements shall be installed until and unless the plans shall have been received and approved by the officials:
1. The centerline and property line profile of each proposed street, with existing and tentative grades indicated;
2. The cross section of each proposed street, showing the width of pavement, the location and width of
sidewalks if constructed;
3. The plans and profiles of proposed sanitary sewers and storm sewers with grades and sizes indicated or
method of sewage or storm water disposal in lieu of sewers;
4. A plan of the proposed water distribution system, showing pipe sizes and the location of valves and fire
hydrants; and
5. A drainage plan showing all existing and proposed storm sewers, manholes, catchbasins, water courses,
culverts, and other underground structures within the tract, immediately adjacent thereto, with pipe sizes and
grades, water openings indicated thereon. The drainage plan shall show the method to be used for the adequate
disposal of all storm water, including drainage outlets. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
12-464 Completion of construction.
The construction of all improvements required by these rules and regulations shall be completed within two
(2) years from the date of approval of the final plat by the planning commission, unless good cause can be shown
for the granting of an extension of time by authority of the planning commission. (Prior Code, Chapter 23)
Chapter 5
AIRPORT ZONING
Sections:
12-501 Short title.
12-502 Definitions.
12-503 Airport zones.
12-504 Airport zone height limitations.
12-505 Use restriction.
12-506 Nonconforming uses.
12-507 Permits.
12-508 Enforcement.
12-509 Board of adjustment.
12-510 Appeals.
12-511 Judicial review.
12-512 Penalties.
12-513 Conflicting regulations.
12-501 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Jones Memorial Airport Zoning Ordinance”. (Ord. No.
4-18-94A)
Cross Reference: See also Sections 16-201 et seq. on airport board and aircraft.
12-502 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
1. “Airport” means the Jones Memorial Airport;
2. “Airport elevation” means the highest Point of an airport’s usable landing area measured in feet from sea
level. Jones Memorial Airport has an elevation of eight hundred fifty-one (851) feet above mean sea level
(MSL), but it is zoned for the future elevation of eight hundred sixty-two (862) feet above mean sea level;
3. “Approach surface” means a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending
outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height
limitation slope set forth in Section IV (come back) of this chapter. In plan, the perimeter of the approach surface
coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone;
4. “Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones” mean zones that are set forth in Section 12-504
of this chapter;
5. A “board of adjustment” means a board consisting of five (5) members appointed by the city council of
the city as provided by the laws of the state;
6. “Conical surface” means a surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal
surface at a slope of twenty (20) to one for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet;
7. “Hazard to air navigation” means an obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the
safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace;
8. “Height” means for the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and
shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified;
9. “Horizontal surface” means a horizontal plane one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport
elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone;
10. “Nonconforming use” means any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an amendment thereto;
11. “Obstruction” means any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a
limiting height set forth in Section IV of this chapter;
12. “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association,
or government entity; includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them;
13. “Primary surface” means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specified
prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of that runway;
for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the
primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in Section 12-504
of this chapter. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point
on the runway centerline;
14. “Runway” means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its
length;
15. “Structure” means an object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including but
without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines;
16. “Transitional surface” means surfaces that extend outward at ninety degree (90°) angles to the runway
centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically
from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces.
Transitional surfaces for those portions through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of
five thousand (5,000) feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface at ninety degree (900)
angles to the extended runway centerline;
17. “Tree” means any object of natural growth;
18. “Utility runway” means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft
of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross weight and less; and
19. “Visual runway” means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures.
(Ord. No. 4-18-94A)
12-503 Airport zones.
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created and established certain zones
which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and
conical surfaces as they apply to Jones Memorial Airport. Such zones are shown on the Jones Memorial Airport
Zoning Map consisting of one sheet, prepared by Leard-Bice & Associates, Inc., and dated June, 1992, which is
attached to this chapter and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered
to be only on the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established
and defined as follows:
1. “Utility runway visual approach zone” means the inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the
width of the primary surface and is two hundred fifty (250) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly
to a width of one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) feet at a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000)
feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway;
2. “Transitional zones” means the areas beneath the transitional surfaces;
3. “Horizontal zone” is established by swinging arcs of five thousand (5,000) feet radii for all runways designated
utility or visual and ten thousand (10,000) feet for all others from the center of each end of the primary
surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal
zone does not include the approach and transition zones; and
4. “Conical zone” is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends
outward therefrom a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. (Ord. No. 4-18-94A)
12-504 Airport zone height limitations.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree
shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit
herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones
in question as follows:
1. “Utility runway visual approach zone” slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning
at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand
(5,000) feet along the extended runway centerline;
2. “Transitional zones” slope seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at
the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of one hundred
fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation which is eight hundred sixty-two (862) feet above mean sea level. In
additional to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they
intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical
zone, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the
sides of and the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of five thousand
(5,000) feet measured at ninety degree (90°) angles to the extended runway centerline;
3. “Horizontal zone” is established at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation or at a height
of one thousand twelve (1,012) feet above mean sea level;
4. “Conical zone” slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the
horizontal zone and at one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet above the airport elevation and extending to a
height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation; and
5. “Excepted height limitations”: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the construction
or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height up to fifty (50) feet above the surface of the
land. (Ord. No. 4-18-94A)
12-505 Use restriction.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made of land or water within any zone
established by this chapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport,
create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering
of aircraft intending to use the airport. (Ord. No. 4-18-94A)
12-506 Nonconforming uses.
A. The regulations prescribed in this chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or
other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulation as of the effective date of this
chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require
any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of
which has begun prior to the effective date of this chapter, and is diligently prosecuted.
B. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure
or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and
lights as shall be deemed necessary by the code enforcement officer to dictate to the operators of aircraft in the
vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated
and maintained at the expense of the city. (Ord. No. 4-18-94A)
12-507 Permits.
A. Except as specifically provided in paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 hereunder, no material change shall be made in
the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone
hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit
shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined
whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such
determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions
of this chapter shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with paragraph D of this
section.
1. In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for
any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of
terrain, land contour or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed
for such zones;
2. In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than four
thousand two hundred (4,200) feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure
less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure
would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones; and
3. In the areas lying within the limits of the transitional zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone,
no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the
ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, would extend
above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones.
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any
construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits, established
by this chapter except as set forth in Section IV, 10.
B. “Existing uses”: No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction
or permit as nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on
the effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is
made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted.
C. “Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed”: Whenever the code enforcement officer determines that
a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than eighty percent (80%) torn down, physically
deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would such structure or tree to exceed the applicable
height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
D. “Variances”: Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of
any tree, or use property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply to the
board of adjustment for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a
determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal of the operation of air
navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is
duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and
relief granted, will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial
justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this chapter. Additionally, no application for variance
to the requirements of this chapter may be considered by the board of adjustment unless a copy of the application
has been furnished to the Jones Memorial Airport Board for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance.
If the Jones Memorial Airport Board does not respond to the application within fifteen (15) days after receipt,
the board of adjustment may act on its own to grant or deny the application.
E. “Obstruction marking and lighting”: Any permit or variance granted may, if such action be deemed advisable
to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to
require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain, at the owner’s expense,
such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the board of adjustment, this condition may
be modified to require the owner to permit the city at its own expense to install, operate, and maintain the necessary
markings and lights. (Ord. No. 4-18-94A)
12-508 Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein.
Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the zoning administrator upon a form published for that
purpose. Applications required by this chapter to be submitted to the zoning administrator shall be promptly considered
and granted or denied. Application for action by the board of adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted
by the zoning administrator. (Ord. No. 4-18-94A)
12-509 Board of adjustment.
A. A board of adjustment has been created to have and exercise the following powers to hear and decide:
1. Appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination of this chapter;
2. Special exceptions to the terms of this chapter upon which such board of adjustment under such regulations
may be required to pass; and
3. Specific variances.
B. The board of adjustment shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the city council and each shall
serve for a term of three (3) years until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. Of the members first appointed,
one shall be appointed for a term of one year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years, and two (2) for a term
of three (3) years. Members shall be removable by the appointing authority for cause, upon written charges, after
a public hearing.
C. The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and in harmony with the provisions of this
chapter. Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times
as the board of adjustment may determine. The chairperson or, in the absence of the chairperson, the acting
chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearing of the board of adjustment
shall be public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each
member upon each questions; or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the zoning administration
and on due cause shown.
D. The board of adjustment shall make written findings of facts and conclusion of law giving the fact upon
which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming or modifying any order, requirement,
decision or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this chapter.
E. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board of adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse
any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator or decide in favor of the applicant
on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect variation to this chapter.
(Ord. No. 4-18-94A)
12-510 Appeals.
A. Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the zoning administration made in
the administration of the chapter, may appeal to the board of adjustment.
B. All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of
adjustment by filing with the zoning administration a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning
administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
C. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the zoning administrator
certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the
facts stated in the certificate a stay would be in the opinion of the zoning administrator cause imminent peril to
life or property. In such case, proceedings shall be stayed except by order of the board of adjustment or notice to
the zoning administrator and on due cause shown.
D. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice
to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear
in person or by agent or by attorney.
E. The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, in
whole or in part, or modify the order requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such
order, requirement, decision, or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. No. 4-18-
94A)
12-511 Judicial review.
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment may appeal to the
District Court of Creek County as provided in Title 3, Section III, of the Oklahoma Statutes Annotated. (Ord.
No. 4-18-94A)
12-512 Penalties.
Each violation of this chapter or of any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-108 of this code; and each day a violation continues
to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. 4-18-94A)
12-513 Conflicting regulations.
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this chapter and any
other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or
trees, and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. No. 4-18-94A)
Chapter 6
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND
FACILITIES
Sections:
12-601 Findings.
12-602 Purposes.
12-603 Definitions.
12-604 Development of towers.
12-605 Setbacks.
12-606 Structural requirements.
12-607 Separation or buffer requirements.
12-608 Method of determining tower height.
12-609 Illumination.
12-610 Exterior finish.
12-611 Landscaping.
12-612 Access.
12-613 Stealth design.
12-614 Telecommunications facilities on antenna support structures.
12-615 Modification of towers.
12-616 Certifications and inspections.
12-617 Maintenance.
12-618 Criteria for site plan development modifications.
12-619 Abandonment.
12-620 Severability.
12-621 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
12-601 Findings.
The Communications Act of 1934 as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (“the Act”) grants the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over:
A. The regulation of the environmental effects of radio frequency (RF) emissions from telecommunications
facilities; and
B. The regulation of radio signal interference among users of the RF spectrum. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-602 Purposes.
The general purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement, construction, and modification of towers and
telecommunications facilities in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, while at the same
time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace
in the city.
Specifically, the purposes of this chapter are:
A. To regulate the location of towers and telecommunications facilities in the city;
B. To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impact of towers and telecommunications
facilities;
C. To minimize adverse visual impact of towers and telecommunications facilities through careful design,
siting, landscaping, and innovative camouflaging techniques;
D. To promote and encourage shared use and/or co-location of towers and antenna support structures as a
primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;
E. To promote and encourage utilization of technological designs that will either eliminate or reduce the
need for erection of new tower structures to support antenna and telecommunications facilities;
F. To avoid potential damage to property caused by towers and telecommunications facilities by ensuring
such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained, and removed when no
longer used or are determined to be structurally unsound; and
G. To ensure that towers and telecommunications facilities are compatible with surrounding land uses.
(Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-603 Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
“Antenna support structure” means any building or structure other than a tower which can be used for location
of telecommunications facilities.
“Applicant” means any person that applies for a tower development permit.
“Application” means the process by which the owner of a parcel of land within the city submits a request to
develop, construct, build, modify, or erect a tower upon such parcel of land. Application includes all written
documentation, verbal statements, and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the
city concerning such a request.
“Engineer” means any engineer licensed by the state of Oklahoma.
“Owner” means any person with fee title or a long-term (exceeding ten (10) years) leasehold to any parcel of
land within the city who desires to develop, or construct, build, modify, or erect a tower upon such parcel of
land.
“Person” is any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity, private
or public, whether for profit or not for profit.
“Stealth” means any tower or telecommunications facility which is designed to enhance compatibility with
adjacent land uses, including, but not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated
into architectural elements, and towers designed to look other than like a tower such as light poles, power
poles, and trees. The term stealth does not necessarily exclude the use of uncamouflaged lattice, guyed, or
monopole tower designs.
“Telecommunications facilities” means any cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas, and any other equipment
or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communications which a person seeks to locate
or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure. However, telecommunications facilities shall
not include:
1. Any satellite earth station antenna two (2) meters in diameter or less which is located in an area zoned
industrial or commercial; or
2. Any satellite earth station antenna one meter or less in diameter, regardless of zoning category.
“Tower” means a self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole structure constructed from grade which supports
telecommunications facilities. The term tower shall not include amateur radio operators’ equipment, as licensed
by the FCC. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-604 Development of towers.
A. A tower shall be a permitted use of land in zoning districts C-2, C-3, C-4, I-1, I-2, I-3. No person shall
build, erect, or construct a tower upon any parcel of land within a zoning district designated C-2, C-3, C-4, I-1, I-
2 and I-3 unless a development permit shall have been issued by the planning and zoning board of the city. Application
shall be made to the planning and zoning board in the manner provided in this chapter.
B. A tower shall be a conditional use of land in the following zoning districts: C-0, C-l.
No person shall build, erect, or construct a tower upon any parcel of land within any zoning district set forth
above unless a development permit shall have been issued by the development review committee of the city and
approval of the city planning and zoning board is obtained.
C. Towers are exempt from the maximum height restrictions of the districts where located, towers shall be
permitted to a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet. Towers may be permitted in excess of one hundred fifty
(150) feet in accordance with Section 12-618 of this code.
D. No new tower shall be built, constructed, or erected in the city unless the tower is capable of supporting
another person’s operating telecommunications facilities comparable in weight, size, and surface area to the telecommunications
facilities installed by the applicant on the tower within six (6) months of the completion of the
tower construction.
E. An application to develop a tower shall include:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and lessee of the parcel of land upon which the
tower is situated. If the applicant is not the owner of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated, the written
consent of the owner shall be evidenced in the application;
2. The legal description, folio number, and address of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated;
3. The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of other towers or usable antenna support
structures within a one-half (½) mile radius of the proposed new tower site, including city-owned property;
4. A description of the design plan proposed by the applicant in the city. Applicant must identify its utilization
of the most recent technological design, including microcell design, as part of the design plan. The applicant
must demonstrate the need for towers and why design alternatives, such as the use of microcell, cannot be utilized
to accomplish the provision of the applicant’s telecommunications services;
5. An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to obtain permission
to install or co-locate the applicant’s telecommunications facilities on city-owned towers or usable antenna
support structures located within a one-half (½) mile radius of the proposed tower site;
6. An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to install or
co-locate the applicant’s telecommunications facilities on towers or usable antenna support structures owned by
other persons located within a one-half (½) mile radius of the proposed tower site;
7. Written technical evidence from an engineer(s) that the proposed tower or telecommunications facilities
cannot be installed or co-located on another person’s tower or usable antenna support structures owned by other
entities located within a one-half (½) mile radius of the proposed tower site;
8. A written statement from an engineer(s) that the construction and placement of the tower will not interfere
with public safety communications and the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television,
or other communications services enjoyed by adjacent residential and nonresidential properties;
9. Written, technical evidence from an engineer(s) that the proposed structure meets the standards set forth
in Section 21-606 of this code;
10. Written, technical evidence from a qualified engineer(s) acceptable to the fire marshall and the building
official that the proposed site of the tower or telecommunications facilities does not pose a risk of explosion, fire,
or other danger to life or property due to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials
such as LP gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas, or corrosive or other dangerous chemicals;
11. In order to assist city staff and the planning and zoning board in evaluating visual impact, the applicant
shall submit color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the tower with a photo-realistic representation
of the proposed tower as it would appear viewed from the closest residential property and from adjacent roadways;
12. The act gives the FCC sole jurisdiction of the field of regulation of RF emissions and does not allow the
city to condition or deny on the basis of RF impacts the approval of any telecommunications facilities (whether
mounted on towers or antenna support structures) which meet FCC standards. In order to provide information to
its citizens, the city shall make available upon request copies of ongoing FCC information and RF emission
standards for telecommunications facilities transmitting from towers or antenna support structures. Applicants
shall be required to submit information on the proposed power density of their proposed telecommunications
facilities and demonstrate how this meets FCC standards.
F. The planning and zoning board may require an applicant to supplement any information that the planning
and zoning board considers inadequate or that the applicant has failed to supply. The planning and zoning
board may deny an application on the basis that the applicant has not satisfactorily supplied the information required
in this subsection. Applications shall be reviewed by the city in a prompt manner and all decisions shall
be supported in writing setting forth the reasons for approval or denial. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-605 Setbacks.
A. All towers up to one hundred (100) feet in height shall be setback on all sides a distance equal to the underlying
setback requirement in the applicable zoning district. Towers in excess of one hundred (100) feet in
height shall be setback one additional foot per each foot of tower height in excess of one hundred (100) feet.
B. Setback requirements for towers shall be measured from the base of the tower to the property line of the
parcel of land on which it is located.
C. Setback requirements may be modified, as provided in Section 12-618(B)(1) of this code, when placement
of a tower in a location which will reduce the visual impact can be accomplished. For example, adjacent to
trees which may visually hide the tower. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-606 Structural requirements.
All towers must be designed and certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and, at minimum, in conformance
with the Building Code, and any other code in the Bristow code of ordinances as well as those outline
in this chapter. All towers in operation shall be fixed to land. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-607 Separation or buffer requirements.
For the purpose of this section, the separation distances between towers shall be measured by drawing or following
a straight line between the base of the existing or approved structure and the proposed base, pursuant to a
site plan of the proposed tower. Tower separation distances from residentially zoned lands shall be measured
from the base of a tower to the closest point of residentially zoned property. The minimum tower separation distances
from residentially zoned land and from other towers shall be calculated and applied irrespective of city
jurisdictional boundaries.
A. Towers shall be separated from all residentially zoned lands by a minimum of two hundred (200) feet or
two hundred percent (200%) of the height of the proposed tower, whichever is greater.
B. Proposed towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from existing tower or towers
which have a development permit but are not yet constructed at the time a development permit is granted
pursuant to this code:
1. Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other towers, whether monopole, self-supporting
lattice, or guyed, by a minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) feet;
2. Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be separated from all other self-supporting or
guyed towers by a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet;
3. Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be separated from all monopole towers by a
minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) feet. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-608 Method of determining tower height.
Measurement of tower height for the purpose of determining compliance with all requirements of this section
shall include the tower structure itself, the base pad, and any other telecommunications facilities attached thereto
which extend more than twenty (20) feet over the top of the tower structure itself. Tower height shall be measured
from grade. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-609 Illumination.
Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
Upon commencement of construction of a tower, in cases where there are residential uses located within a distance
which is three hundred percent (300%) of the height of the tower from the tower and when required by
federal law, dual mode lighting shall be requested from the FAA. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-610 Exterior finish.
Towers not requiring FAA painting or marking shall have an exterior finish which enhances compatibility
with adjacent land uses, as approved by the appropriate reviewing body. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-611 Landscaping.
All landscaping on a parcel of land containing towers, antenna support structures, or telecommunications facilities
shall be in accordance with the applicable landscaping requirements in the zoning district where the
tower, antenna support structure, or telecommunications facilities are located. The city may require landscaping
in excess of the requirements in the city code in order to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses. Landscaping
shall be installed on the outside of any fencing. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-612 Access.
A parcel of land upon which a tower is located must provide access to at least one paved vehicular parking
space on site. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-613 Stealth design.
All towers which must be approved as a conditional use shall be of stealth design. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-614 Telecommunications facilities on antenna support structures.
Any telecommunications facilities which are not attached to a tower may be permitted on any antenna support
structure at least fifty (50) feet tall, regardless of the zoning restrictions applicable to the zoning district where
the structure is located. Telecommunications facilities are prohibited on all other structures. The owner of such
structure shall, by written certification to the code enforcement official, establish the following at the time plans
are submitted for a building permit:
A. That the height from grade of the telecommunications facilities shall not exceed the height from grade of
the antenna support structure by more than twenty (20) feet;
B. That any telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances, located above the primary roof of an
antenna support structure, are setback one foot from the edge of the primary roof for each one foot in height
above the primary roof of the telecommunications facilities. This setback requirement shall not apply to telecommunications
facilities and their appurtenances, located above the primary roof of an antenna support structure,
if such facilities are appropriately screened from view through the use of panels, walls, fences, or other
screening techniques approved by the city. Setback requirements shall not apply to stealth antennas which are
mounted to the exterior of antenna support structures below the primary roof, but which do not protrude more
than eighteen (18) inches from the side of such an antenna support structure. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-615 Modification of towers.
A. A tower existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which was in compliance
with the city’s zoning regulations immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, may continue in existence as a nonconforming structure. Such nonconforming structures may be modified
or demolished and rebuilt without complying with any of the additional requirements of this section, except
for Sections 12-607, 12-616 and 12-617, provided in this code:
1. The tower is being modified or demolished and rebuilt for the sole purpose of accommodating, within
six (6) months of the completion of the modification or rebuild, additional telecommunications facilities comparable
in weight, size, and surface area to the discrete operating telecommunications facilities of any person currently
installed on the tower;
2. An application for a development permit is made to the planning and zoning board which shall have the
authority to issue a development permit without further approval. The grant of a development permit pursuant to
this section allowing the modification or demolition and rebuild of an existing nonconforming tower shall not be
considered a determination that the modified or demolished and rebuilt tower is conforming;
3. The height of the modified or rebuilt tower and telecommunications facilities attached thereto do not
exceed the maximum height allowed under this chapter.
B. Except as provided in this section, a nonconforming structure or use may not be enlarged, increased in
size, or discontinued in use for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days. This chapter shall not be
interpreted to legalize any structure or use existing at the time this chapter is adopted which structure or use is in
violation of the code prior to enactment of this chapter. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-616 Certifications and inspections.
A. All towers shall be certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and in conformance with the requirements
of the Building Code and all other construction standards set forth by the city’s code and federal and
state law. For new monopole towers, such certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to Section
12-604 of this chapter and every five (5) years thereafter. For existing monopole towers, certification shall be
submitted within sixty (60) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and then every five
(5) years thereafter. For new lattice or guyed towers, such certification shall be submitted with an application
pursuant to Section 12-604 of this chapter and every two (2) years thereafter. For existing lattice or guyed towers,
certification shall be submitted within sixty (60) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter and then every two (2) years thereafter. The tower owner may be required by the city to submit more
frequent certifications should there be reason to believe that the structural and electrical integrity of the tower is
jeopardized.
B. The city or its agents shall have authority to enter onto the property upon which a tower is located, between
the inspections and certifications required above, to inspect the tower for the purpose of determining
whether it complies with the Building Code and all other construction standards provided by the city code and
federal and state law.
C. The city reserves the right to conduct such inspections at any time, upon reasonable notice to the tower
owner. All expenses related to such inspections by the city shall be borne by the tower owner. (Ord. 43-050304 §
1 (part))
12-617 Maintenance.
A. Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and maintain in
use nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are
likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public.
B. Tower owners shall install and maintain towers, telecommunications facilities, wires, cables, fixtures,
and other equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code and all
FCC, state, and local regulations, and in such manner that will not interfere with the use of other property.
C. All towers, telecommunications facilities, and antenna support structures shall at all times be kept and
maintained in good condition, order, and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property
of any person.
D. All maintenance or construction of towers, telecommunications facilities, or antenna support structures
shall be performed by licensed maintenance and construction personnel.
E. All towers shall maintain compliance with current RF emission standards of the FCC.
F. In the event that the use of a tower is discontinued by the tower owner, the tower owner shall provide
written notice to the city of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. (Ord.
43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-618 Criteria for site plan development modifications.
A. Notwithstanding the tower requirements provided in this chapter, a modification to the requirements
may be approved by the planning and zoning board as a conditional use in accordance with the following:
1. In addition to the requirement for a tower application, the application for modification shall include the
following:
a. A description of how the plan addresses any adverse impact that might occur as a result of approving the
modification;
b. A description of off-site or on-site factors which mitigate any adverse impacts which might occur as a
result of the modification;
c. A technical study that documents and supports the criteria submitted by the applicant upon which the
request for modification is based. The technical study shall be certified by an engineer and shall document the
existence of the facts related to the proposed modifications and its relationship to surrounding rights-of-way and
properties;
d. For a modification of the setback requirement, the application shall identify all parcels of land where the
proposed tower could be located, attempts by the applicant to contract and negotiate an agreement for colocation,
and the result of such attempts;
e. The planning and zoning board may require the application to be reviewed by an independent engineer
under contract to the city to determine whether the antenna study supports the basis for the modification requested.
The cost of review by the city’s engineer shall be reimbursed to the city by the applicant.
2. The planning and zoning board shall consider the application for modification based on the following
criteria:
a. That the tower as modified will be compatible with and not adversely impact the character and integrity
of surrounding properties;
b. Off-site or on-site conditions exist which mitigate the adverse impacts, if any, created by the modification;
c. In addition, the board may include conditions on the site where the tower is to be located if such conditions
are necessary to preserve the character and integrity of the neighborhoods affected by the proposed tower
and mitigate any adverse impacts which arise in connection with the approval of the modification.
B. In addition to the requirements of subsection A of this section, in the following cases, the applicant must
also demonstrate, with written evidence, the following:
1. In the case of a requested modification to the setback requirement, Section 12-605 of this code, that the
setback requirement cannot be met on the parcel of land upon which the tower is proposed to be located and the
alternative for the person is to locate the tower at another site which is closer in proximity to a residentially
zoned land;
2. In the case of a request for modification to the separation and buffer requirements from other towers of
Section 12-607 of this code, that the proposed site is zoned “Industrial” or “Heavy Industrial” and the proposed
site is at least double the minimum standard for separation from residentially zoned lands as provided for in Section
12-607 of this code;
3. In the case of a request for modification of the separation and buffer requirements from residentially
zoned land of Section 12-607 of this code, if the person provides written technical evidence from an engineer(s)
that the proposed tower and telecommunications facilities must be located at the proposed site in order to meet
the coverage requirements of the applicant’s wireless communications system and if the person is willing to create
approved landscaping and other buffers to screen the tower from being visible to residentially zoned property;
4. In the case of a request for modification of the height limit for towers and telecommunications facilities
or to the minimum height requirements for antenna support structures, that the modification is necessary to: (i)
facilitate co-location of telecommunications facilities in order to avoid construction of a new tower; or (ii) to
meet the coverage requirements of the applicant’s wireless communications system, which requirements must be
documented with written, technical evidence from an engineer(s) that demonstrates that the height of the proposed
tower is the minimum height required to function satisfactorily, and no tower that is taller than such
minimum height shall be approved. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-619 Abandonment.
A. If any tower shall cease to be used for a period of three hundred sixty-five (365) consecutive days, the
city council shall notify the owner, with a copy to the applicant, that the site will be subject to a determination by
the city council that such site has been abandoned. The owner shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of said
notice to show, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the tower has been in use or under repair during the period.
If the owner fails to show that the tower has been in use or under repair during the period, the city council
shall issue a final determination of abandonment for the site. Upon issuance of the final determination of abandonment,
the owner shall, within seventy-five (75) days, dismantle and remove the tower.
B. To secure the obligation set forth in this section, the applicant and/or owner shall post a bond in the
minimum amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). Such amount may be modified by the city council
based on the anticipated cost of removal of the tower. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-620 Severability.
That if any clause, section, or other part of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be held invalid or unconstitutional
by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby,
but shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1 (part))
12-621 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. (Ord. 43-050304 § 1
(part))
PART 13
PUBLIC SAFETY
Chapters:
1 Fire Prevention
2 Fire Department
3 Civil Defense
4 Police Department
5 Civil Emergency Management Organization
Chapter 1
FIRE PREVENTION
Sections:
13-101 Adoption of Fire Prevention Code.
13-102 Fire department to enforce Fire Prevention Code.
13-103 Limits within which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited.
13-104 Limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted.
13-105 Limits in which storage of explosives and blasting agents are prohibited.
13-106 Dynamite, nitroglycerin, explosives prohibited.
13-107 Gasoline, benzene restrictions.
13-108 Modifications.
13-109 New materials, processes, or occupancies which may require permits.
13-110 Appeals.
13-111 Hazardous materials cleanup--Recovery of costs.
13-112 Penalties.
13-101 Adoption of Fire Prevention Code.
There is hereby adopted by the city council for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as Fire Prevention Code recommended
by the American Insurance Association, being particularly the latest edition, or the latest revision
thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by
this code, of which Fire Prevention Code not less than one copy has been and now is filed in the office of the city
clerk. The Fire Prevention Code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. From
the date on which this code shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the
city.
13-102 Fire department to enforce Fire Prevention Code.
A. The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the fire department of the city, under the supervision of
the chief of the fire department. The terms “Bureau of Fire Prevention” and “Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention,”
wherever found in the Fire Prevention Code, shall mean fire department and chief of the fire department,
respectively, of this city.
B. The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as may
from time to time be necessary.
13-103 Limits within which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited.
A. The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which storage of flammable liquids in outside
aboveground tanks is prohibited, shall be the city limits.
B. The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which new bulk plants for flammable liquids are
prohibited, shall be the city limits.
13-104 Limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted.
A. The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum has been
prohibited, shall be the city limits.
B. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to establish, erect, construct or enlarge a plant or place
of business where liquefied petroleum gas is to be manufactured, distributed or hauled within the city.
Cross Reference: See Sections 5-501 et seq. of this code for other provisions on liquefied petroleum gases.
13-105 Limits in which storage of explosives and blasting agents are prohibited.
The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited
shall be the city limits.
13-106 Dynamite, nitroglycerin, explosives prohibited.
A. No person shall keep or permit to be kept by themselves, agents, employees or other person in their interest,
within the limits of the city any dynamite caps, dynamite, nitroglycerine, gun powder, gun cotton, Hercules
or blasting powder, or permit the explosion of the same or any gun powder except as hereinafter set out.
B. Retail, hardware and other merchants may keep for the purpose of sale, gun powder, to be used in guns
and for no other purpose, dynamite caps and stock dynamite, not to exceed fifty (50) pounds of one-half pound
sticks, under the following restrictions in this section. No dynamite caps or detonating caps shall be kept within
twenty-five (25) feet of any dynamite or other explosive substance; bulk powder shall be kept in individual casks
or canisters for each grade of powder and the canisters shall not contain more than three (3) pounds each of
powder; all such supplies of explosives shall at all times be kept in safe, secure iron boxes or canisters completely
closed except when necessarily opened to remove desired quantities thereof. All containers within which
is kept any such explosives shall be plainly marked on the exterior thereof describing its contents.
C. It is unlawful for any person or persons to convey any nitroglycerine through the streets or alleys of the
city.
13-107 Gasoline, benzene restrictions.
A. No person without first obtaining a permit from the fire chief within the corporate limits of the city may
have, store, keep, manufacture, use or sell gasoline, benzene or naphtha, except as hereinafter provided, and then
only if kept in approved metal cans made for the purpose and free from leaks. Two (2) gallons or less may be
kept within a building without obtaining a permit therefor. No container shall be filled inside a building.
B. Application for a permit shall be made to the chief of the fire department in writing, and shall state location
of the building and the quantity of benzene, gasoline, naphtha it is desired to keep on storage or sale. No
provision in this chapter is intended to prohibit the carrying of gasoline in the storage tanks of automobiles or
other gasoline driven vehicles.
C. No permit shall be issued for the storage or keeping for sale or use of gasoline, benzene or naphtha, exceeding
ten (10) gallons in quantity, save in underground - (buried in the ground) - metal tanks with no opening
for drawing off contents below the level of the ground, but to be drawn from by pumps. Such tanks shall be constructed
of steel, or iron, galvanized or painted, and of suitable thickness and weight and shall be provided with a
fill and vent pipe, so arranged that the fill pipe cannot be opened without opening the vent; and, also, these pipes
shall be provided with a screen near the top and terminating in an iron cover, which shall be kept locked. The
tank shall be buried at least two (2) feet underground.
D. No dealer shall sell or deliver any quantity of gasoline, benzene or naphtha to any customer except in
closed metallic cans or containers.
E. Not exceeding fifty (50) gallons may be kept outside of a building, provided same be kept in closed
metal cans free from leak and under lock and key.
F. In case of drug, hardware or paint and oil stores only, not exceeding ten (10) gallons may be kept in the
store in approved metal cans made for the purpose and free of leaks.
G. Where the system known as gasoline vapor gas light is used in any building, the installations shall be
subject to inspection of the chief of the fire department. It is unlawful to install any such system without first
obtaining a permit therefor from him or to use such system until the inspection shall have been made and permission
granted for use of the same by the chief.
13-108 Modifications.
The chief of the fire department, with the approval of the city council, shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized
agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code; provided, that
the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of
such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the fire chief and council thereon shall be entered
upon the records of the council, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
13-109 New materials, processes, or occupancies which may require permits.
The mayor and chief of the fire department shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected
persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes, or occupancies, which shall require
permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the code. The fire chief shall post such list in a conspicuous
place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
13-110 Appeals.
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied
for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the
code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of
the fire department to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed.
13-111 Hazardous materials cleanup--Recovery of costs.
A. The fire chief is authorized to clean up or to abate the effects of any hazardous substance or waste
unlawfully, accidentally or negligently released, discharged or deposited upon or into any property or facilities
within the city. The following described persons shall be jointly and severally liable to the city for the payment
of all costs incurred by the city as a result of such cleanup or abatement activity:
1. The person or persons whose accidental, negligent or willful act or omission proximately caused such
release, discharge or deposit;
2. The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the hazardous substance or waste at the
time of such release, discharge or deposit without regard to fault or proximate cause; and
3. The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the container which held such hazardous
waste or substance at the time or immediately prior to such release, discharge or deposit without regard to fault
or proximate cause.
B. In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon order of the fire chief or other city
official, to clean up or abate the effects of any hazardous substance or waste negligently, unlawfully or accidentally
released, discharged or deposited upon or into any property or facilities within the city, the fire chief may
take such action as is necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy of the cleanup or abatement. The persons
described in subsection A of this section shall be liable to the city for all costs incurred as a result of such supervision
or verification.
C. For purposes of this section, “hazardous material” means any material that, because of its quality, concentration
or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant, present or potential hazard to human health
and safety or to the environment if released into the workplace or the environment.
D. for purposes of this section, costs incurred by the city shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited
to the following: actual labor costs of city personnel, including benefits and administrative overhead; costs of
equipment operations; costs of any contract labor or materials.
E. The remedies provided by this section shall be in addition to other remedies provided by law.
F. The authority to recover costs under this section shall not include actual fire suppression services which
are normally or usually provided by the fire department. (Ord. 1-17-95 § 1; Ord. No. 8-5-91)
13-112 Penalties.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted or fails to
comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation
of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or
permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as
affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein,
shall severally for every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of an offense, punishable by a
fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse
the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations
or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions
are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions.
Chapter 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sections:
Article A. Fire Department and Organization
13-201 Duties.
13-202 Appointment and removal.
13-203 Duties of the fire chief.
13-204 Duties of the assistant fire chief.
13-205 Volunteer department.
13-206 Secretary-treasurer of volunteer department.
13-207 New members of volunteer department.
13-208 Rules and regulations.
13-209 Refusing to obey orders at fires.
13-210 Protection of apparatus.
13-211 Repair of apparatus.
Article B. Fire Protection Outside Limits
13-220 Agreements authorized.
13-221 Fees without contract.
13-222 Contract, enrollment fee.
13-223 Contract may be refused.
13-224 Runs may be refused.
13-225 Article incorporated in contract.
13-226 Contract term.
13-227 No liability.
13-228 Calls outside limits.
13-229 Pension benefits.
Article A. Fire Department and Organization
13-201 Duties.
It is the duty of the fire department, among others, to extinguish fires; to rescue persons endangered by fire; to
resuscitate, and to administer first aid to persons injured in or about burning structures, or elsewhere in case of
an emergency; to promote fire prevention; and unless otherwise provided, to enforce all ordinances relating to
fires, fire prevention, and safety of persons from fire and explosions in theaters, stores, and other public buildings.
State Law Reference: Fire departments generally, 11 O.S. Sections 29-101 et seq.
13-202 Appointment and removal.
The chief shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the consent and confirmation of the council and shall
serve for an indefinite term, subject to removal as provided in this code or by applicable law.
13-203 Duties of the fire chief.
A. The chief is at the head of the department, subject to the laws of the state, ordinances of the city, and the
rules and regulations herein adopted. He shall:
1. Be responsible for the general condition and efficient operation of the department, the training of members,
and the performance of all other duties imposed upon him;
2. Have power to inspect or cause to be inspected by members of the department, the fire hydrants, cisterns
and other sources of water supply at least twice each year;
3. Maintain a library or file of publications on fire prevention and fire protection and shall make use of it to
the best advantage of all members;
4. Make every effort to attend all fires and direct the officers and members in the performance of their duties;
5. See that the citizens are kept informed on fire hazards in the community and on the activities of the department;
6. See that each fire is carefully investigated to determine its cause, and in the case of suspicion of incendiarism
shall notify proper authorities and secure and preserve all possible evidence for future use in the case;
7. Adopt all prudent measures for the prevention of fires, and whenever he has reason to believe that the
safety of property demands it, he and his authorized representatives shall have reasonable access in the daytime
to any house, building or premises in this city and may give directions for correcting or removing hazards or violations
as he shall deem proper. Such directions shall be obeyed and complied with by the person or persons so
directed immediately at their expense;
8. Keep a record of all fires occurring within this city in a suitable book, to be provided for that purpose,
showing the estimated value of the loss or damage to property, the amount of insurance, the cause and origin of
fire, and the names of the firemen attending, and the expenses incurred to the department thereby; and
9. Prepare and keep a complete inventory of all property belonging to the fire department, and shall at the
expiration of his term turn over such inventory and all such property to his successor, together with all books,
records, reports and data of such department. (Prior Code, Article E)
13-204 Duties of the assistant fire chief.
In the absence of the chief, the assistant chief on duty shall command the department and be held responsible
therefor in all respects with the full powers and responsibilities of the chief. (Prior Code, Article E)
13-205 Volunteer department.
The company officers of the volunteer department shall be selected upon their ability to meet the following
requirements:
1. Their knowledge of fire fighting;
2. Their leadership ability; and
3. Their knowledge of fire fighting equipment. (Prior Code, Article E)
State Law Reference: Volunteer departments, 11 O.S. Sections 29-201 et seq.
13-206 Secretary-treasurer of volunteer department.
One member of the volunteer department elected by the fire department shall be secretary-treasurer. His duties
shall consist of the following:
1. Calling the roll at the opening of each meeting;
2. Keeping the minutes of each meeting; and
3. Collecting the money due the department by the members. (Prior Code, Article E)
13-207 New members of volunteer department.
A. All new members shall be on probation for one year after their appointment.
B. New volunteer members upon completion of their probation period must be approved by the majority of
the fire department. (Prior Code, Article E)
13-208 Rules and regulations.
The volunteer fire department shall be subject to the following rules and regulations which shall be incorporated
in the bylaws of the department:
1. All volunteer firefighters are required, when notified, to respond to alarms of fire and other emergencies;
2. He is required to be present at all regular meetings, call meetings and schools presented for the benefit of
the firefighters;
3. There shall be at least one regular business meeting each month;
4. Any volunteer firefighter having two (2) unexcused absences in succession or three (3) unexcused absences
in a period of three (3) months will be dropped from the fire department rolls;
5. Volunteer firefighters leaving the city for an extended period of time will be required to notify the chief;
6. Any volunteer firefighter refusing to attend training classes provided for him will be dropped; and
7. Any volunteer member of the fire department shall be dropped from the rolls for the following offenses:
a. Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
b. Any act of insubordination;
c. Neglect of duty;
d. Any violation of rules and regulations governing the fire department; or
e. Conviction of a felony. (Prior Code, Article E)
13-209 Refusing to obey orders at fires.
It is the duty of every person at a fire to observe and obey the lawful orders of any public officer or firefighter
of this city, and to offer no resistance to, or to otherwise interfere with the officer and firefighters or any company
of firefighters, in the performance of their duties at any fire within the limits of this city.
13-210 Protection of apparatus.
It is unlawful for any person, without authority, to take, remove, or in any manner disturb, molest or interfere
with any hydrants, hose, hose cart, hook and ladder vehicle, ladder or any apparatus or tools to be used in connection
with the fire department.
13-211 Repair of apparatus.
The chief shall report to the city council any necessary repairs, alterations or improvements, needed by the fire
department, with an estimate of their probable cost, and shall superintend the making of such repairs, alterations
and improvements, and, in case any apparatus shall become disabled for immediate use, he shall repair the same
and report his action to the council.
Article B. Fire Protection Outside Limits
13-220 Agreements authorized.
The city clerk of the city is authorized to enter into contracts with individuals, firms, private corporations or
associations, hereinafter referred to as “customers” or “customer” for fire protection for structures outside the
corporate limits of the city in compliance with the terms of this article. (Ord. No. 607, 1/76)
State Law Reference: Fire calls outside limits, 11 O.S. Section 29-106.
13-221 Fees without contract.
If no such contract shall be entered unto with the city, then there shall be paid to the city the sum of six hundred
dollars ($600.00) per unit of equipment used per hour, with a minimum charge of one thousand two hundred
dollars ($1,200.00) per run made by the fire department to the individual’s property when the run is made at
the request of such individual, a member of such individual’s family, individual’s agent, or a member of the public
acting under the justified belief that there is a reasonable basis to fear damage to the customer’s property by
fire. The fee provided herein shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the run. (Ord. No. 85-10,
10/21/85: Ord. 38-030104 § 1)
13-222 Contract, enrollment fee.
A. Commencing January 1, 2004 at 12:01 a.m., and continuing until June 30, 2004, at 11:59 p.m., the contract
fee for such period shall be forty dollars ($40.00). Upon the execution of a contract as provided in Section
13-220 of this code, together with payment of the sum of forty dollars ($40.00), then the fees set forth in Section
13-221 of this code shall not be assessed to such customer during such period.
B. Commencing June 30, 2004, at 11:59 p.m., and continuing yearly thereafter, the annual contract fee shall
be one hundred dollars ($100.00). The term of such annual contracts shall be from June 30th at 11:59 p.m., until
the following June 30th at 11:59 p.m. Upon the execution of a contract as provided in Section 13-220 of this
code together with payment of the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), then the fees set forth in Section 13-
221 of this code shall not be assessed to such customer during the annual term set forth herein. (Ord. No. 85-10,
10/21/85; Ord. No. 1-9-89; Ord. No. 1-4-94: Ord. 29-110303 § 1)
13-223 Contract may be refused.
No such contract shall be entered into when, in the opinion of the city clerk, the location of the customer’s
property is such that effective service cannot be given customer or the giving of such service would involve a
hazard to the fire equipment of the city or would impair the fire protection service afforded the citizens of the
city. (Ord. No. 607, 1/76)
13-224 Runs may be refused.
The fire chief is authorized to refuse to make fire runs to customers outside the city when in his judgment it is
not expedient to do so because of conditions involving equipment, personnel, road conditions, fires, or other related
or nonrelated matters. (Ord. No. 607, 1/76)
13-225 Article incorporated in contract.
All contracts entered into pursuant to this article shall have attached to them a copy of this article and shall
specifically incorporate the provisions hereof. (Ord. No. 607, 1/76)
13-226 Contract term.
Repealed by Ordinance Number 37-030104 § 1.
(Ord. No. 85-10, 10/21/85: Ord. 37-030104 § 1)
13-227 No liability.
The city shall act in good faith in providing services under this article. Neither the city nor its officers or
agents shall be responsible for damages to customers or members of the public arising out of any acts or omissions
connected with this article. (Ord. No. 607, 1/76)
13-228 Calls outside limits.
The fire chief may authorize runs to be made outside the city limits of the city when he believes that there exists
a condition that endangers the life or lives of members of the public. (Ord. No. 607, 1/76)
13-229 Pension benefits.
All firefighters of the fire department of the city making runs under the provisions of this article shall be serving
in their regular line of duty, and, while they shall receive no additional compensation, shall be entitled to all
benefits of any fire pension and relief fund in the same manner as if the run were within the city. (Ord. No. 607,
1/76)
Chapter 3
CIVIL DEFENSE
Sections:
Article A. Civil Defense Officers and Organization
13-301 Purpose of civil defense organization.
13-302 Department of civil defense created.
13-303 Director of civil defense; powers and duties.
13-304 Plans, information, records.
13-305 Civil defense; emergency powers.
13-306 Enforcement of laws and ordinances.
13-307 Service without compensation; not liable for injuries.
Article B. Civil Emergencies
13-310 Definitions.
13-311 Proclamation of mayor.
13-312 Curfew powers.
13-313 Other emergency powers.
13-314 Penalty.
Article A. Civil Defense Officers and Organization
13-301 Purpose of civil defense organization.
The purpose of this chapter is to create a civil defense organization for the city to be prepared for, and to function
in the event of, emergencies endangering the lives and property of the people of such city. The duty of such
civil defense organization shall be the protection of the lives and health of the citizens of the city and of property
rights, both private and public, and to perform all functions necessary and incident thereto. (Prior Code, Chapter
1)
State Law Reference: Local civil defense organizations, 11 O.S. Sections 683.11, 683.12.
13-302 Department of civil defense created.
There is hereby established under the executive branch of the government of the city a deportment of civil
defense, which shall consist of:
1. A director of civil defense who shall be appointed by the mayor of the city and serve at his pleasure; and
2. A civil defense advisory committee. This committee shall consist of the mayor as chairman and five (5)
members appointed by the mayor and serving at his pleasure. The committee shall select from its members a
vice-chairman and secretary. It shall hold such meetings as are directed by the mayor or the director of civil defense.
Its function shall be to act in an advisory capacity as needed or requested by the mayor or the director of
civil defense. (Prior Code, Chapter 1)
13-303 Director of civil defense; powers and duties.
The director of civil defense shall be the executive head of the department of civil defense, and shall be responsible
for carrying out the civil defense program of the city. He shall serve without compensation but may be
reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of his duties. It is the duty of the director of civil defense,
as soon as practicable after his appointment, to perfect an organization to carry out the purposes set forth in this
chapter. He shall have all necessary power and authority to form committees or other bodies and to appoint and
designate the chairman or chief officer of such bodies as may be necessary to perfect such an organization. He
shall have such further duty and responsibility to cooperate with all civil defense agencies of other governmental
units including the state and federal government. (Prior Code, Chapter 1)
13-304 Plans, information, records.
The director of civil defense is further authorized to formulate written plans and gather information and keep
written records thereof to govern the functions of the civil defense organization. (Prior Code, Chapter 1)
13-305 Civil defense; emergency powers.
In the event of an enemy-caused emergency or emergency resulting from natural causes, the director of civil
defense, after due authorization from the mayor of the city, shall have the power and authority to enforce all
rules and regulations relating to civil defense and, if necessary take control of transportation, communications,
stocks of fuel, food, clothing, medicine, and public utilities for the purpose of protecting the civilian population.
He shall cooperate in every way with the activities of other governmental agencies or civil defense organizations.
If required by the mayor, he shall have control over any and all funds allocated from any source for the
purpose of alleviating distress conditions in the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 1)
13-306 Enforcement of laws and ordinances.
The director of civil defense and other members of the civil defense organization created by him shall have
the power and authority to enforce the laws of the state and ordinances of the city during the period of emergency,
and shall at such time have the further power to make arrests for violations of such laws or ordinances.
(Prior Code, Chapter 1)
13-307 Service without compensation; not liable for injuries.
All members of the civil defense organization created hereunder shall serve without compensation; and the
city shall not be liable for any personal injury received by any member of such organization while acting in line
of duty. (Prior Code, Chapter 1)
Article B. Civil Emergencies
13-310 Definitions.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, “civil emergency” is defined to be:
1. A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force of violence or any threat to use force
if accompanied by immediate power to execute by three (3) or more persons acting together without authorization
of law; or
2. Any natural disaster or man-made calamity including flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake
or explosion within the corporate limits of the city resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of
property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, “curfew” is defined as a prohibition against any person or persons walking,
running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises
within the corporate limits of the city excepting persons officially designated to duty with reference to the civil
emergency.
13-311 Proclamation of mayor.
When in the judgment of the mayor a civil emergency as defined herein is deemed to exist, he shall forthwith
proclaim in writing the existence of same. (Prior Code, Chapter 12)
13-312 Curfew powers.
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the mayor, he may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical
areas of the city or to the city as a whole, as he deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of
the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. (Prior Code, Chapter 12)
13-313 Other emergency powers.
After proclamation of a civil emergency, the mayor of the city may order, in the interest of public safety and
welfare:
1. The closing of all retail liquor stores;
2. The closing of all beer taverns;
3. The closing of all private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor or
beer is permitted;
4. The discontinuance of the sale of beer;
5. The discontinuance of the selling, distribution or giving away of gasoline or other liquid flammable or
combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
6. The closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution
or dispensing of liquid flammable or combustible products;
7. The discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of
any character whatsoever;
8. The closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution,
dispensing or giving away of firearms and/or ammunition; and
9. Other actions as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property, or any or all of the
above. (Prior Code, Chapter 12)
13-314 Penalty.
Any person violating the provisions of this article or executive order issued pursuant thereto shall be guilty of
an offense against the city and shall be punishable by a fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. (Prior
Code, Chapter 12)

Chapter 4
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Sections:
Article A. Police
13-401 Police chief; appointment, removal.
13-402 Powers and duties.
13-403 To serve warrants, processes and notices.
13-404 Emergency duties in other cities.
Article B. Auxiliary Police
13-410 Auxiliary police established.
13-411 Rules and regulations.
13-412 Selection, commissioning and authority of members.
13-413 Compensation of members; eligibility for pension.
Article A. Police
13-401 Police chief; appointment, removal.
The chief of police shall be appointed by the mayor, with approval of the council, and removed in manner
provided by law.
State Law Reference: City police departments generally, 11 O.S. Sections 34-101 et seq.
13-402 Powers and duties.
The police chief and other police officers shall constitute the police department and shall have the powers and
duties prescribed by Sections 34-101 et seq. of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes and other provisions of law or
by ordinance.
13-403 To serve warrants, processes and notices.
The chief of police and other police officers shall serve all warrants, orders, writs, processes and notices to
them directly by the municipal judge, mayor, council, board of health, superintendent of health, or other officer
of this city charged with the duty of enforcing the laws of this city.
13-404 Emergency duties in other cities.
A. Approval is hereby given for service of members of the regular police department of this city as police
officers of any other city or town, in an emergency situation, in the state, not more than one hundred (100) miles
distant from this city, when such service is requested by the mayor or chief of police of the city or town.
B. Requests for service under this section shall be made by writing or by telephone, or other means of
communications, to the mayor and, in his absence, the vice mayor, who, if he determines that the request can be
granted consistently with the continuance of the proper police protection to the inhabitants of this city, shall direct
the chief of police to furnish the number of officers requested and to arrange their transportation to the requesting
municipality. (Prior Code, Chapter 12)
State Law Reference: Mutual aid, law enforcement, 11 O.S. Section 34-103.
Article B. Auxiliary Police
13-410 Auxiliary police established.
For the purpose of assisting the regularly constituted law enforcement officers of the city, the establishment,
organization and operation of an auxiliary police force for the city is hereby authorized and directed. There shall
be a sufficient number of auxiliary police officers allowed, so as to enable the chief of police to adequately supplement
the activities and functions of the police department. (Prior Code, Article F: Ord. 55-011805 § 1)
State Law Reference: Auxiliary police to have same training as regular police, 11 O.S. Section 34-101.
13-411 Rules and regulations.
A. The police chief of the city shall as soon as practicable hereafter promulgate rules and regulations for the
organization, operation and maintenance of the auxiliary police force authorized in this article. All members
shall meet the same requirements as city police officers.
B. When such rules and regulations are set by the city police chief they shall be reduced to writing and be
approved by the mayor and city council and the same shall thereupon govern the membership and functions of
such auxiliary police force. (Prior Code, Article F; Ord. 54-011805 § 1)
13-412 Selection, commissioning and authority of members.
A. The members of the city auxiliary police force shall be selected by the police chief. The mayor, acting
upon the recommendation of the chief, is authorized to nominate to the city council members for the auxiliary
police force, but members of the auxiliary police force shall not be authorized to act in such capacity except after
due call.
B. The members of the auxiliary police force shall act as officers of the city only upon due call issued by
the police chief or his authorized agent for such period as the city chief shall designate. While upon active duty
the members of the auxiliary police force, holding special officer’s commissions, are hereby authorized to make
arrests for violation of the provisions of this code and other laws and regulations. (Prior Code, Article F)
13-413 Compensation of members; eligibility for pension.
Members of the auxiliary police force of the city shall serve without compensation and shall not be considered
members of the police department of the city and they shall not under any conditions become eligible for a pension
from the police pension and retirement fund of the city, but they shall be covered by worker’s compensation.
(Prior Code, Article F)
Chapter 5
CIVIL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION
Sections:
13-501 Purpose of civil emergency management organization.
13-502 Definitions.
13-503 Co-directors--Generally.
13-504 Co-directors--Planning, training and functions.
13-505 Co-directors’ general powers during emergencies.
13-506 Other functions.
13-507 Authorization and termination of emergency powers.
13-508 Proclamation of state of emergency.
13-509 Mayor’s emergency powers.
13-510 Riots.
13-511 Civil emergency management staff.
13-512 Rules and regulations.
13-513 Selection and authority of members.
13-514 Compensation of members; eligibility for pension.
13-515 Identification of members.
13-501 Purpose of civil emergency management organization.
The purpose of this chapter is to create a civil emergency management organization for the city to be prepared
for, and to function in the event of emergencies endangering the lives and property of the people of the city. The
duty of the civil emergency management organization shall be the protection of the lives and health of the citizens
of the city and of property and property rights, both public and private, and to perform all functions necessary
and incident thereto. (Ord. 76-091806 § 1)
13-502 Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except where the context clearly indicated a different meaning:
“Civil emergency management” means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions
other than functions for which primary responsibility is assigned elsewhere by federal, state or local law or ordinance,
to protect the public peace, health and safety and to preserve lives and property in the city during an
emergency or catastrophe in or near the city and involving imminent or actual peril to life and property in the
city. The functions include admission, organization, planning, recruiting, training, education, information, welfare
service, relief service, police service, warden service, fire service, rescue service, medical service, health
service, transportation service, communication service, streets and sewer service, utility service, general engineering
service, radiological service, plant protection service, supply service, mutual aid, mobile support,
evacuation, public shelter use and management, warning, and all other functions necessary or incidental to the
preparation for and the carrying out of the foregoing functions.
“Co-directors” means the co-directors of the civil emergency management organization.
“Curfew” means a prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any
alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises, excepting persons officially designated to duty with
reference to the emergency.
“Disaster” means any occurrence or catastrophe resulting in or imminently threatening substantial damage or
injury to persons or property in the city whether such occurrence is caused by an act of nature or of man, including
an enemy of the United States.
“Disorderly” means a course of conduct by a person which:
1. Causes public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, or recklessly creates risk thereof by:
a. Engaging in fighting or in violent, tumultuous, or threatening behavior;
b. Making an unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance, gesture, or display, or addressing abusive
language to any person present; or
c. Dispersing any lawful procession or meeting of persons, not being an officer of this city and without
lawful authority.
2. Creating a hazardous or physically offensive condition which serves no legitimate purpose.
Engages with at last one other person in a course of disorderly conduct as defined in subsection 1 of this definition
which is likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, and refuses or
knowingly fails to obey an order to disperse, made by a peace officer to the participants.
“State of emergency” means an emergency and shall be deemed to exist whenever, by reason of any disaster,
such proper authority proclaims same to exist as provided in this chapter, and such state of emergency shall continue
until terminated by proclamation of proper authority as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 77-091806 § 1)
13-503 Co-directors--Generally.
The chief of police and the fire chief of the city are hereby designated as co-directors. The co-directors shall
serve as executive heads of the civil emergency management organization. The co-directors shall perform such
other duties pertaining to safety as may be assigned by the mayor. (Ord. 78-091806 § 1)
13-504 Co-directors--Planning, training and functions.
Prior to an emergency, and within limits of any funds appropriated or received by grant thereof, the codirectors
shall:
A. Prepare an operational plan of the departments of city government which shall provide a coordinated
assignment of activities and responsibilities to each department in the event of a disaster or state of emergency as
provided in this chapter;
B. Establish necessary emergency operation centers;
C. Establish public warning systems and acquire and cause to be installed such devices as may be necessary
to implement such systems;
D. Establish and carry out recruiting and training program for purposes of developing qualified civil emergency
management volunteer works;
E. Plan, supervise and conduct drills and exercises under simulated disaster conditions;
F. Plan and develop mutual aid arrangements for reciprocal civil emergency management assistance consistent
with state and federal plans of civil emergency management;
G. Plan and develop a public shelter system to include identification, marking and stocking of public shelters
and shelter use and management training. (Ord. 79-091806 § 1)
13-505 Co-directors’ general powers during emergencies.
If an actual emergency is proclaimed by the mayor or the city council, as provided in this chapter, the codirectors,
with the approval of the mayor or the city council as provided in this chapter, may exercise the powers
to enforce all rules and regulations relating to civil emergency management during such emergency.
If the co-directors are acting under the authority of the mayor as an agent of the governor of this state, then the
co-directors may take control of all means of transportation and communications, all stocks of fuel, food, clothing,
medicine and supplies and all facilities, including buildings, and plants, and exercise all power necessary to
secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, to the extent as provided by law. (Ord. 80-091806 § 1)
13-506 Other functions.
The co-directors shall properly coordinate the activities of the civil emergency management organization.
They are specifically charged in such emergency with the collection, evaluation and dissemination of information
to all agencies both public and private participating in the city’s civil emergency management or cooperating
in any such emergency.
The co-directors shall have the power to recommend appropriate action, but they shall not otherwise exercise
control over the participating agencies.
The co-directors shall recommend to the city council the allocation of any funds received from the federal or
state governments or from any other source to alleviate distress and aid in restoring normal conditions.
The co-directors shall prepare and present an annual budget for the civil emergency management organization.
The prepared budget will be presented to the mayor and the city council, at a minimum, in a timely manner
each year. (Ord. 81-091806 § 1)
13-507 Authorization and termination of emergency powers.
The emergency powers conferred in this chapter shall be effective immediately upon the issuance of a proclamation
of the existence of an emergency.
A. By a proper officer or agency of the state as provided by law; or
B. By a resolution of the city council if the council finds that the disaster causing the emergency is local to
the city and its environs and is locally controllable, and it is so noted in the resolution.
If the urgency of the situation requires, the mayor is authorized to declare the existence of the emergency until
such time as the city council may meet and determine that a state of emergency exists. The exercise of the emergency
powers conferred in this chapter is limited to the duration of the emergency as determined according to
law by the provisions of this chapter.
During the period of such local emergency, the exercise of emergency powers shall be in conformity with all
applicable provisions of the city charter.
Locally proclaimed states of emergency shall be terminated upon adoption by the city council of a resolution
of termination not in conflict with state laws. (Ord. 82-091806 § 1)
13-508 Proclamation of state of emergency.
The mayor, after finding that a public disorder, disaster or riot exists which affects the life, health, property or
the public peace, may proclaim a state of emergency in the area affected. The proclamation of a state of emergency
and other proclamations issued pursuant to this section shall be in writing and shall be signed by the
mayor and filed with the city clerk.
The mayor shall give as much public notice as practical through the news media of the issuance of proclamations
pursuant to this section.
The state of emergency shall cease to exist upon the issuance of a proclamation of the mayor declaring its
termination; provided that the mayor shall terminate the proclamation when order has been restored in the affected
areas. (Ord. 83-091806 § 1)
13-509 Mayor’s emergency powers.
A. The mayor, during the existence of a state of emergency, by proclamation, may in the area affected by
public disorder, disaster or riot at the time the proclamation is issued, prohibit:
1. Any person being on the public streets, or in the public parks or at any other public place during the
hours declared by the mayor to be a period of curfew;
2. A designated number of persons from assembling or gathering on the public streets, parks or other areas
either public or private;
3. The manufacture, transfer, use, possession or transportation of a Molotov Cocktail or any other device,
instrument or object designed to explode or produce uncontained combustion;
4. The transporting, possessing or using of gasoline, kerosene or combustible, flammable, or explosive liquids
or materials in a glass or uncapped container of any kind except in connection with the normal operation of
motor vehicles, normal home use or legitimate commercial use;
5. The possession of firearms or any other deadly weapon by a person (other than a law enforcement officer)
in a place other than that person’s place of residence or business;
6. The sale, purchase or dispensing of alcoholic beverages (including 3.2 beer);
7. The sale, purchase or dispensing of other commodities or goods, as he/she reasonably believes should be
prohibited to help preserve and maintain life, health, property or the public peace;
8. The use of certain streets, highways or public ways by the public; and
9. Such other activities as he/she reasonably believes should be prohibited to help preserve and maintain
life, health, property or the public peace.
In imposing the restrictions provided in this section, the mayor may impose them for such times, upon such
conditions, with such exceptions and in such areas as he/she from time to time deems necessary. (Ord. 84-
091806 § 1)
13-510 Riots.
No three (3) or more persons shall assemble together or act in concert to do any act with force or violence
against the peace, or to the terror of others or make any movement or preparation thereof. No person who is present
at the meeting or assembly shall fail to endeavor to prevent the commission or preparation of such an act.
(Ord. 85-091806 § 1)
13-511 Civil emergency management staff.
For the purpose of assisting the co-directors of the civil emergency management organization, the establishment,
organization and operation of staffing is hereby authorized and directed. There shall be a sufficient number
of staff allowed, so as to enable the co-directors to adequately perform the functions and operations of the civil
emergency management organization. (Ord. 86-091806 § 1)
13-512 Rules and regulations.
A. The co-directors shall as soon as practicable hereafter promulgate rules and regulations for the organization,
operation and maintenance of the staff of the civil emergency management organization organized in this
chapter. All members shall meet the requirements set forth in the prescribed rules and regulations.
B. When such rules and regulations are set by the co-directors, they shall be reduced to writing and be approved
by the mayor and the city council and the same shall thereupon govern the membership and functions of
such civil emergency management staff. (Ord. 87-091806 § 1)
13-513 Selection and authority of members.
A. The staff of the civil emergency management organization shall be selected by the co-directors, in a
manner suitable for the position. The mayor, acting upon the recommendation of the co-directors, is authorized
to nominate the city council members for the civil emergency management organization, but members of the
civil emergency management organization shall not be authorized to act in such capacity except after due call.
B. The members of the civil emergency management organization shall act only upon due call issued by the
co-directors or his authorized agent for such period as the co-directors shall designate. (Ord. 88-091806 § 1)
13-514 Compensation of members; eligibility for pension.
Members of the civil emergency management organization shall serve without compensation, including vehicle
expenses, and shall not be considered members of the police or fire departments of the city and they shall not
under any conditions become eligible for a pension from the police pension, fire pension and retirement fund of
the city, but they shall be covered by worker’s compensation. (Ord. 89-091806 § 1)
13-515 Identification of members.
The co-directors are authorized and directed to promulgate guidelines and standards for the proper identification
of staff and vehicles. (Ord. 90-091806 § 1)
PART 14
STREETS AND PUBLIC WORKS
Chapters:
1 General Provisions
2 Excavations in Streets, Sidewalks
3 Sidewalks
4 Street Numbering
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
14-101 Trees and shrubbery to be trimmed.
14-102 Penalty for violation of above section.
14-103 Unlawful to injure trees and shrubbery.
14-104 Business use of streets prohibited.
14-105 Unlawful to obstruct unduly sidewalks and streets.
14-106 Unlawful to deposit trash upon streets or sidewalks.
14-107 Unlawful to play in streets.
14-108 Water from filling stations and other businesses.
14-109 Sidewalk or sidewalk area not to become a hazard.
14-110 Cutting curbs or city streets.
14-111 Penalty.
14-101 Trees and shrubbery to be trimmed.
The owner of any premises abutting on any street of this city shall trim all trees and shrubbery growing in the
parking, between the sidewalks and the roadway, of any such street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any
port of the premises adjacent to the sidewalks or any street or alley, in such manner that the boughs or limbs
thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient passage, view and travel along the streets, sidewalks, and alleys.
When such premises are occupied by some person other than the owner, such occupant shall trim the trees and
shrubbery in the same manner as hereinbefore required of the owner. Such trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed
so that the lowest branches or foliage shall not be lower than fourteen (14) feet above the roadway of a street or
alley, nor lower than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk.
14-102 Penalty for violation of above section.
Any owner or occupant who fails, refuses, or neglects to trim trees and shrubbery as provided in the above
section, after receiving five (5) days’ notice from the mayor, or his duly authorized representative, to do so, is
guilty of an offense against the city. Every day that the owner or occupant fails, refuses, or neglects to trim such
trees or shrubbery, after the expiration of the five (5) days’ notice, shall be a separate offense.
14-103 Unlawful to injure trees and shrubbery.
It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery on a street or alley in the city. This section shall
not prohibit the lawful and proper care and removal of such trees and shrubbery.
14-104 Business use of streets prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct, erect, place, operate, maintain, or permit to
exist any ice box, ice dock, gasoline pump, gasoline storage reservoir, tire rack, tire tools or equipment, water
hose connection, any mercantile business, or any tools, stand, equipment, merchandise, or appurtenances thereof,
aerials, poles, or wires therefor, whether permanent or temporary, or any other obstruction, upon any part of any
street, alley, boulevard, parkway, curbing, or parking within the city.
14-105 Unlawful to obstruct unduly sidewalks and streets.
It is unlawful for any person to use or obstruct the sidewalks of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly
with pedestrian traffic thereon, or to use or obstruct the streets and alleys of the city in any manner so as to
interfere unduly with lawful traffic and parking thereon.
14-106 Unlawful to deposit trash upon streets or sidewalks.
It is unlawful for any person to deposit, throw, or sweep into or upon a street, alley, parking, or sidewalk of
the city any paper, rubbish, grass, weeds, tree trimmings, dirt, trash, crates, boxes, or other refuse of any kind.
14-107 Unlawful to play in streets.
It is unlawful for any person to play in or upon streets and alleys of the city, except as may be otherwise authorized
by the city.
14-108 Water from filling stations and other businesses.
It is unlawful for any owner or operator of a filling station or other place of business, or any agent or employee
thereof, to cause or allow water, grease, or other fluid to flow or drain into, upon, over, or across any
sidewalk, parking, street, alley, or other public way.
14-109 Sidewalk or sidewalk area not to become a hazard.
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area to permit the
sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the property to become a hazard to persons using the sidewalk or sidewalk
area.
14-110 Cutting curbs or city streets.
No person or entity, other than a city employee acting in the scope and course of their employment, shall
physically cut or alter a curb, street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, pavement, or other public ground unless such person
or entity has fully complied with the provisions of Part 14, Chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 12-071601 § 1)
14-111 Penalty.
Any person violating the provisions hereof shall be deemed guilty of misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
Chapter 2
EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS, SIDEWALKS
Sections:
14-201 Permit.
14-202 Bond required.
14-203 Replacing street surface.
14-204 Guard rails.
14-205 Completion of work, return of deposit.
14-206 Pedestrians to be protected at all times.
14-207 Warning light required with excavations parallel to street.
14-201 Permit.
No person or entity shall excavate, cut, dig in, alter, change, or interfere with any curb, street, avenue, alley,
sidewalk, pavement, or other public ground, within the limits of this city for any purpose unless the provisions of
this chapter have been strictly complied with. Prior to the commencement of such, a person or entity shall obtain
a permit from the city clerk and deposit a cash or surety bond with the city clerk as set forth in Section 14-102 of
this code. (Ord. 12/1/80: Ord. 13-071601 § 1)
14-202 Bond required.
Prior to the commencement of the work described in this chapter, all persons or entities shall deposit with the
city clerk a cash or surety bond conditioned that the permittee shall replace and restore any such street, alley,
avenue, sidewalk, pavement, or other public grounds, in the same condition as the same was prior to the time of
the doing of any work as described in this chapter. The amount of such cash deposit or surety bond shall be fixed
as follows:
$6.00 per square foot for asphalt surfaces.
$8.00 per square foot for cement surfaces.
$4.00 per square foot for all other surfaces.
(Ord. 12/1/80: Ord. 14-071601 § 1)
14-203 Replacing street surface.
No person or entity shall commence the work described in this chapter until a permit is issued and a cash or
surety bond is deposited with the city clerk. Only upon the issuance of a permit shall a person or entity commence
such work. All such excavation, digging, altering, changing, and interference made, trenches, or ditches,
dug, shall upon completion of such work, be filled up, compacted to ninety percent (90%), and the surface on
such curbs, streets, alleys, avenues, sidewalks, pavement, or other public grounds placed in as durable, smooth,
and serviceable condition and in the same condition as it was before such work was done. In the event that the
surface of any paved curb, street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, pavement, or other public ground shall have been disturbed
by any such work, the pavement shall be replaced with like material and in all respects in the same condition
in which it was before such work was done. All such repairs shall be under the supervision and to the satisfaction
of the city inspector. (Ord. 12/1/80: Ord. 15-071601 § 1)
14-204 Guard rails.
It is the duty of any permittee during any excavation to safely guard the public against any and all accidents,
by providing suitable and adequate railings and guard devices around any such excavation, ditches, or trenches.
From sunset to sunrise, the permittee shall place a sufficient number of red lights, light barricades, or torches on
each side of such excavations, trenches, or ditches as it necessary to give adequate and suitable warning of danger.
(Ord. 12/1/80: Ord. 16-071601 § 1)
14-205 Completion of work, return of deposit.
The city inspector shall inspect the work performed pursuant to this chapter. The cash deposit or surety bond
shall be returned to the permittee only upon the satisfactory performance and completion of the work within
seven (7) days or such other times as the city inspector and the permittee agree. The city of Bristow shall be
permitted to utilize such portion of the cash deposit or surety bond as may be necessary for the purpose of restoring
the curb, street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, pavement, or other public ground to their former condition. (Ord.
12/1/80: Ord. 17-071601 § 1)
14-206 Pedestrians to be protected at all times.
Any person authorized to do work described in this chapter must at the time of the excavation, and until the
place is restored to its original condition, construct and maintain an appropriate bridge across the work for the
passage of pedestrians or travel at all times. At night such persons shall place and maintain a warning light on
each side of the bridge to protect the public, the bridge shall have banisters or guard rails, if any ditch is left open
on either side. Torches may be used in place of the warning lights herein required. (Ord. 12/1/80)
14-207 Warning light required with excavations parallel to street.
In all cases where the ditch or excavation runs parallel with the street either to the sidewalk in the street or a
driveway, warning lights shall be placed not less than twenty-five (25) feet apart and along the ditch. The lights
shall be maintained from sunset until daylight. (Ord. 12/1/80)
Chapter 3
SIDEWALKS
Sections:
14-301 Sidewalk construction grades.
14-302 Specifications for streets and sidewalks.
14-303 Permit required.
14-304 Penalty.
14-301 Sidewalk construction grades.
All sidewalks built or constructed in streets in the city shall be built in accordance with the grades as shown
on sidewalks grade profiles prepared by city’s constructing and supervising engineers and which are hereby
adopted and approved by the mayor and city council. (Prior Code, Chapter 27)
14-302 Specifications for streets and sidewalks.
Sidewalks constructed on any street, avenue, alley or public ground in the city and streets shall be constructed
according to specifications hereby adopted by the city and incorporated herein by reference: “Standard Specifications
for Highway Construction” issued by the Oklahoma State Department of Transportation, latest edition
thereof. (Prior Code, Chapter 27, as amended)
14-303 Permit required.
Before the sidewalk contractor or individual shall commence the construction of any sidewalk on the street,
alley, avenue, or public ground, in the city he shall first make application to the city clerk, in writing, for a special
permit to do the work. Before special permit will be issued, he shall deposit with the city clerk of the city, a
sum as set by the council from time to time by motion or resolution to cover the cost of giving the grade and inspecting
the work. The contractor or individual shall notify the city clerk when the work is to be started. All
sidewalks shall be built and constructed under the inspection of an engineer appointed by the city. (Prior Code,
Chapter 27)
14-304 Penalty.
Any person, persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 27)
Chapter 4
STREET NUMBERING
Sections:
14-401 Division streets designated.
14-402 Block numbers extending out.
14-403 Assignment of numbers in blocks.
14-404 Type letters.
14-405 Number expense of owner.
14-406 Planning commission to assign numbers.
14-401 Division streets designated.
For the purpose of establishing a system of numbering business houses and residences in the city there shall
be established two (2) division streets as follows: Main Street, which shall divide the city east and west, and
Sixth Avenue, which shall divide the city north and south, and all streets now named and named in the future
shall be made to carry a prefix, north or south, east or west, with reference to these dividing streets. (Prior Code,
Article VIII)
14-402 Block numbers extending out.
Numbering of business houses and residences in the city shall start from the intersection of these dividing
streets. The first block in each direction shall be designated the one hundred (100) block, the second the two
hundred (200) block, and continue to the limits of the city. (Prior Code, Article VIII)
14-403 Assignment of numbers in blocks.
Business houses and residences will be assigned numbers for each twenty-five (25) feet, fronting on the various
streets and avenues. Business houses occupying more than one unit of twenty-five (25) feet shall carry numbers
for each entrance, except that a residence will be designated by only one number, unless an apartment or
duplex house. Residences that are placed on lots crossways, and fronting the side streets, shall be numbered with
reference to the way they front. (Prior Code, Article VIII)
14-404 Type letters.
Businesses and residences shall be numbered and placed so that the numbers may be easily seen from the
streets. (Prior Code, Article VIII)
14-405 Number expense of owner.
The property owners shall pay the cost of numbering their property. Owners are required to have their property
numbered. (Prior Code, Article VIII)
14-406 Planning commission to assign numbers.
It is the duty of the city planning commission to assign all business and residential numbers.
Cross Reference: Planning commission, See Sections 12-101 et seq. of this code.
PART 15
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Chapters:
1 General Provisions
2 Enforcement
3 Vehicle Equipment
4 Speed Regulations
5 Driving, Overtaking, Passing
6 Traffic Control Devices
7 Stopping, Standing and Parking Generally
8 Loading
9 Turning Movements
10 Pedestrians
11 Bicycles
12 (Reserved)
13 Impoundment of Vehicles
14 Penalties
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
15-101 Citation of chapter.
15-102 Traffic code controlling.
15-103 Definitions.
15-104 Adoption of state traffic code
15-101 Citation of Chapter
This chapter and all amendments hereto may be
cited or referred to as the "Traffic Coed, City of
Bristow" and may so appear upon all official
documents, records of instruments. (Prior Code,
Chapter 28)
15-102 Traffic code controlling
Except as specifically provided by law as set forth
in this chapter, the traffic code shall be controlling
in the use of city streets, alleys, thoroughfares,
parks, parkways or any other public right-of-way or
municipally owned land, by pedestrians and by
vehicles of every kind whether self-propelled or
otherwise and whether moving or at rest. (Prior
Code, Chapter 28)
15-103 Definitions.
As used herein:
1. "Alley" means any narrow highway
ordinarily located in the interior portion of
platted blocks and ordinarily used for service
or delivery purposes at the rear of stores,
dwellings, or building;
2. “Ambulance” means a motor vehicle
constructed, reconstructed or arranged for the
purpose of transporting ill, sick, or injured
persons;
3. “Bicycle” means a device propelled by
human power upon which any person may
ride, having two(2) tandem wheels;
4. “Bus” means every motor vehicle designed
for carrying more than ten(10) passengers
and used for the transportation of persons,
and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab,
designed and used for the transportation of
persons for compensation;
5. “Business district” means the territory
contiguous to, and including a highway if there are
buildings within six hundred (600) feet of the
highway in use for business or industrial purposes,
including but not limited to hotels, banks, or office
buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings
which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of
frontage on one side or three hundred (300) feet
collectively on both sides of the highway;
6. “Controlled access highway” means every
highway, street or roadway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other
persons have no legal right of access to or from
the same except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public
authority having jurisdiction over such highway,
street or roadway;
7. “Commercial vehicles” means every vehicle
designed, maintained, or used primarily for the
transportation of property;
8. “Center lane” means any clearly marked
center lane. If the center lane is not marked and
no cars are parked on the roadway, then the
center lane is equally distanced between the
curbs or traveled portion of the roadway. In the
event a vehicle or vehicles are parked on one
side of the roadway only, then the center lane is
equally distanced from the side of the parked
vehicle or vehicles toward the street and curb on
the opposite roadway. If vehicles be parked on
each side of the roadway, then the center lane is
equally distanced from the edges of the parked
vehicles;
9. “Cross walk” means that part of a roadway at
an intersection included within the connections
of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite
sides of the street measured from the curbs; or in
the absence of cubs from the edges of the
traversable roadway.
“Cross walk also means any portion of a
roadway at an intersection or elsewhere
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines or other markings on the surface;
10. “Double park” means parking or stopping a
vehicle on the roadway side of another vehicle
already parked adjacent to the edge or curbing of
the roadway;
11. “Driver or operator” means a person who
drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle;
12. “Emergency” means an unforeseeable
occurrence of temporary duration causing or
resulting in an abnormal increase in traffic
volume, cessation or stoppage of traffic
movement, or creation of conditions hazardous
to normal traffic movement, including fire, storm,
accident, riot, or spontaneous assembly of large
numbers of pedestrians in such a manner as to
impede the flow of traffic;
13. “Emergency vehicle” means vehicles of the
fire department, police vehicles and ambulances;
14. “Highway”, see street;
15. “Intersection” means:
a. The area embraced within the prolongation
or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if
none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadway of two (2) streets, which join one
another at, or approximately at, right angles,
or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different streets join at any other
angle, may come in conflict; or
b. Where a street includes two (2) roadways
thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every
crossing of each roadway of such divided
street by an intersecting street, shall be
regarded as a separate intersection. In the
event such intersecting street also includes
two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more
apart, then every crossing of two (2)
roadways of such streets shall be regarded
as separate intersections;
16. “Laned roadway” means a roadway which is
divided into two (2) or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic;
17. “Limited access highway”, see controlled
access highway;
18. “Loading zone” means a space adjacent to a
curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles
during the loading or unloading of passengers or
material. A freight curb loading zone for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or
unloading of freight; a passenger curb loading
zone is a loading zone for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers;
19. “Limit lines” means boundaries of parking
areas, loading zones and non-traffic areas and lines
indicating the proper place for stopping where stops
are required;
20. “Motor cycle, Motor scooter, and motor
bicycle” mean a motor vehicle, other than a
tractor, having a seat or saddle for the use of the
driver and designed to travel on not more than
three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but
excluding a tractor;
21. “Motor vehicle” means every vehicle which
is self-propelled;
22. “Official time” shall mean whenever certain
hours are named herein they shall mean Central
Standard Time, Daylight Savings Time, as may
be in current use in the city;
23. “Official traffic control device” means all
signs, signals, markings, and devices not
inconsistent with this ordinance, placed or
erected by authority of a public body or official
having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning, or guiding traffic;
24. “Park or parking” means the standing of a
vehicle whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of, and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers, providing such
loading and unloading is in an authorized place;
25. “Pedestrian” means any person afoot;
26. “Police officer” means every officer of the
municipal police department, or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or to
make arrests for violation of traffic regulations;
27. “Private road or roadway” means a way or
place in private ownership or leading to property
in private ownership and used for vehicular
traffic by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner;
28. “Railroad” means a carrier of persons or
property upon cars other than streetcars operated
upon stationary rails;
29. “Railroad train” means a steam engine,
electric or other motor, with or without cars
coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except
streetcars;
30. “Residence district” means the territory
contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district;
31 “Right-of way” means the right of one
vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or
pedestrian approaching under such
circumstances of direction, speed and proximity
as to give rise to danger of collision unless one
grants precedence to the other;
32 “Roadway” means that portion of a street
improved, designed, ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulders. In
the event a street includes two (2) or more
separate roadways, the term roadway, as used
herein, shall refer to any such roadway,
separately, but not to all such roadways,
collectively;
33 “Safety zone” means the area or space
officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is
protected or is so marked or indicated by
adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times,
while set apart as a safety zone;
34 “School zone” means all streets or portions of
streets immediately adjacent to a school, or
school ground, where same is adjacent and for a
distance of three hundred (300) feet in each
direction;
35 “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street
between the curb lines or at lateral lines of the
roadway and adjacent property lines, intended
for use of pedestrians;
36 “Stand” or “standing” means any stopping of
a vehicle whether occupied or not;
37 “Stop”, when required, shall mean the
complete cessation from movement;
38 “Stop or stopping,” when prohibited, means
any halting even momentarily of a vehicle
whether occupied or not, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the direction of a police officer
or traffic signal;
39 “Street or highway” means the entire width
between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is
opened to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel;
40 “ Through street or highway” means a street,
or boulevard or highway or portion thereof at the
entrances to which:
a. Vehicular traffic from intersection
streets or highways is required by law
to come to a full stop before entering
or crossing; and
b. Stop signs are erected as provided in
this part;
41 “Traffic” means pedestrians, ridden or herded
animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either
singularly or together, while using any highway
or street for purpose of travel;
42 “Traffic control devices or signals” mean any
device legally authorized and used for the
purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic;
43 “Urban district” means the territory
contiguous to and including any street which is
built up with structures devoted to business,
industry, or dwelling houses situated at intervals
of less than one hundred (100) feet for a distance
of a quarter mile or more;
44 “U-turn” means a turn by which a vehicle
reverses its course of travel on the same street;
and;
45 “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by
which any person or property is, or may be
transported, or drawn, upon a highway or street;
except devices moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks,.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Defining state traffic
code, 47 O.S. Sections 1-101 et seq.
15-105 Adoption of state traffic code.
The provisions of the state motor vehicle code,
Sections 1-101 et seq. of Title 47 of the Oklahoma
Statutes, and particularly the Rules of the Road,
Sections 10-101 et seq. of Title 47 of the Oklahoma
Statutes, are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference, and are enforceable by the city
within the city limits as fully as if set out at length
herein.
(Ord. No. 540, 10/5/82)
State Law Reference: State rules of the road, 47 O.S.
Section 10-101 et seq.; state motor vehicle code,
47 O.S. Sections 1-101 et seq.
Chapter 2
ENFPRCEMENT
Sections:
15-201 Enforcement of traffic laws;
establishment of traffic control
division
15-202 Direction of traffic by hand or
Voice
15-203 Direction of traffic by
Unauthorized persons.
15-204 Obedience to police and fire
Officials.
15-205 Emergency and experimental
Regulations.
15-206 Push carts, riding animals, or
Driving animal drawn vehicles
to comply with code.
15-207 Use of coasters, roller-skates,
And similar devices restricted.
15-208 Public officers and employees
to
Obey traffic regulations.
15-209 Persons working on streets,
Exceptions.
15-210 Maintenance and construction
zones.
15-211 Authorized emergency vehicles.
15-212 Operation of vehicles on
Approach of authorized
Emergency vehicles.
15-213 Accident, duty to stop.
15-214 Issuance of citation tags.
15-215 Failure to obey citation
15-216 Failure to comply with traffic
Citations attached to parked
vehicle.
15-217 Presumption in reference to
Illegal parking.
15-218 Illegal cancellation of traffic
Citations.
15-219 Disposition and records of
Traffic citations, warrants, and
Complaints.
15-220 Court records; abstract to be
Sent to State Department of
Public Safety.
15-221 Possession of valid driver’s
license required
15- 222 Operation of vehicle on invalid
license prohibited.
15-223 Unlawful to operate vehicle
Without state vehicle license
15-224 Permitting unauthorized
person
to drive prohibited.
15-225 Insurance or certificate
Required.
15-201 Enforcement of traffic laws;
Establishment of traffic control division.
It is the duty of the officers of the police
department of any officers that are assigned by the
chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of
this cit and all the state vehicle laws applicable to
street traffic in this city. Officers of the department
shall make arrests for traffic violations, investigate
accidents, and cooperate with other officers in the
administration of the traffic laws and in developing
ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and
to carry out those duties specially imposed upon ht
department by this part and any other traffic
ordinances of this city. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-202 Direction of traffic by hand or voice
A. Officers of the police department or any
officers designated by the chief of police are
hereby authorized to direct traffic by voice,
hand, or signal in conformance with traffic
laws and ordinances. In the event of a fire
of other emergency or to expedite traffic or
to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the
police department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of the traffic laws and ordinances.
B. Officers of the fire department, when at the
scene of a fire, or other emergency, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic
in the immediate vicinity. (Prior Code,
Chapter 28)
15-203 Direction of traffic by unauthorized
persons.
No unauthorized person shall direct or attempt to
direct traffic, except in case of emergency where no
officer is present. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-204 Obedience to police and fire officials.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order or direction of a police officer
or fire department official. (Prior Coed, Chapter 28)
15-205 Emergency and experimental
Regulations.
A. The city council, by motion or resolution, is
empowered to adopt regulations necessary to
make effective the provisions of the traffic
ordinances of this city and to make temporary
or experimental regulations to cover
emergencies or special conditions. No such
temporary or experimental regulation shall
remain in effect for more than ninety (90)
days.
B. The city council may have traffic-control
devices tested under actual conditions of
traffic.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-206 Push carts, riding animals, or driving
animal drawn vehicles to comply with
code.
Every person propelling any push cart or riding an
animal upon a roadway, and every person driving
any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this part applicable to the driver of
any vehicle, except those provisions of this part
which by their very nature can have no application.
(Prior Code,
Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 11-104
15-207 Use of coaster, roller-skates, and
similar devices restricted
No person upon roller-skates, or riding in or by
means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device,
shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street on a cross walk; and when so crossing, such
person shall be subject to all of the duties applicable
to pedestrians,
This section shall not apply upon any street while
set aside as a play street as authorizes by ordinances
of this city. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-208 Public officers and employees to obey
Traffic regulations.
The provisions of this part shall apply to the
driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the
service of the United States Government, any state,
county , city,
or governmental unit or agency, as well as to other
vehicles. It is unlawful for any such driver to violate
any of the provisions of this part, except as
otherwise permitted in this part by state statute. This
part shall not apply to the military forces of the
United States and organizations of the National
Guard when performing any military duty. (Prior
Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Municipal drivers to obey
state rules of the road, 47 O.S. Section 16-103
15-209 Persons working on street, exceptions.
Unless specifically made applicable, the
provisions of this part, except those relating to
reckless driving and driving while intoxicated, shall
not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and
other equipment while actually engaged in work
upon the surface of a street, or to persons, motor
vehicles, and other equipment while actually
engaged in construction, maintenance, or repair of
public utilities.
All street of highway and public utility operations
shall be protected by adequate warning signs,
signals, devices, or flag persons. The provisions of
this part shall apply to any of the persons and
vehicles exempted by this section when traveling to
and from such work. (Prior Code, chapter 28)
15-210 Maintenance and construction zones.
A. City personnel or contractors, while repairing
or improving the streets of the city, and city
personnel and utility companies, when
installing, improving, or repairing lines or
other utility facilities in the streets, are hereby
authorized as necessary, subject to control by
the city clerk, to close any street or section
thereof to traffic during such repair,
maintenance, or construction.
In exercising this authority, the appropriate
personnel, contractor or utility company shall erect
or cause to be erected proper control devices and
barricades to warn and notify the public that the
street has been closed to traffic.
B. When any street has been closed to traffic
under the provisions of Subsection A of this
section and traffic-control devices or
barricades have been erected, it is unlawful
for any person to drive any vehicle through,
under, over, or around such traffic control
devices or barricades, or otherwise to enter
the closed area. The provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to persons entering
the closed area or zone for the protection of
lives or property. Persons having their places
of residence or places of business within the
closed area may travel, when possible to do
so, through the area at their own risk.
C. Whenever construction, repair, or
maintenance of any street or utility line or
facility is being performed under traffic, the
city personnel, contractor, or utility company
concerned shall erect, or cause to be erected,
traffic control devices to warn and guide the
public. Every person using the street shall
obey all signs, signals, markings, flag persons,
or other traffic control devices which are
placed to regulate, control, and guide traffic
through the construction or maintenance area.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-211 Authorized emergency vehicles.
A. The driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle, when responding to an emergency
call or when in the pursuit of an actual or
suspected violator of the law or ordinance or
when responding to but not upon returning
from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges
set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions stated in this section.
B. The driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle may do any of the following when in
pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of
the law or ordinance or when responding to
but not upon returning from a fire alarm:
1. Park or stand, irrespective of the
provisions of this part;
2. Proceed past a red or stop signal or
stop sign, but only after slowing down
as may be necessary for safe operation;
3. Exceed the maximum speed limits so
long as life or property is not
endangered; or
4. Disregard regulations governing
direction of movement or turning in
specific directions.
C. The exemptions granted in this section to an
authorized emergency vehicle shall apply
only when the driver of any such vehicle is
making use of audible and visual signals as
required by law, except that an authorized
emergency vehicle operated as a police
vehicle need not be equipped with or display
a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
D. The provisions of this section shall not relieve
the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle
from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions
protect the driver from the consequences of
his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Emergency vehicle driving
rules, 47 O.S. Section 11-106
15-212 Operation of vehicles on approach of
authorized emergency vehicles.
A. Upon the immediate approach of an
authorized emergency vehicle making use of
audible and visual signals meeting the
requirements of the laws of this state, of a
police vehicle properly and lawfully making
use of an audible signal only, the driver of
every other vehicle shall yield the right of
way and shall immediately drive to a
position parallel to, and as close as possible
to, the right-hand edge or curb of the
roadway clear of any intersection, and shall
stop and remain in such position until the
authorized emergency vehicle has passed,
except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.
B. This section shall not operate to relieve the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle
from the duty to drive with due regard for
the
safety of all persons using the highway.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Authorized emergency
vehicles and their equipment, 47 O.S. Sections
11-106 11-405, and 12-218
15-213 Accident, duty to stop
A. The driver of any vehicle involved in an
accident resulting in injury to or death of any
person or damage to any vehicle or property
shall immediately stop his vehicle at the
scene of such accident, or as close thereto as
possible, return to and remain at the scene of
the accident until he has given his name,
address and the registration of his vehicle and
shall upon request exhibit his driver’s license
to the person injured or the driver or occupant
of , or person attending, any vehicle collided
with and shall render to any person injured in
such accident reasonable assistance, including
the carrying or making arrangement for the
carrying of such persons to a physician,
surgeon or hospital for medical and surgical
treatment if it is apparent that this treatment is
necessary, or if such is requested by the
injured person. Each such stop shall be made
without obstruction traffic more than is
necessary.
B. The driver of a vehicle which is in any
manner involved in an accident resulting in
bodily injury to or death of any person or in
which it is apparent that damage to one
vehicle or to the property is in excess of
Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) shall, as
soon as practicable, report such accident to a
police officer or to the police department.
C. Any person failing to stop or to comply with
any of the requirements of this section shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof may be fined as provided
in Section 1-108 of this code. (Prior Code,
Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Accident reports, 47 O.S.
Section 10-101 et seq.
Cross Reference: For specific penalty of violation
of the section, see Section 1-108 of this code.
15-214 Issuance of citation tags.
A. The chief of police is hereby authorized and
directed to supply police officers with citation tags
in
sets, each set consisting of an original and at least
two (2) duplicate copies, for the purpose of giving
notice to persons violating any provision of this part.
B. Notice may be given by delivering the tags
to the violator or by affixing it to the vehicle
involved in the violation.
C. Each citation tag shall direct the violator to
appear and to present such tag at a designated
place on or before a date and hour specified
thereon.
D. Nothing in this section shall be constructed
to abridge the power of a police officer to arrest
any violator and take him into custody. (Prior
Code, Chapter 28)
15-215 Failure to obey citation
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to
violate his written promise to appear, given to an
officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation
regardless of the disposition of the charge for which
citation was originally issued. (Prior Code, Chapter
28)
15-216 Failure to comply with traffic citations
attached to parked vehicle.
If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing,
or parking under the traffic laws or ordinances does
not appear in response to a traffic citation affixed to
such motor vehicle within a period of five (5) days,
the clerk of the municipal court may send to the
owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic
citation was affixed a letter informing him of the
violation and warning him that in the event such
letter is disregarded for a period of five (5) days, a
warrant of arrest may be issued. On any occasion
where three (3) or more such traffic citations have
been affixed on the same motor vehicle and the
traffic citations have been disregarded, a warrant of
arrest may be issued without sending the latter
provided in this section. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-217 Presumption in reference to illegal
Parking.
A. In any prosecution charging a violation of any
law or regulation governing the standing or
parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle describer in the complaint was parked
in violation of any law or regulation, together
with
proof that the defendant named in the complaint
was at the time of the parking the registered owner
of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima
facie presumption that the registered owner of the
vehicle was the person who parked or placed the
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during
which, the violation occurred.
B. The presumption in Subsection A of this
section shall apply only when the procedure as
prescribed in this chapter has been followed.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-218 Illegal cancellation of traffic citation
It is unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit
the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner
other than is provided by this chapter. (Prior Code,
Chapter 28)
15-218 Disposition and records of traffic
citations,
warrants, and complaints.
A. Every police officer upon issuing a traffic
citation to an alleged violator of any
provision of the motor vehicle laws of this
state or any traffic law of this city shall
deposit the original and a duplicate copy of
the citation with his immediate superior
officer, who shall cause the original to be
delivered to the municipal court.
B. Upon the filing of the original citation in the
municipal court, the citation may be disposed
of only by trial in the court or by other
official action by a judge of the court,
including forfeiture of bail or by payment of
fine.
C. The chief of police shall maintain a record of
all warrants issued by the municipal court
which are delivered to the police department
for service, and of the final disposition of the
warrants.
D. No member of the police department or other
officer or public employee shall dispose of,
alter, or deface a traffic citation or any copy
thereof, or the record of the issuance or
disposition of any traffic citation, complaint,
or warrant, in a manner other than required on
this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
155-220 Court records; abstract to be sent to
State Department of Public Safety.
A. The municipal judge shall keep a record of
every traffic citation deposited with or
presented to the court and shall keep a record
of every official action by the court or its
traffic violations bureau in reference thereto,
including but not limited to a record of every
conviction, forfeiture of bail, judgment of
acquittal, and the amount of fine or forfeiture.
B. Within ten (10) days after the conviction or
forfeiture of bail of a person upon a charge of
violating any provision of this chapter or
other law regulating the operation of vehicles
on highways, the municipal judge or clerk of
the court in which the conviction was had or
bail was forfeited shall prepare and
immediately forward to the State Department
of Public Safety a certified abstract need not
be made of any conviction involving the
illegal parking or standing of a vehicle.
C. The abstract must be made upon a form
furnished by the State Department of Public
Safety and shall include the name and
address of the party charged, the number of
his operator’s or chauffeur’s license, the
registration number of the vehicle involved,
the nature of the offense, the date of hearing,
the plea, the judgment, whether bail was
forfeited, and the amount of the fine or
forfeiture. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-221 Possession of valid driver’s license
required.
A. No person shall operate any motor vehicle on
the highway without having in his possession at
all times, when operating such motor vehicle, an
unrevoked or unsuspended operator’s or
chauffeur’s license as required by the laws of the
state, unless such person is specifically exempted
from such laws by the provision thereof. No
person charged with violating this section shall
be convicted if he produces in court an
operator’s or chauffeur’s license issued to him
and valid at the time of his arrest.
C. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any
manner in violation of any restriction that may
be
Imposed in a restricted license issued to him with
respect to the type of, or special mechanical control
devices required on a motor vehicle or any other
restriction applicable to the licensee as the state ma
determine. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Driver’s licenses, 47 O.S.
Section 6-101.
15- 222 Operation of vehicle on invalid license
prohibited.
No Person shall operate a motor vehicle when his
privilege to do so is cancelled, suspended, revoked
or denied. Any person convicted of violation this
section shall be punished by a fine as provided on
Section 1-108 of this code. Each act of driving on
the streets of highways as prohibited by this section
shall constitute a separate offense. (Prior Code,
Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 6-303.
Cross Reference: For specific penalty of violation
of this section, see Section 1-108 of this code.
15- 223 Unlawful to operate vehicle without
state
vehicle license.
It is unlawful to operate a vehicle of any kind upon
a street of the city without a state vehicle license as
may be required by law or to fail to display the state
vehicle license as may be required by law.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-224 Permitting unauthorized to drive
Prohibited
No person shall authorize or knowingly permit any
vehicle owed by him or under his control to be
driven upon any highway by any person who is not
authorized under the provisions of the laws of the
state to operate such vehicle.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-225 Insurance of certificate required
A. The owner of a motor vehicle registered in
this state and operating the vehicle within the
city’s boundaries, shall carry in such vehicle
at all times a current owner’s security
verification form listing the vehicle, or an
equivalent form which has been used by the
Department of Public Safety which shall be
produced by any driver thereof upon request
for inspection by any law enforcement
officer and, in case of a collision, the form
shall be shown upon request to any person
affected by the collision.
B. The following shall not be required to carry
an owner’s or operator’s security verification
form or an equivalent form from the
department during operation of the vehicle
and shall not be required to surrender such
form for vehicle registration purposes:
1. Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or
state government, or any agency or political
subdivision thereof;
2. Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of
the business, corporation or utility on the exterior
and which is in compliance with the Compulsory
Insurance Law according to records of the
Department of Public Safety which reflect a deposit,
bond, self-insurance, or fleet policy;
3. Any vehicle authorized for operation, under a
permit number issued by the Interstate Commerce
Commission, or the Oklahoma Corporation
Commission;
4. Any licensed taxicab; and
5. Any vehicle owed by a licensed motor vehicle
dealer.
C. For the purpose of this section, the following
terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them in this section:
1. “Owner’s Policy” means an owner’s policy of
liability insurance which:
a. Shall designate by explicit description or by
appropriate reference all vehicles with respect to
which coverage is thereby be granted;
b. Shall insure the person named therein and insure
any other person, except as provided in
Subparagraph C of this paragraph, using an insured
vehicle with the express or implied permission of
the named insured, against loss from the liability
imposed by law for damages arising out of the
ownership, maintenance, operation or use of such
vehicle;
c. May provide for exclusions from coverage in
accordance with existing laws; and
d. Shall be issued by an authorized carrier
providing coverage in accordance with Section 7-
204 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
2. “Operator’s Policy” means an operator’s policy
of liability insurance which shall insure the named
person against loss from the liability imposed upon
him by law for damages arising out of the operation
or use by him of any motor vehicle not owned by
him, subject to the same limits of liability required
in an owner’s policy;
3. “Security” means:
a. A policy or bond meeting the requirements of
Section 7-204 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statues;
b. A deposit of cash or securities having the
equivalency of limits required under Section 7-204
of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes as acceptable
limits for a policy or bond; or
c. Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of
Section 7-503 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes,
having the equivalency of limits required under
Section 7-204 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes
as acceptable limits for a policy or bond.
4. “Compulsory Insurance Law” means the law
requiring liability insurance in conjunction with the
operation of motor vehicle in this state as found in
Article VI, Chapter 7, and Section 7-606 of Title 47
of the Oklahoma Statutes.
5. “Security verification form” means a form,
approved by the State Board for property and
casualty rates, verifying the existence of security
required by the Compulsory Insurance Law of the
State of Oklahoma.
C. Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in
this state, shall while operating or using such
vehicle within the city’s boundaries, carry either an
operator’s or an owner’s security verification form
issued by a carrier, providing the operator is not
excluded from coverage thereon; or an equivalent
form issued by the Department of Public Safety,
reflecting liability coverage.
D. An owner or operator who fails to produce for
inspection a valid and current security
verification form or equivalent form which ahs
been issued by the department upon request of
any peace officer of the department shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be subject to a fine as provided in Section
1-108 of this code.
E. A sentence imposed for any violation of this
section may be suspended or deferred in whole
or in part by the court.
F. Any person producing proof in court that a
current security verification form or equivalent
form which has been issued by the department
reflecting this liability coverage for such
person was in force at the time of the alleged
offense shall be entitle to dismissal of such
charge.
G. Upon conviction, bond forfeiture or deferral of
sentence, the court clerk shall forward an
abstract to the Department of Public Safety
within ten (10) days reflecting the action taken
by the court. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
Chapter 3
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
Sections:
15-301 Certain vehicles prohibited;
Vehicles injurious to streets.
15-302 Obstructive and dangerous
vehicles.
15-303 Equipment.
15-304 Mufflers, cut-outs.
15-305 Width, height, length, and load.
15-306 Inspection of vehicles.
15-301 Certain vehicles prohibited; vehicles
injurious to streets.
No vehicle or object which injures of is likely to
injure the surface of a street, shall be driven or
moved on any street. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-302 Obstructive and dangerous vehicles.
No person shall drive any vehicle in such
condition, so constructed, or so loaded, as to
cause delay or be likely to cause delay in traffic,
or as to constitute a hazard to persons or property,
except by permit issued by the chief of police and
in accordance with the terms of such permit.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-303 Equipment
Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the
city shall be equipped as required by law. It is
unlawful to operate a vehicle upon a street of the
city which is not equipped as required by law. It
is unlawful to fail to use such equipment in the
manner required by law. It is unlawful to operate
a vehicle which has equipment prohibited by law
upon a street of the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: For state law relating to
vehicle equipment, see 47 OS. Section 12-201 et
seq.
15-304 Mufflers, cut-outs.
No motor vehicles with an internal combustion
engine shall be operated within the city unless the
exhaust from such engine is muffled by a suitable
and sufficient muffler. No muffler cut-out or
exhaust or vacuum whistle shall be used on any
motor vehicle while operating within the city,
except that exhaust whistles may be used on
authorized emergency vehicles.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-305 Width, height, length, and load.
No person shall drive or convey through any
street any vehicle the width, length, height,
weight, or load of which exceeds that authorized
by state law, except in accordance with a permit
issued by state authority or by the chief of police.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: For state law relating to
size, weight, and load, see 47 O.S. Section 14-
101 et seq.
15-306 Inspection of vehicles.
A. No person shall drive or move on any road,
street, or highway of this city any motor
vehicle, including motorcycles, trailers,
semi-trailers, or pole trailers, which are
licensed by the Oklahoma Tax Commission
and operated on the streets or highways, of
this city, or any combination thereof ,
unless the vehicle is bearing a valid official
inspection sticker issued by an official
inspection station licensed by the
Department of Public Safety. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to
any house trailer, which requires a permit to
be move upon the highways of this state.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of
this section shall upon conviction thereof be
subject to a fine as provided in Section 1-
108 of this code. (Ord. No. 528, 12/9/77)
Chapter 4
SPEED REGULATIONS
Sections:
15-401 Speed limits generally;
Exceptions.
15-402 School zones.
15-403 Speed never to exceed that which is
reasonable or prudent for existing
conditions.
15-404 Minimum speed requirements;
Exception.
15-405 Obedience to maximum and
minimum
speed limits.
15-401 Speed limits generally; exceptions.
A. No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed
than provided in Subsection B of this section
upon any street or highway within the city
except:
1. Emergency vehicles being lawfully
driven as provided in this code;
2. When a different speed limit is
otherwise designated and posted; or
3. When a different speed limit is
established in this code.
B. Except when a special hazard exists that
requires lower speed for compliance with
this chapter, the limits specified in this
chapter or established as hereinafter
authorized shall be maximum lawful speeds,
and no person shall drive a vehicle on a
highway at a speed in excess of such
maximum limits as follows: All vehicles
shall be driven at a rate of speed not to
exceed twenty-five (25) miles per hour
except that on state and federal highways and
streets designated by the council as through
streets, the maximum speed is thirty (30)
miles per hour;
C. The City council, by motion or resolution,
may reduce or increase the speed limits
provided in this code, and when it does os,
appropriate signs shall be placed on such
streets or parts of streets indicating the lower
or higher speed limit.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Basic and minimum
speed rules, 47 O.S. Section 11-801; local
authority to set speed limits, 47 O.S.
Section 15-102, 11-803
15-402 School Zones.
No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than
posted per hour between the hours posted on any
street adjacent to any school in a designated school
zone on days when school is in session, unless a
different speed limit or time is otherwise designated
and posted. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-403 Speed never to exceed that which is
reasonable or prudent for existing
conditions.
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater
or less than is reasonable or prudent under the
conditions then existing, taking into consideration
among other things, the conditions of the vehicle,
the traffic, roadway surface or width, the amount of
light or darkness, the presence of pedestrians in or
near the roadways, and the obstruction of views. No
person shall drive any vehicle at a speed greater
than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the
assured clear distance ahead. (Prior Code, Chapter
28)
15-404 Minimum speed requirements; exception.
No vehicle shall be driven at such an
unreasonably slow speed in relation to the effective
maximum speed allowed as to constitute a hazard or
to interfere with the normal movement of other
traffic except when the slow speed is unavoidable.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-405 Obedience to maximum and minimum
speed limits.
Where official signs and markings give notice of
both maximum and minimum speed limits in effect
on any street, no vehicle shall be driven at rates in
excess of the maximum nor slower than the
minimum except as required by an authorized
officer or in obedience to posted official signs.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
Chapter 5
DRIVING, OVERTAKING, PASSING
Sections:
15-501 Changing lanes.
15-502 Driving on right side of roadway
required: exceptions.
15-503 When overtaking on the right is
permitted.
15-504 Overtaking a vehicle on the left.
15-505 Limitations on overtaking on the
left; exception.
15-506 Passing vehicles proceeding in
opposite directions.
15-507 One-way roadways and rotary
traffic islands.
15-508 Following too closely.
15-509 No passing zones.
15-510 Following fire apparatus prohibited
15-511 Crossing fire hose
15-512 Driving through funeral or other
procession prohibited;
15-513 Drivers in a procession
15-514 Funeral processions to be identified.
15-515 Overtaking and passing in school
zones.
15-516 Overtaking and passing school bus.
15-517 School bus requirements; lights;
signs; painting.
15-518 Driving of vehicles on sidewalk
prohibited; exception.
15-519 Limitation on backing vehicle.
15-520 Limitation on use of motorcycle,
bicycles and motor scooters.
15-521 Required motorcycle equipment,
headgear.
15-522 Special speed limitation on
motorcycles and motor scooters.
15-523 Clinging to vehicles prohibited.
15-524 Entering and leaving controlled
access highways.
15-525 Reckless driving.
15-526 Careless or negligent driving,
stopping, or parking.
15-527 Requirement of any person driving
a vehicle on a public way to operate
same in a careful and prudent
manner.
15-528 Driving while under the influence of
drugs.
15-529 Driving while under the influence of
alcohol.
15-530 Attention to driving required.
15-531 Speed contest prohibited.
15-532 Permits required for parades and
processions.
15-533 Driving through safety zone.
15-534 Starting parked vehicle.
15-535 Opening and closing vehicle doors.
15-536 Obstructions to driver’s view or
driving mechanism.
15-537 Boarding or alighting from vehicles.
15-538 Unlawful riding.
15-539 Private service drives.
15-540 Designation of truck routes.
15-541 Loads on vehicles.
15-542 Vehicle approaching or entering
intersection.
15-543 Vehicle turning left at intersection.
15-544 Vehicle approaching a “yield rightof
way” sign
15-545 Vehicle entering through highway.
15-546 Vehicles facing stop, slow, warning
or caution signal.
15-547 Through streets.
15-548 Intersections where stop or yield
required.
15-549 Stop or yield sign construction and
placement.
15-550 Vehicle entering stop intersection.
15-551 Vehicle entering yield intersection.
15-552 Vehicle entering highway from
private road or driveway.
15-553 Vehicles entering traffic from
Parking.
15-554 Emerging from the alley, driveway,
or building.
15-555 Stop when traffic obstructed.
15-556 Obedience to signal indicating
approach of train.
15-557 Certain vehicles to stop at all
railroad grade crossings.
15-558 Loud noises from vehicle and use of
compression release engine brakes.
15-501 Changing lanes.
A. Whenever any roadway has been divided
into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic, in addition to all other rules
consistent with this subsection, a vehicle
shall be driven as nearly as practical
entirely within a single lane and shall not
be moved from the lane until the driver has
first ascertained that the movement can he
made with safety and has signaled for a
change of course.
B. Where streets or roadways do not have
marked traffic lanes, vehicles shall
nevertheless keep in line or follow a
straight course as nearly as practical and
shall not weave in and out or turn from side
to side unnecessarily. Vehicles shall move
to the right or left only as necessary in
slowing or stopping adjacent to the curb, in
passing slow moving vehicles or making a
proper approach for a turn, and this only
after the driver has first ascertained that
such movement can be made safely and has
signaled for a change of course.
C. Upon a roadway which has been divided
into three (3) lanes, a vehicle shall not be
driven in the center lane except when the
roadway is clearly visible and such center
lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or in preparation for a left turn, or where
such center lane is at the time allocated
exclusively to traffic moving in the
direction the vehicle is proceeding and is
signposted to give notice of such allocation.
D. Official signs may be erected directing
slow moving traffic to use a designated
lane or designating those lanes to be used
by traffic moving in a particular direction
regardless of the center of the roadway.
Drivers of vehicles shall obey the
directions of every such sign. (Prior Code,
Chapter 28 in part)
15-502 Driving on right side of roadway
required; exceptions.
A. Upon all roadways of sufficient width a
vehicle shall be driven to the right of the
center of the roadway, except as follows:
1. When overtaking and passing another
vehicle proceeding in the same direction
under the rules governing such movement;
2. When the right half of a roadway is closed
to traffic while under construction or repair;
3. Upon a roadway divided into three (3)
marked lanes for traffic under the rules
applicable thereon; and
4. Upon a roadway designated and signposted
for one-way traffic.
B. All vehicles shall keep to the right roadway
on all streets or highways which are
divided into two (2) roadways.
C. Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding
at less than the normal speed of traffic at
the time and place and under the conditions
then existing shall be driven in the right
hand lane then available for traffic, or as
close as practicable to the right-hand curb
or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection or
into a private road or driveway. (Prior Code,
Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions. 47
O.S. Section 11-301.
15-503 When overtaking on the right is
permitted.
A. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass
upon the right of another vehicle only under
the following conditions:
1. When the vehicle overtaken is making or
about to make a left turn;
2. Upon a street or highway with unobstructed
pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of
sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of
moving vehicles in each direction; or
3. Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway
on which traffic is restricted to one direction
of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2)
or more lines of moving vehicles.
B. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and
pass another vehicle upon the right only under
conditions permitting such movement in safety.
In no event shall such movement be made by
driving off the pavement or main traveled portion
of the roadway.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-504 Overtaking a vehicle on the left.
A. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another
vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall
pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and
shall not again drive to the right side of the
street or roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle.
B. Except when overtaking and passing on the
right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken
vehicle shoo give way to the right in favor of
the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and
shall not increase the speed of his vehicle
until completely passed by the overtaking
vehicle. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-505 Limitations on overtaking on the left;
exception.
A. No vehicle shall be driven to the left
side of the center of the street or
roadway in overtaking and passing
another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction unless such left side is
clearly visible and is free of
oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the
completing of the overtaking and
passing without interfering with the
safe operation of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite
direction or any vehicle overtaken. In
every instance the overtaking vehicle
must return to the right-hand side of
the roadway before coming within
one hundred (100) feet of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite
direction.
B. No vehicle at any time shall be driven
to the left side of the roadway under
the following conditions.
1. When approaching the crest of a grade,
or upon a curve in the street or
highway where the driver’s view
along the street or highway is
obstructed’ or
2. When approaching within one
hundred (100) feet of any bridge,
viaduct or tunnel or when approaching
within fifty (50) feet of or traversing
any intersection or railroad grade
crossing.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-506 Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite
directions.
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite
directions shall pass each other to the right. Upon
roadways having a width for not more than one line
of traffic in each direction each driver shall give to
the other at least one-half (1/2) the main-traveled
portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-507 One-way roadways and rotary traffic
islands.
A. The city council may designate any road,
street, alley, or highway, or any separate
roadway under their jurisdiction for on-way
traffic and shall cause appropriate signs
giving notice thereof, to be erected.
B. Upon roadway designated and signposted for
one-way traffic a vehicle shall be driven only
in the direction designated.
C. A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic
island shall be driven only to the right of such
island.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 11-308
15-508 Following too closely.
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow
another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and
prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and condition of the
highway. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 11-310
15-509 No passing zone
A. The State Department of Transportation, as
regards state and federal highways, and the city
council, as regards all other streets, are hereby
authorized to determine those portions of any
highway where overtaking and passing to the left
would be especially hazardous, and may, by
appropriate signs or markings on the roadway,
indicate the beginning and end of such zones. When
such signs or markings are in place and clearly
visible to an ordinarily observant person, every
driver shall obey the directions thereof.
B. Where signs or markings are in place to define
a no-passing zone as set forth in Subsection A of
this section, no driver shall at any time drive to the
left side of the roadway within the no-passing zone
or on the left side of any pavement striping
designed to mark the no-passing zone throughout
its length.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-510 Following fire apparatus prohibited.
The driver of any vehicle other than one on
official business shall not follow any fire apparatus
traveling
in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred
(500) feet or drive into or park such vehicle within
the block where fire apparatus has stopped in
answer to a fire alarm. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 11-1108(a).
15-511 Crossing fire hose.
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected
hose of a fire department used at any fire or alarm
of fire, without the consent of the fire department
official in command. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 11-1109.
15-512 Driving through funeral or other
procession prohibited; exceptions.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the
vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized
procession while they are in motion and when such
vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in
this chapter. This provision shall not apply at
intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic
control signals or police officers.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-513 Drivers in a procession.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall
drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway
as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as
close as is practical and safe. (Prior Code, Chapter
28)
15-514 Funeral processions to be identified.
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles
shall be identified as such by the display upon the
outside of each vehicle such identifying insignia as
may be determined and designated by the police
department. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-515 Overtaking and passing in school zones.
A. No driver of a vehicle shall pass any other
vehicle which is in motion and being driven in the
same direction in any school zone between the
posted hours on all days when schools are in session
B. Wherever a school zone is located on a
multiple lane street which is divided into three (3)
or more clearly marked lanes for traffic or where
the right half of the roadway has been divided into
two (2) or more lanes, or on one-way streets,
vehicles shall be allowed to pass slower moving
vehicles being driven in the same direction where
passing does not involve a change of lane
movement.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-516 Overtaking and passing school bus.
A. The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking
a school bus that is stopped to take on or discharge
school children, and on which the red loading
signals are in operation, shall stop his vehicle before
it reaches the school bus and not proceed until the
loading signals are deactivated and then proceed
past
such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and
with due caution for the safety of such school
children and other occupants.
B. The driver of any vehicle when passing a
school bus shall use due caution for the safety of
school children and other occupants of the school
bus.
C. Occupants of the school bus shall have the
right of way when crossing the roadway
immediately upon leaving the school bus. (Prior
Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 11-705.
15-517 School bus requirements; lights; signs;
painting
A. The provisions of Section 15-516 of this code
shall be applicable only if the school bus is
painted yellow and bears upon the front and
rear thereon a plainly visible sign containing
the words “SCHOOL BUS” In letters not less
than eight (8) inches in height which can be
removed or covered when the vehicle is not in
use as a school bus.
B. The school bus shall be equipped with four (4)
red alternately flashing warning signal lights,
two (2) of which shall be located high on the
front and two (2) high on the rear of the
vehicle.
The lights shall be a minimum of four (4)
inches in diameter and shall be widely
separated. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 11-307.
15-158 Driving of vehicles on sidewalk
prohibited;
exception.
No person shall drive any vehicle within or upon
any sidewalk area except at a permanent or
temporary driveway. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-519 Limitations on backing vehicle.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle
unless such movement can be made with reasonable
safety and without interfering with any other traffic.
No vehicle shall be backed into an intersection.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-520 Limitation on use of motorcycles,
bicycles
and motor scooters.
A. No driver of a two-wheel or three-wheel
motor vehicle or bicycle shall carry any other
person upon or within such vehicle on any
street or highway, except as provided in this
section:
1. If any tow-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle
with a wheel diameter of twelve (12) inches or
greater or any bicycle shall have either a
double seating device with double foot rests or
a side car attachment providing a separate seat
space within such sidecar attachment for each
person riding therein so that such person shall
be seated entirely within the body of the side
car, then it shall be permissible for an operator
who has attained the age of sixteen (16) or
older to carry a passenger; and
2. A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or
his employee is permissible.
B. No Motorcycle or motor scooter shall be
ridden upon any sidewalk of the city.
C. No rider of a motorcycle, bicycle, or motor
scooter shall hold on to any moving vehicle
for the purpose of being propelled.
D. A person operating a motor scooter,
motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, or motor
bicycle, shall ride only on the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto.
E. No driver of a motorcycle or motor scooter
shall pass other vehicles in between lanes of
traffic traveling in the same direction.
Authorized emergency vehicles are excepted
from the provisions of this subsection.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-521 Required motorcycle equipment,
headgear.
A. In addition to all other requirements
motorcycles and motor scooters shall be
equipped with the following:
1. Handle bars which co not exceed twelve (12)
inches in height, measured from the crown or
point of attachment;
2. Two (2) mirrors, containing a reflection
surface of not less than three (3) inches in
diameter, mounted one on each side of the
vehicle and positioned so as to enable the
operator to clearly view the roadway for a
distance of two hundred (200) feet to the rear
of his vehicle;
3. brakes adequate to control the movement of
the vehicle, to stop and hold the vehicle,
including two (2) separate means of applying
the brakes. One means for applying the
brakes shall be to effectively apply the brakes
to the front wheel, and one means shall be to
effectively apply the brakes to the rear wheels.
All such vehicles shall be equipped with a
stop lamp on the rear of the vehicle which
shall display a red or amber light, or any
shade of color between red and amber, visible
from a distance of not less than one hundred
(100) feet to the rear in normal sunlight, and
which shall be activated upon application of
the service brake;
4. A properly operating speedometer capable of
registering at least the maximum legal speed
limit for that vehicle shall be provided;
5. A fender over each wheel. All fenders shall
be of the type provided by the manufacturer;
6. One lighted headlamp capable of showing a
white light visible at least three hundred (300)
feet in the direction in which the vehicle is
proceeding, and one tail lamp mounted on the
rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red
light plainly visible from at least three
hundred (300) feet to the rear. The lights
required by this paragraph shall be burning
whenever the vehicle is in motion during the
period from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset
and one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise and at
an other time
when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable
atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on
the streets are not clearly discernible at a distance
of at least five hundred (500) feet ahead: and
7. A windshield of sufficient quality, size and
thickness to protect the operator from foreign
objects. In lieu of the windshield, the operator
shall wear goggles or face shield of material
and design to protect him from foreign
objects.
B. No person under eighteen (18) years of age
shall operate or ride upon any vehicle covered
under this section unless the person is
equipped with and wearing on the head a
crash helmet of the type and design which
complies with the standards established by
the State Department of Public Safety. All
crash helmets shall consist of lining, padding
and chin straps and be of the type as not to
distort the view of the driver.
C. No person may operate a motorcycle or motor
scooter with the exhaust system modified so
that motor noise is increased greater than that
of the original muffler equipment provided by
the manufacturer of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-522 Special Speed limitation on motorcycles
and motor scooters.
No person shall operate any motorcycle or any
motor scooter at a speed greater than the speed limit
legally posted. In no event nor at any time may an
operator under the age of sixteen (16) years operate
a motorcycle or motor scooter, including a motor
driven bicycle, at a speed greater than thirty-five
(35) miles per hour, or at any time or any speed
when prohibited by state law. (Prior Code, Chapter
28)
State Law Reference: Speed limits, motorcycles,
47 O.S. Section 11-805.
15-523 Clinging to vehicles prohibited
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster,
roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the
same or himself to any moving vehicle upon a
roadway.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-524 Entering and leaving controlled access
highways.
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any
controlled-access highway except at entrances and
exits established by public authority. (Prior Code,
Chapter 28)
15-524 Reckless driving.
Any person who drives any vehicle in a
wanton manner without regard for the safety
of persons or property is guilty of reckless
driving, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in the sum not to exceed One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) including costs.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions,
47 OS. Section 9-101.
Cross Reference: For specific penalty for
violation of this section, see Section 1-108 of
this code.
15-526 Careless of negligent driving, stopping,
or parking.
It is unlawful for any person to drive, use,
operate, park, cause to be parked, or stop any
vehicle in a careless or negligent manner, or
in such a manner as to endanger life, limb,
person, or property, or as to interfere with the
lawful movement of traffic or use of the
streets. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-527 Requirement of any person driving a
vehicle on a public way to operate same
in
a careful and prudent manner.
Any person driving a vehicle on a public
road or way shall drive the same in a careful
and prudent speed not greater than nor less
than is reasonable and proper, having due
regard to the traffic, surface, and width of the
public way and any other conditions then
existing.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15- 528 Driving while under the influence of
drugs.
A. No person shall drive, operate, or be
in actual physical control of any motor
vehicle upon any highway who is
under
the influence of any substance included in the
Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substance Act.
The fact that any person charged with a violation of
this provision is or has been lawfully entitled to use
such controlled substance shall not constitute a
defense.
B. Any person who violates this section shall be
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined as provided in Section 1-108 of this
code. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Driving under the
influence of liquor, drugs, 47 O.S. Section 11-902;
controlled dangerous substances act, 63 O.S.
Sections 2-101 et seq.
Cross Reference: For specific penalty for violation
of this section, see Section 1-108 of this code.
15-529 Driving while under the influence of
alcohol.
A. It is unlawful for any person who is under the
influence of intoxicating liquor to drive,
operate or be in actual physical control of any
motor vehicle in the city.
Any person who operates a motor vehicle while
his ability to operate such motor vehicle is impaired
by the consumption of alcohol shall be subject to a
fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Mandatory revocation
of license for DUI, 47 O.S. Section 6-205;
testing, procedures for DUI, 47 O.S. Sections
751 et seq.
Cross Reference: For specific penalty for violation
of this section, see Section 1-108 of this code.
15- 530 Attention to driving required.
The operator of every vehicle while driving shall
devote his full time and attention to such driving.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-531 Speed contest prohibited.
A. No person shall engage in, aid or abet any
motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed
on any street or highway.
B. No person shall for the purpose of facilitation
or aiding or as an incident to any motor vehicle
speed contest upon any street or highway, in
any manner obstruct or place any barricade or
obstruction upon any street or highway.
C. When three (3) or more persons assemble to
witness or participate in an unlawful speed
contest such assembly is unlawful assembly
and any person who participates in such
unlawful assembly is guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15- 532 permits required for parades and
processions.
No funeral, procession, or parade containing two
hundred (200) or more persons or fifty (50) or more
vehicles except the military forces of the United
States and the military forces of this state, shall
occupy, march, or proceed along any street except
in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of
police and such other regulations as are set forth
herein which may apply. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Local powers to regulate
processions, 47 O.S. Section 15-102.
15-533 Driving through safety zone.
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or
within a safety zone or island.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15- 534 Starting parked vehicle.
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped,
standing, or parked unless and until such movement
can be made with reasonable safety.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-535 Opening and closing vehicle doors.
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle
on the side available to moving traffic unless and
until it is reasonably safe to do so; nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a motor
vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of
time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference : Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 11-1105.
11-536 Obstructions to driver’s view or driving
mechanism.
A. No person shall drive a vehicle when it is
so loaded, or when there are in the front
seat such a number of persons, exceeding
three (3), as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle
or as to interfere with the driver’s control
over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
B. No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in
such position as to interfere with the
driver’s view ahead or to the sides or to
interfere with his control over the driving
mechanism of the vehicle. (Prior Code,
Chapter 28)
11-537 Boarding or alighting from vehicles.
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle
while such vehicle is in motion
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
11-538 Unlawful riding.
No person shall ride on any such vehicle upon
any portion thereof not designed or intended for the
use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to
an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of
a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in
space intended for merchandise.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-539 Private service drives.
No vehicle or animal shall be driven through any
private service driveway or private service area
except for the purpose of obtaining service or
merchandise. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-540 Designation of truck routes.
A. The city council may prescribe routes through
the city for the use of trucks in general, trucks of
particular kinds and/or other vehicles which are not
Ordinary private passenger vehicles, passing
through
the city. Appropriate and adequate signs shall be
placed along such routes so that drivers of such
vehicles may follow the routes.
B. When such signs are so erected and in place, the
driver of a truck or other vehicle for which a route
has been prescribed, as provided above, while
passing through the city, shall keep on such route
and shall not deviate there from except in case of
emergency. Drivers of such vehicles shall follow
such routes so far as practicable also when driving
within the city and not merely through the city.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-541 Loads on vehicles.
A. No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any
highway unless the vehicle is so constructed
or loaded as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, shifting, leaking, blowing or
otherwise escaping there from, except that
sand may be dropped for the purpose of
securing traction, or water or other
substances may be sprinkled on a roadway
in cleaning or maintaining the roadway.
B. No person shall operate on any highway an
vehicle with any load unless the load and
any covering thereon is securely fastened so
as to prevent the covering or load from
becoming loose, detached or in any manner
a hazard to other users of the highway. Any
vehicle loaded with sand, cinders, or other
loose material susceptible to blowing or
escaping by reason of wind shall have the
load covered or dampened so as to prevent
the blowing or escaping of the load from the
vehicle.
C. This section not shall apply to trucks loaded
with livestock, poultry or agricultural
products, provided that any such truck shall
be so constructed or loaded as to prevent
such livestock or poultry from escaping
there from.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-542 Vehicle approaching or entering
intersection.
A. When two (2) vehicles enter or approach an
uncontrolled intersection from different
highways at approximately the same time, the
driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the
Right as otherwise stated in this chapter; however,
the driver of vehicle on a street which is not a state
or federal highway approaching an intersection with
a state or federal highway approaching an
intersection with a state or federal highway shall
stop and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which
ahs entered the intersection or which is so close
thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
B. The right-of- way rule declared in Subsection
A of this section is modified at through highways as
otherwise stated in this chapter.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Right-of-way at
intersections,
47 O.S. Section 11-401.
15-543 Vehicle turning left at intersection.
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection
intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-ofway
to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close
thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. After
so yielding and having given signal when and as
required by this code, the driver may make the left
turn and the drivers of all other vehicles
approaching the intersection from the opposite
direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle
making the left turn. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 11-402.
15-544 Vehicle approaching a “yield right-ofway”
sign
The driver of a vehicle approaching a “Yield
Right-of-way” sign shall slow to a reasonable speed
for existing conditions of traffic and visibility,
yielding the right-of-way to all vehicles on the
intersecting street or highway which have entered
the intersection or which are so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard. (Prior Code,
Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 11-403.
15-545 Vehicle entering through highway.
Except when directed to proceed by a police
officer or a traffic control signal, every driver of a
vehicle shall stop as required by this code at the
entrance to a through highway and shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered
the intersection from the through highway, or which
are approaching so closely on the through highway
as to constitute an immediate hazard. (Prior Code,
Chapter 28)
15-546 Vehicles facing stop, slow, warning or
caution signal.
If two (2) or more vehicles face stop, slow,
warning or caution signs or signals at an
intersection and are approaching as to enter the
intersection at the same time, the following rules
shall apply: If each vehicle is required to stop, the
vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of
–way. If each vehicle is required to slow, the
vehicle coming from the right shall have the rightof-
way. If each vehicle is required to take caution,
the vehicle coming from the right shall have the
right-of-way.
In any event, a vehicle which has already entered
the intersection shall have the right-of-way over one
which has not entered the intersection.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-547 Through streets.
A. The city council may designate any street or
part of a street a through street.
B. Whenever the city council designates and
describes a through street, a stop sign, or yield sign
if deemed more appropriate, shall be placed and
maintained on every street intersection a through
street, or intersecting that portion thereof, unless
traffic at such intersection is controlled at all time
by traffic control signals.
C. At the intersection of two (2) such through
street or at the intersection of a through street and a
heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs
shall be erected at the approaches of either of the
streets as may be determined by the city clerk if
deemed desirable. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-548 Intersections where stop or yield
required.
The city council is hereby authorized to determine
and designate intersections upon other than through
streets where particular hazards exist and to
determine whether:
1. Vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances
to any such stop intersection, in which event
it shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every
such place a stop is required; or
2. Vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles on a different street as provided in
this code, in which event is shall cause to be
erected a yield sign at every place where yield
is required. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-549 Stop or yield sign construction and
placement.
Every stop or yield sign erected pursuant to this
chapter shall bear the word “Stop” or “Yield” in
letters not less than eight (8) inches in height. Every
stop or yield sign shall at night be rendered
luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination,
by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the
sign, or by efficient reflecting elements on the face
of the sign. Every stop or yield sign shall be located
as close as practicable to the nearest line of the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if
there is no crosswalk, then the sign shall be located
at the nearest line of the intersection roadway.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-550 Vehicle entering stop intersection.
Except when directed by a police officer or traffic
control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching
a stop intersection, indicated by a stop sign, shall
stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection. In the event there is no
crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line before entering the intersection. If there is
no marked stop line, then the driver shall stop at the
point nearest the intersecting road where the driver
has a view of
approaching traffic on an intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection. A driver after
having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle which has entered the intersection from
another highway or road, or which is approaching
so close as to constitute immediate hazard; but the
driver having so yielded may then proceed and the
driver of all other vehicles approaching the
intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the
vehicle so proceeding.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-551 Vehicle entering yield intersection.
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign
shall, in observance to such sign, slow down to a
speed, reasonable for the existing condition or shall
stop if necessary and shall yield the right-of-way to
any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on
which hi is driving and to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another road so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. The
driver having so yielded may then proceed and
drivers of all other vehicles approaching the
intersection shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding.
A driver who enters a yield intersection without
stopping and has or causes a collision with a
pedestrian at a crosswalk or a vehicle in the
intersection shall prima facie be considered not to
have yielded as required herein. The provisions of
this section shall not release the drivers of other
vehicles approaching the intersection at such a
distance as not to constitute immediate hazard from
the duty to driver with due care to avoid a collision.
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if
required for safety to stop shall stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection
before entering the intersection; if there is no
crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line, or if there is no stop line, then at the point
nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-552 Vehicle entering highway from private
road or driveway.
The driver of a vehicle about to enter, leave or
cross a highway from or into a private road or
driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the highway.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 11-404.
15-553 Vehicles entering traffic from parking.
Any vehicle attempting to re-enter traffic while
parked at the curb shall yield the right-of-way to
oncoming traffic in the street approaching from the
rear. The parked vehicle shall proceed into the ling
of traffic only after the driver has given the
appropriate signal which indicates his intention of
turning from the curb and into the line of traffic.
The vehicle shall in no event enter the line of traffic
until the driver has ascertained that no hazard exists.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-554 Emerging from the alley, driveway, or
building.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley,
driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto
the sidewalk area extending across any alley way or
driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision,
and upon entering the roadway shall yield the rightof-
way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 11-404.
15-555 Stop when traffic obstructed.
No driver shall enter on intersection or a marked
cross walk unless there is sufficient space on the
other side of the intersection or cross walk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or
pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-556 Obedience to signal indicating approach
of train.
A. Whenever any person driving a vehicle
approaches a railroad grade crossing under
any of the circumstances stated in this section,
the driver of such vehicle shall stop within
fifty (50) feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet
from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall
not proceed until he can do so safely. The
foregoing requirements shall apply when:
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
1. A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal
device gives warning of the immediate
approach of a railroad train;
2. A crossing gate is lowered or when a human
flagman gives or continues to give a signal of
the approach or passage of a railroad train;
3. A railroad train approaching within
approximately one thousand five hundred
(1,500) feet of the highway crossing emits a
signal audible from such distance and such
railroad train, by reason of its speed or
nearness to such crossing, is an immediate
hazard; or
4. An approaching railroad train is plainly visible
and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing.
B. No person shall drive any vehicle through,
around or under any crossing gate or barrier at
a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-557 Certain vehicles to stop at all railroad
grad crossings.
A. The driver of any motor vehicle carrying
passengers for hire, or of any school bus
carrying any school child, or of any vehicle
carrying explosive substances or flammable
liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before
crossing at grade any track or tracks of a
railroad, shall stop such vehicle within fifty (50)
feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad, and while so
stopped, shall listen and look in both directions
along such track for any approaching train and
for signals indicating the approach of a train,
except as hereinafter provided, and shall not
proceed until he can do so safely. After
stopping as required herein and
upon proceeding when it is safe to do so, the driver
of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gear of
the vehicle that there will be no necessity for
changing gears while traversing such crossing, and
the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the
tracks.
B. No stop need be made at any such crossing
where a police officer or traffic control signal
directs traffic to proceed. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-558 Loud noises from vehicle and use of
compression release engine brakes.
A. It is unlawful for any person to disturb the
peace and quietude of any part of the city by
operating, having operating, or permitting to
be operated any automobile, contrivance, or
machinery in such a manner as to emit loud
sound.
B. It is unlawful, except to avert an imminent
danger, for any person to use compression
release type engine brakes, commonly known
as “Jake Brakes,” unless the blow down from
the compression release and the exhaust of
any internal combustion engine is discharged
through an appropriate muffler system before
entering the ambient air.
C. For the purpose of this section, use of a
compression release type engine brake or
“Jake Brake” shall be defined as a devise
which when activated retards one or more
pistons on the engine of the motor vehicle in
order to assist the motor vehicle in braking,
and in the process of doing so creates a loud
and offensive noise from the motor vehicle
when inadequately or improperly muffled.
(Ord. 66-060605 Section 1)
Chapter 6
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Sections:
15-601 Authority to install traffic control
devices.
15-602 Traffic control devices; uniform
requirements.
15-603 Obedience to official traffic control
devices
15-604 When official traffic control
devices required for enforcement
purpose.
15-605 Traffic control signal.
15-606 Pedestrians; signal indicators;
regulations.
15-607 Flashing signals:
15-608 Pedestrian-activated school
crossing signals.
15-609 Unauthorized traffic control
devices prohibited.
15-610 Defacement of traffic control
devices.
15-611 Play streets, authority to establish.
15-612 Play streets, restriction on use.
15-613 Designation of crosswalks and
safety zones.
15-614 Traffic lanes.
15-601 Authority to install traffic control
devices.
The city council, by motion or resolution, shall
have placed and maintained traffic-control signs,
signals, and devices when and as required under
the traffic ordinances of this city to make effective
the provisions of such ordinances, and may have
placed and maintained such additional trafficcontrol
signs, signals, and devices as it may deem
necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic
ordinances of this city or under state law or to
guide or warn traffic.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
Cross-Reference: For state law relating to trafficcontrol
devices, see 47 O.S. Sections 11-201 et seq.
15- 602 Traffic control devices; uniform
requirements.
A. All traffic control signs, signals, and
devices shall conform to the manual of
uniform traffic control devices
approved by the State Department of
Public Safety.
B. All signs, signals, and devices
required hereunder for a particular
purpose shall so far as practicable be
uniform as to type and relative
location throughout the city. All traffic
control devices erected and not
inconsistent with the provisions of
state law or this chapter shall be
official traffic control devices.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-603 Obedience to official traffic control
devices.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the
instructions of any official traffic control device
applicable thereto, placed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to
the exemptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this part.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Drivers to obey traffic
devices, 47 O.S. Section 11-201.
15- 604 When official traffic control devices
required for enforcement purpose.
No provision of this chapter for which official
traffic control devices are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if at the time and place of
the alleged violation an official device is not in
proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen
by an ordinarily observant person. If a particular
section does not state that official traffic control
devices are required, such section shall be effective
even though no devices are erected or in place.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-605 Traffic control signal legend.
The display of signal lights, arrows and words
shall be deemed to have the following meanings and
requires the appropriate response on the part of
vehicular traffic and pedestrians:
1. Green alone, “Go”:
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal,
except when prohibited, may proceed
straight through or turn right or left
unless an official sign at such place
prohibits such turn, but any vehicle and
any pedestrian lawfully within the
intersection or adjacent crosswalk at
the time the signal displays green shall
have the right-of-way over such
vehicular traffic; and
b. Pedestrian traffic, facing a green signal
may proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk unless a “Walk” signal
indicator is operating;
2. Steady yellow or amber alone, “Caution”:
a. The showing of such signal color following
green shall constitute a warning that the “Red” or
“Stop” signal will be exhibited immediately
thereafter; and
b. Vehicles facing the signal shall stop before
entering the near side crosswalk or at the limit line,
if it is marked, unless the vehicle is so near the limit
line when the “caution” signal first flashes that stop
cannot be made in safety, in which event vehicles
may proceed cautiously through the intersection and
clear the same before the “red” signal flashes;
3. Red alone, “Stop” :
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop
before entering the crosswalk and shall remain
standing until green or “go” is shown alone. Except
where official signs are erected prohibiting such
turns, vehicles in the right traffic lane, after making
a full stop as required, may enter the intersection
cautiously and make a right turn, but such vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrians or
other traffic in the intersection and the turn shall be
made so as not to interfere in any way with traffic
proceeding on a green signal indication on the cross
street; and
b. Pedestrians facing the signal shall not enter or
cross the roadway when such movement interferes
with traffic proceeding on a green signal indications
on the cross street, or when the movement cannot be
made in safety. No pedestrian facing such signal
shall enter the roadway until the green or “go” is
shown alone unless authorized to do so, by a
pedestrian “walk” signal;
4. Steady red with green arrow:
a. Vehicular traffic facing such signal when in
the proper traffic lane may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated
by the arrow, but shall yield the fight-of-way to
pedestrians lawfully using the intersection. If the
movement indicated by the green arrow is a left turn,
the left turn shall be made only on the red with
green arrow signal; and
b. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter
the roadway until the green or “go” is shown alone
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian “walk”
signal; and
5. Green arrows alone. Whenever vehicular
traffic movements are controlled by green arrows
alone and not displayed with any other signal
indication, vehicles facing such signals may make
the movements indicated by the green arrows and
the movements shall be made only when the green
arrows are displayed. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar Provisions, 47
O.S. Section 11-202.
15-606 Pedestrians; signal indicators;
regulations.
Special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the
words “Walk”, “Wait” or “Don’t Walk” shall
regulate pedestrian movement as follows:
1. “Walk”. Pedestrians facing such signal
may proceed across the roadway in the
direction of the signal and shall be
given the right-of-way by the drivers of
all vehicles; and
2. “Wait” or “Don’t Walk”. No
pedestrian shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such signal,
but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his crossing on the “Walk”
signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or
safety zone while the “Wait” signal is
showing.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-607 Flashing signals.
A. Whenever an illuminated flashing red or
yellow signal is showing, it shall require obedience
by vehicular traffic as follows:
1. “Flashing Red”. When a red light is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers
of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk at an intersection and the firth to proceed
shall be subject to the rules applicable after making
a stop at a stop sign; and
2. “Flashing Yellow”. When a yellow light is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers
of vehicles may proceed through the intersection, or
pass such signal only with caution.
B. This section shall not apply at railroad grade
crossings. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 11-204.
15-608 Pedestrian-activated school crossing
signals.
Whenever a pedestrian-activated school crossing
signal is provided, it requires obedience by
vehicular traffic and pedestrians as follows:
1. “Flashing yellow”:
a. When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers or operators of
vehicles may proceed through the intersection
or pass such signal only with caution; and
b. Pedestrians shall not proceed in conflict with
traffic, but may activate the signal control
switch, and shall wait until steady red alone is
shown before entering the roadway or
intersection controlled by the signal;
2. “Steady yellow alone”:
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby
warned that the red or “Stop” signal with be
exhibited immediately thereafter, and such
vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing
the intersection or pass the signal when the red
or “Stop” signal when the red or “Stop” signal
is exhibited; and
b. No pedestrian shall enter the roadway or
intersection on which the signal controls
vehicular traffic until steady red alone is
shown;
3. “Steady red”:
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall
stop before entering the crosswalk on
the near side of the intersection, and
shall remain standing until flashing
yellow is shown alone;
b. Pedestrians may proceed across the
road controlled by the signal, and shall
be given the right-of –way by the
drivers of all vehicles; and
4. “Steady red and steady yellow combined”:
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal is
thereby warned that the flashing
yellow signal will be exhibited
immediately thereafter, and that such
vehicular traffic shall remain standing
until the flashing yellow is shown
alone; and
b. Pedestrians and thereby warned that
the flashing yellow signal is about to
be shown, and shall not enter the
signal-controlled roadway or
intersection, or in a direction which
conflicts with the movement of
vehicular traffic; but any pedestrian
who has partially completed his
crossing shall proceed to the nearest
sidewalk or safety island, and shall be
given the right-of-way by the drivers
of all vehicles. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 11-203.
15-609 Unauthorized traffic control devices
prohibited.
A. No person shall place, maintain, or display
upon or in view of any highway any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device
which purports to be or is an imitation of or
resembles an official traffic control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to
direct the movement of traffic, or which hides
from view or interferes with the effectiveness
of any official traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal.
B. No person shall place or maintain nor shall
any public authority permit upon any highway
any traffic sign, signal, or device bearing
thereon any commercial advertising.
C. This section shall not prohibit the erection
upon private property adjacent to highways of
signs giving useful directional information
which are of a type that cannot be mistaken
for official signs.
D. Every prohibited sign, signal, marking or
device may be removed without notice.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions,
47 O.S. Section 11-206.
15-610 Defacement of traffic control devices.
A. No person shall without lawful authority
attempt to or in fact alter, destroy, deface, molest,
interfere, tamper, injure, knock down, remove or
have in his possession any traffic control device
or any railroad sign or signal or an inscription,
shield or insignia thereon, or any part thereof.
B. This chapter shall not apply to any of the
following persons when acting within the scope
and duty of their employment:
1. Any officer, agent, independent contractor,
employee, servant or trustee of any governmental
agency; or
2. Any officer, agent independent contractor,
employee, servant or trustee of any contractor,
public utility or railroad company.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 11-207.
15-611 Play streets, authority to establish.
The city council, by motion or resolution, shall
have authority to declare any street or part thereof a
play street and to have placed appropriate signs or
devices in the roadway indicating and helping to
protect the same. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-612 Play streets, restriction on use.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating
any street or part thereof as a play street, no person
shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion
thereof except drivers of vehicles having business
or whose residences are within such closed area;
and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest
care
in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-613 Designation of crosswalks and safety
zones.
The city council by motion or resolution, may:
1. Designate and maintain, by appropriate
devices, marks or lines upon the surface of
the roadway, crosswalks at intersections
where in its opinion there is particular danger
to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at
such other places as it may deem necessary;
and
2. Establish safety zones or islands of such kind
and character and at such places as it may
deem necessary for the protection of
pedestrians. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15- 614 Traffic lanes.
A. The cit council, by motion or resolution, may
be authorized to have traffic lanes marked upon the
roadway of any street where a regular alignment of
traffic is necessary.
B. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it
is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or
refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of
any such lane except when lawfully passing another
vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning
movement or otherwise authorized by ordinance.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47 O.S.
Section 11-309.
\
Chapter 7
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
GEENRALLY
Sections:
15-701 Illegal parking declared public
nuisance.
15-702 Application of standing or
parking regulations.
15-703 Parking time limits may be
established, signs.
15-704 Handicapped parking,
enforcement on public or private
property.
15-705 Parking more than twenty-four
(24) hours.
15-706 Brakes; motor not to be left
running.
15-707 Signs or markings indicating
angle parking.
15-708 Obedience to angle-parking
signs or markings.
15-709 Parking in spaces marked off.
15-710 Permits for loading or unloading
at an angle to the curb.
15-711 Hazardous or congested places;
stopping, standing, parking.
15-712 Stopping, standing or parking
prohibited in specified places.
15-713 Blocking of intersection or
crosswalk prohibited.
15-714 Standing or parking on one-way
roadway.
15-715 Standing or parking on left side
of one-way streets.
15-716 Parking adjacent to schools.
15-717 Parking prohibited at
intersections.
15-718 Parking in alleys, blocking
driveways.
15-719 Entry on private property;
trespass; evidence; burden of
proof.
15-720 Truck parking prohibited.
15-721 Double parking.
15-722 Parking for certain purposes
prohibited.
15-723 Method of parking, standing or
parking close to curb.
15-724 Negligent parking.
15-725 Right-of-way to parallel parking
space.
15-726 Metered parking zones.
15-727 Parking meters.
15-728 Handicapped parking,
enforcement on public or private
property.
15-701 Illegal parking declared public
Nuisance.
Any vehicle in violation of any regulation
contained in this chapter governing, limiting or
prohibiting the parking or standing of a vehicle on
any street or public thoroughfare is hereby declared
to constitute a public nuisance, and each separate
traffic citation issued as authorized herein for such
violation shall constitute a separate notice thereof
to the owner or operator of such vehicle.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15- 702 Application of standing or parking
regulations.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be
applicable when it is necessary for a vehicle to stop
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or official
traffic control device. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-703 Parking time limits may be established,
signs.
A. The city council, by motion or resolution,
may establish parking time limits or
prohibit parking on designated streets or
parts of streets and have appropriate signs
places on the streets. When the signs are in
place, it is unlawful for any person to park
a vehicle in violation of the sign. No such
time limits shall be effective unless a sign is
erected and in place at the time of the
alleged violation. All parking time limit
regulations, unless specifically provided
otherwise, shall be in force and effect
between 8:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. except on
Sundays and legal holidays.
B. The city council ha sole authority to issue
parking permits. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-704 Handicapped parking,
enforcement on public or private
property.
A. It sis unlawful for any person to place or
park a motor vehicle in any parking space
on private property accessible to the public
and where the public is invited or public
property that is designated and posted as a
reserved area for parking of motor vehicles
of a physically disabled person unless such
person has a physical disability insignia as
under the provisions of Section 15-112 of
Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and such
insignias are displayed as provided in
Section 15-112 of Title 47 of the
Oklahoma Statutes or regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
B. Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine as provided in Section
1-108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Handicapped insignia,
application and display on vehicles, 47 O. S.
Section 15-112.
Note: This section is new for review.
15-705 Parking more than twenty-four (24)
hours.
No person shall park a vehicle on any street for
a period of time longer than twenty-four (24)
hours. This section shall not affect parking limits
established for shorter periods
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-706 Brakes; motor not to be left
running.
Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked
vehicles. No driver of a motor vehicle leave the
vehicle with the motor running while parked.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-707 Signs or marking indicating angle
Parking.
The city council, by motion or resolution, shall
determine upon what streets and parts of streets
angle parking shoo be permitted, and shall have
such streets marked or signed.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-708 Obedience to angle-parking signs
or
markings.
On those streets which have been so signed or
marked for angle parking, no person shall park or
stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb
or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or
markings. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47
O.S.. Section 11-1004(c).
15-709 Parking in spaces marked off.
In an area where parking spaces have been
marked off on the surface of the street, a driver
parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking
space as thus marked off, and not on or over a
line delimiting a space. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-710 Permits for loading or unloading
at
an angle to the curb.
A. The city clerk is authorized to issue special
permits to permit the backing of a vehicle
to the curb for the purpose of loading or
unloading merchandise or materials subject
to the terms and conditions of such permit.
Such permits may be issued either to the
owner or lessee of real property or to the
owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such
person the privilege as therein stated and
authorized herein. The city clerk may
revoke such permits at any time.
B. It is unlawful for any permittee or other
person to violate any of the special terms or
conditions of any such permit.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-711 Hazardous or congested places;
stopping, standing, parking.
A. The city council is hereby authorized to
determine and regulate by proper signs the
stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles
when such stopping, standing or parking
would create an especially hazardous
condition or would cause unusual delay to
traffic.
B. When official signs are erected at hazardous
or congested places, as authorized in
Subsection A of this section, no person
shall violate such signs.
C. There is no parking in the middle of a street
in any residential area of the city.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-712 Stopping, standing or parking
Prohibited in specified places.
A. No person shall stop, stand, or park a
vehicle, except in emergencies or when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic
or in compliance with law or the directions
of a police officer or traffic control device
in any of the following places:
1. On a sidewalk, sidewalk area, or between
the sidewalk and the street;
2. In front of a public or private driveway;
3. Within an intersection;
4. Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant
except in a parking space officially marked;
5. On a crosswalk;
6. Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an
intersection;
7. Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to
any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic
control signal located at the side of a
roadway;
8. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb
or within thirty (30) feet of points on the
curb immediately opposite the ends of a
safety zone, unless a different length has
been indicated by signs or markings;
9. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a
railroad crossing;
10. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway
entrance to any fire station, and on the side
of street opposite the entrance to any fire
station
within seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance
when properly signposted;
11. Alongside or opposite any street excavation
or construction when stopping, standing, or
parking would obstruct traffic;
12. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped
or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
13. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure
upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;
or
14. At any place where official signs prohibit
stopping.
B. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully
under his control into any prohibited area or
an unlawful distance away from a curb.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47
O.S. Section 11-1003
15-713 Blocking of intersection or crosswalk
prohibited.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked
crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the
other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicles or pedestrians,
notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication
to proceed.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-714 Standing or parking on one-way
roadway.
A. If a highway includes two(2) or more separate
roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction
upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of the oneway
roadway unless signs are erected to permit such
standing or parking.
B. The city council may determine when standing
or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side
of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs
giving notice thereof. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-715 Standing or parking on left side of oneway
streets.
The city council may have signs erected upon the
left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the
standing or parking of vehicles. When the signs are
in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in
violation of any such signs. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-716 Parking adjacent to schools.
A. The city council may have signs erected
indicating no parking upon either or both sides of
any street adjacent to any school property when
such parking would, in its opinion, interfere with
traffic or create a hazardous situation.
B. No person shall park a vehicle in violation of
any such signs. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-717 Parking prohibited at intersections.
The parking of vehicles at the curb where streets
intersect shall be prohibited fifteen (15) feet in
advance of the crosswalk on the near side of such
intersection. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-718 Parking in alleys, blocking driveways.
No person shall park a vehicle within a street or
alley in such a manner or under such conditions as
to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width
of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular
traffic. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
within a street or alley in such position as to block a
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-719 Entry on private property; trespass;
evidence; burden of proof.
A. No person shall make an entry with any
vehicle upon real property owned or legally
occupied by another without the owner’s or
occupant’s consent except where such private
property is provided as public parking and the
general use of the property is no restricted by
signs or proper markings.
B. Where entry is made upon real property
owned or legally occupied by another without
the owner’s or occupant’s consent, except on
unrestricted public parking, and is complained
of by the owner or legal occupant of the
premises, the burden is put upon the person
making the entry to show that permission for
such entry was given.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-720 Truck parking prohibited.
A. It is unlawful and an offense for any person,
firm or corporation to park any of the
following vehicles which exceed a weight
limit of one ton on any street or alley in a
residential area of the city for more than three
(3) consecutive hours;
1. Truck;
2. Bus;
3. Tractor;
4. Trailer; or
5. Any other commercial vehicle.
B. This section does not apply to the following:
1. Any passenger car;
2. Any vehicle on a state highway or county
section line road within the city limits; or
3. Any vehicle parked on a street or fight-of-way
or for repair, maintenance or installation of public
utilities or for any other governmental purpose.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28 in part )
15-721 Double parking.
A. No driver shall double park or double stop a
vehicle under the following conditions:
1. Within fifty (50) feet of an intersection except
alley intersections, or within ten (10) feet of
an alley intersection;
2. Opposite a double parked or double stopped
vehicle across the street;
3. When such double parking or double stopping
would or does block or interfere materially
with the normal movement of traffic;
4. When parking space adjacent to the curb is
available;
5. When directed by a police officer to move on;
or
6. In any position other than parallel to the curb
and within two (2) feet of the adjacent vehicle
parked next to the curb
B. A driver may double park or double stop a
vehicle only as authorized in this section.
There must be a licensed driver in any vehicle
while it is double parked or double stopped.
C. A driver may double stop for the purpose of,
but only while actually engaged in, the
expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers, subject, however, to all the
general conditions hereinabove set out.
D. A driver may double park for the purpose of,
but only while actually engaged in, the
expeditious loading or unloading of
merchandise, subject, however, to all the
general conditions hereinabove set out. No
such vehicle shall be double parked longer
than ten (10) minutes. (Prior Code, Chapter
28)
15-722 Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway
for the purpose of:
1. Displaying the vehicle for sale;
2. Displaying advertising or displaying
merchandise or other things for sale or selling
merchandise or other things; or
3. Washing, cleaning, or repairing the vehicle,
except for repairs necessitated by an
emergency. (Prior Code, Chapter 28 )
15-723 Method of parking, standing or parking
close to curb.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway
where there are adjacent curbs, shall be so stopped
or parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle
parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches of the
right-hand curb. Any vehicle stopped or parked
upon the left-hand side of a one-way street where
there are adjacent curbs shall be parked or stopped
with the left-hand wheels parallel to and within
eighteen (18) inches of the left-hand curb. (Prior
Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Parking rules, 47 O.S.
Section 11-1004.
15-724 Negligent parking.
No person shall park, cause to be parked, stop or
leave unattended any vehicle as follows:
1. In a careless or negligent manner;
2. In such a manner as to endanger life, limb,
person, or property; or
3. In such manner as to endanger or interfere
with the lawful traffic or use of the streets.
( Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-725 Right-of –way to parallel parking space.
A. The driver of any vehicle intending to
occupy a parallel parking space where a
backing movement is necessary and which is
being vacated by another vehicle shall stop
his vehicle to the rear of the parking space
until the vacating vehicle has cleared and
entered normal traffic. He then shall be
deemed to have the right-of-way to such
parking space over any other vehicle
attempting to park therein.
B. The first of two (2) or more vehicles to reach
the rear boundary of an unoccupied parallel
parking space where a backing movement is
necessary to occupy, shall be deemed to have
the right-of-way to such parking space.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-726 Metered parking zones.
A. Any person who as driver or owner, shall
allow any automobile to remain parked in a
metered parking zone, after the time paid for
on the meter shall have expired shall be
deemed to be in violations of this chapter and
a traffic ticket or summons shall be affixed to
any such vehicle as provided in this coed.
B. Should any person receiving such ticket or
summons for a parking meter violation desire
to plead guilty to such violation, he shall pay
a fine as set by the city within twenty-four
(24) hours after receipt of such ticket or
summons. Such plea of guilty may be
entered and fine paid by depositing the fine
together with the ticket or summons received
in a fine box which shall be attached to a
parking meter, at least one to each block on
each side of the street where parking meters
are placed.
C. After the expiration of twenty-four (24)
hours from the time of receiving any such
traffic ticket or summons for a parking meter
violation, a plea of guilty may only be
entered before the municipal judge at the
time and place specified in the summons or
ticket; upon entering any such plea of guilty
or upon conviction after a plea of innocence,
the violator shall be fined in an amount as set
by the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-727 Parking meters.
A. Where parking meters are erected and the
time limits prescribed thereon are in conflict
with any ordinance or regulation prescribing
parking limits, the parking meter time limit
shall govern, unless other official signs are
attached to the meter post or meter head or
stamped thereon indication to the contrary.
B. The city council shall have the power to
designate the placement of parking meters,
the total parking time allowable thereon, and
to change the placement or timing thereof by
regulation as herein provided.
C. Regardless of the placement or total parking
time allowable on any parking meter, all
such parking meters shall be made so as to
allow twelve (12) minutes parking time for
each one cent ($.01) deposited therein.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-728 Handicapped parking, enforcement on
public or private property.
A. It is unlawful for any person to place or park
a motor vehicle in any parking space on
private property accessible to the public and
where the public is invited or public property
that is designated and posted as a reserved
area for parking of motor vehicles of a
physically disabled person unless such
person has a physical disability insignia as
under the provisions of Section 15-112 of
Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, and such
insignias are displayed as provided in Section
15-112 of Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes
or regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
B. Any person who shall violate any of the
Provisions of this section shall be guilty of an
offense and upon conviction thereof shall be
punishable by a fine as provided in Section
1-108 of this code.
State Law Reference: Handicapped insignia,
application and display on vehicles, 47 O.S.
Section 15-112.
Chapter 8
LOADING
Sections:
15-801 Definitions.
15-802 Curb loading zones, designation.
15-803 Loading zones to be used only for
designated purpose.
15-804 Stopping, standing or parking in
passenger curb loading zone.
15-805 Stopping, standing or parking in
commercial curb loading zone.
15-806 Designation of public carrier stops
and stands.
15-807 Use of bus and taxicab stands
restricted.
15-808 Stopping, standing and parking of
buses and taxis.
15-801 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
1. “Freight loading zones” means all curb loading
zones authorized and regularly used
exclusively for the loading and unloading of
merchandise for storage, trade, shipment or resale;
2. “Commercial vehicle” means:
a. A truck designated for delivery purposes with
the name of the owner or his business painted
on both sides of the vehicle, regularly used
during normal business hours for the delivery
and handling of merchandise or freight and
which bears a regular state commercial license
tag; and
b. A passenger vehicle used regularly and
actually engaged during normal business hours
in the delivery and handling of merchandise or
freight, and which bears a special numbered
license plate issued by the city at the rear of the
vehicle attached to the state license plate
together with an identically numbered decal,
issued vehicle; and
3. “Passenger loading zones” means all loading
zones authorized and used regularly and
exclusively for the loading and unloading of
passengers except bus stops, taxicab stands,
and stands for other passenger common carrier
vehicles.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-802 Curb loading zones, designation.
A. The city council may determine the location
of passenger and freight curb loading zones
and shall have placed and maintained
appropriate signs indicating the zones and
stating the hours during which the provisions
of this section are applicable.
B. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in
violation of signs erected in accordance with
this section.
C. If any loading zone is established on request
of any person, the signs shall not be placed
until the applicant pays to the city an amount
of money estimated by the city council to be
adequate to reimburse the city for all costs of
establishing and signing the same.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-803 Loading zones to be used only for
designated purpose.
No curb loading zone authorized and established
as a passenger loading zone shall be used as a
freight loading zone, and no freight loading zone
shall be used as a passenger loading zone except as
may be specifically provided by law.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-804 Stopping, standing or parking in
passenger curb loading zone.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a
passenger curb loading zone for any purpose or
period of time other than for the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers, during the
hours when the regulations applicable to such curb
loading zones are effective, and then only for a
period not to exceed three (3) minutes. (Prior Code,
Chapter 28)
15-805 Stopping, standing or parking in
commercial curb loading zone.
A. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle
in a commercial curb loading zone for any
purpose or length of time other than for the
expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup
and loading of materials curing hours when
the provisions applicable to such zones are in
effect.
In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading
of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes. Vehicles
using any commercial loading zone shall be subject
to be the licensing requirements and regulations
provided by this chapter.
B. The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop
temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb
loading zone for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when
such stopping does not interfere with any
commercial vehicle which is waiting to enter the
zone.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-806 Designation of public carrier stops and
stands.
The city council may establish loading zones for
common carriers, including but not limited to bus
stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other
passenger common carrier motor vehicles, on such
public streets in such places and in such number as
it shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public. Every such loading zone
shall be designated by appropriate signs.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-807 Use of bus and taxicab stands restricted.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle
other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a
taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and the
appropriate signs are in place. The driver of a
passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus, or taxicab
waiting to enter or about to enter the zone.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
topping, standing and parking of buses and taxis.
A. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park
such vehicle upon any street at any place
other than a bus stand so designated as
provided herein
B. The operator of a bus shall not stop such
vehicle upon any street at any place for the
purpose of loading or unloading passengers or
their baggage except at areas designated as
provided herein, except in case of an
emergency.
C. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop,
bus stand, or passenger loading zone on a
public street in such a manner that the bus,
when stopped to load or unload passengers or
baggage, shall be in a position with the right
front wheel of such vehicle not further than
eighteen (18) inches from the curb and the
bus approximately parallel to the curb so as
not to unduly impede the movement of other
vehicular traffic.
D. The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or
park such vehicle upon any street at any place
other than in a taxicab stand so designated as
provided herein. This provision shall not
prevent the operator of a taxicab from
temporarily stopping in accordance with other
stopping or parking regulations at any place
for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
Chapter 9
TRUNNING MOVEMENTS
Sections:
15-901 Turning markers or indicators.
15-902 Designation of restricted turns.
15-903 Obedience to no-turn signs.
15-904 U-Turns.
15-905 Position and method of turning.
15-906 Turning movements and required
signals.
15-907 Means of giving turn signals.
15-908 Method of giving hand and arm
signals.
15-909 Turns into or from alleys.
15-901 Turning markers or indicators.
A. The city council is authorized to place
markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent
to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such
intersections. The course to be traveled, as so
indicated, may conform to or be other than as
prescribed by law.
B. When authorized markers, buttons, or other
indications are placed within an intersection
indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a
vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-902 Designation of restricted turns.
The city council is hereby authorized to
determine those street intersections at which
drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left or Uturns,
and shall have proper signs placed at the
intersections. The making of the turns may be
prohibited between certain hours of any day and
permitted at other hours. Where turns are
restricted during certain hours pursuant to this
section, the same shall be plainly indicated on the
signs, or they may be removed when turns are
permitted.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-903 Obedience to no-turn signs.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating
that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, the driver
of a vehicle shall not disobey the directions of any
such sign. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-904 U-Turns.
A. The driver of a vehicle shall not turn the
vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction
upon any street in the city at the following locations:
1. At intersections control led by traffic control
devices or signals unless such turns are
specifically authorized;
2. Where a police officer is directing traffic
except at the latter’s direction; or
3. At any other location where an official “no-
U-turn” has been placed and is maintained.
B. Manner of making U-turns. A U-Turn may be
made only when it can be made in safety and
without interfering with other traffic. No person
shall make a U-Turn except in the following manner:
1. By approaching the intersection as closely as
practical to the right curb or edge of the roadway,
the driver giving and continuing to give a signal
for a left turn until the turn is completed,
proceeding to make the turn across the
intersection;
2. In one continuous movement without
stopping or backing the vehicle;
3. By yielding the right-of-way at all times to all
vehicles until such turn in completed; and
4. Without constituting a hazard to or interfering
with any other vehicle. (Prior Code, Chapter 28
in part)
15-905 Position and method of turning.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an
intersection shall do as follows:
1. Right turns. Both the approach for a right
turn and the execution of a right turn shall
be made as close as practicable to the righthand
curb or edge of the roadway;
2. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any
intersection where traffic is permitted to
move in both directions on each roadway
entering the intersection, the approach for a
left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the street nearest the center
thereof by passing to the right of the center
line where it enters the intersection. After
entering the intersection, the left turn shall be
made so as to leave the intersection, the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection to the right of the center of the
roadway being entered. Whenever
practicable, the left turn shall be made in that
portion of the intersection to the left of the
center of the intersection; and
3. Left turns, on other than two-way roadways.
At any intersection where traffic is restricted
to one direction on one or more of the
roadways the driver of a vehicle intending to
turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme lefthand
lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle. After entering the intersection, the
left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection, as nearby as practicable, in the
left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in such direction upon roadway
being entered.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions,
47 O.S. Section 11-601.
15-906 Turning movements and required signals.
A. No person shall turn a vehicle at an
intersection unless the vehicle is in proper
position upon the roadway as required in
section 15-905 of this code, or turn a vehicle
to enter a private road or driveway, or
otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course
or move right or left upon a roadway unless
and until such movement can be made with
reasonable safety. No person shall so turn any
vehicle without giving an appropriate signal
in the manner hereinafter provided.
B. A signal of intersection to turn right or left,
slow or stop when required, shall be given
continuously during not less than the last one
hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle
before turning or stopping.
C. No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the
speed of a vehicle without first giving an
appropriate signal in the manner provided
herein to the driver of any vehicle
immediately to the rear when there is
opportunity to give the signal. (Prior Code,
Chapter28)
State Law Reference: Similar provisions, 47
O.S. Section 11-604.
15-907 Means of giving turn signals.
A. Any stop or turn signal when required herein
shall be given either by means of hand or arm,
or by a signal lamp or lamps, or mechanical
device of a type approved by the Oklahoma
Department of Public Safety, except as
provided in Subsection B of this section.
B. A vehicle shall be equipped with, and the
required signal given by, signal lamps or
devices when:
1. The body or cab of a vehicle or the load of
any vehicle projects twenty-four (24) inches
or more to the left of the center of the steering
wheel;
2. Under any condition where a hand and arm
signal would not be visible both to the front
and rear of the vehicle; or
3. The rear limit of the body of a vehicle or the
load of any vehicle projects fourteen (14) feet
or more beyond the center top pf the steering
post. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-908 Method of giving hand and arm signals.
All signals herein required given by hand and
arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle
in the following manner and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
1. Left turn- hand and arm extended horizontally;
2. Right turn- hand and arm extended upward;
and
3. Stop or decrease speed- hand and arm
extended downward with palm to the rear.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-909 Turns into or from alleys.
A. No vehicles shall turn left when proceeding
into or proceeding out of an alley except
when necessary to enter a one-way street, and
no vehicle shall cross any street or highway
when proceeding into or proceeding out of
any alley except as provided in Subsection B
of this section.
B. Left turns may be made when proceeding out
of an alley if a traffic survey conducted by the
traffic engineer shows that such turn may be
made safely and official signs are erected
authorizing such turns.
C. The foregoing provisions of this section shall
not apply to bus terminals used by licensed
and authorized bus lines. (Prior Code,
Chapter 28)
Chapter 10
PEDESTRIANS
Section:
15-1001 Pedestrians subject to traffic control
signals.
15-1002 Pedestrians’ right-of –way at
crosswalks.
15-1003 Pedestrians to use right half of
crosswalk.
15-1004 Crossing at right angles.
15-1005 When pedestrians shall yield.
15-1006 Pedestrians walking along roadways.
15-1007 Pedestrians prohibited from
soliciting rides, business or
donations from vehicle occupants.
15-1008 Drivers to exercise due care.
15-1009 Crossing prohibited.
15-1010 Obedience of pedestrians to railroad
signals.
15-1001 Pedestrians subject to traffic control
signals.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control
signals as provided for in this code of ordinances,
but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted
those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated
in this chapter. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Pedestrian rights and duties,
47 O.S. Sections 11-501 to 11-507.
15-1002 Pedestrians’ right-of-way at crosswalks.
A. When traffic control signals are not in place
or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way slowing down or stopping, if
need be, to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the
roadway within a crosswalk when:
1. The pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway
upon which the vehicle is traveling; or
2. The pedestrian is approaching so closely from
the opposite edge of the roadway as to be in danger.
The provisions of this subsection are not applicable
under conditions where pedestrians are required to
yield pursuant to this chapter.
B. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb
or other place of safety or walk or run into the
path of the vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.
C. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a
marked crosswalk, or any unmarked crosswalk, or
at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross a
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from the rear shall not overtake to pass
such stopped vehicle.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1003 Pedestrians to use right half of
crosswalk.
Pedestrians, when crossing the street at a
crosswalk, shall move, whenever practicable, upon
the right half of the crosswalk.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1004 Crossing at right angles.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place
other than by a route at right angles to the curb or
by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in
a crosswalk. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1005 When Pedestrians shall yield.
A. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any
point other than within a marked or
unmarked crosswalk at any intersection shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon
the roadway.
B. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point
where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead
pedestrian crossing has been provided shall
yield the right of way to all vehicle upon the
roadway.
C. The provisions of this section are not
applicable where pedestrian crossing are
prohibited.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1006 Pedestrians walking along roadways.
A. Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along
and upon an adjacent roadway.
B. Where sidewalks are not provided, any
pedestrian walking along and upon a
highway shall, when practical, walk only on
the left side of the roadway, or its shoulder,
facing traffic which may approach from the
opposite direction, and shall yield to
approaching vehicles. (Prior Code, Chapter
28)
15-1007 Pedestrians prohibited from soliciting
rides, business of donations from
vehicle
occupants.
A. No person shall stand in a roadway for
purpose of soliciting a ride, donations,
employment or business from the occupant of
any vehicle.
B. No person shall:
1. Stand in any street, roadway or park and stop
or attempt to stop and engage any person in
any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting
contributions or the watching or guarding of
any vehicle while parked or about to be
parked on a street;
2. Sell or attempt to sell anything to any person
in any vehicle;
3. Hand or attempt to hand to any person in any
vehicle any circular, advertisement, handbill
or any political campaign literature, or any
sample, souvenir or gift; or
4. In any other manner, while standing in the
street or roadway, attempt to interfere with
the normal flow of traffic for any other
similar purpose. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1008 Drivers to exercise due care.
Not withstanding the foregoing provisions of this
chapter, every driver shall exercise due care to
avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway, and shall give warning by sounding the
horn when necessary and shall exercise proper
precaution upon observing any child or any
confused or incapacitated person on the roadway.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1009 Crossing prohibited.
Between adjacent intersections, at which traffic
control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall
not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
Pedestrians shall not cross any divided highway
having a median in the center thereof, except in a
crosswalk.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1010 Obedience of pedestrians to railroad
signals.
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or
under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade
crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is
being opened or closed.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
Chapter 11
BICYCLES
Sections:
15-1101 Application of bicycle regulations.
15-1102 Application of traffic law to
bicycles.
15-1103 Obedience to traffic control
devices.
15-1104 Riding on bicycles.
15-1105 Riding on roadways and bicycle
paths.
15-1106 Speed of bicycle.
15-1107 Emerging from alley or driveway.
15-1108 Carrying articles.
15-1109 Parking.
15-1110 Riding on sidewalks.
15-1111 Lamps and equipment on bicycles.
15-1101 Application of bicycle regulations.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply
whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or
upon any public way; or upon any path set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those
exceptions stated in this chapter.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Bicycle regulations, 47 O.S.
Sections 11-1201 et seq.
15-1102 Application of traffic laws to bicycles.
Every person riding a bicycle upon roadway
shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to
all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by
the laws of this state and the traffic provisions of
this code applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except as to special regulations in this chapter and
except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances
which by their nature are inapplicable to such
persons.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1103 Obedience to traffic control devices.
A. Any person operating a bicycle shall obey
the instructions of official traffic control
signals, signs and other control devices
applicable to vehicles unless otherwise
directed by a police officer.
B. Whenever authorized signs are erected
indicating no right or left of U-turn is
permitted, no person operating a bicycle
shall disobey the directions of such sign,
except where such person dismounts from
the bicycle to make any such turn, in which
event, such person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to the pedestrians.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1104 Riding on bicycles.
A. No person operating a bicycle shall ride other
than astride a permanent and regular seat
attached thereto.
B. No bicycle shall be used to carry more
persons at one time than the number for
which it is designed and equipped.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1105 Riding on roadways and bicycle paths.
A. Every person operating a bicycle upon a
roadway shall ride as near to the right hand
side of the roadway shall ride as near to the
right hand side of the roadway as practicable,
exercising due care when passing a standing
vehicle or a vehicle proceeding in the same
direction.
B. Person riding bicycles upon a roadway shall
not ride more than two (2) abreast except on
path or parts of roadway set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.
C. If usable paths for bicycles are provided
adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall
use such paths and shall not use the roadway.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1106 Speed of bicycle.
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed
greater than is reasonable and prudent under the
conditions then existing. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1107 Emerging from alley or driveway.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley
or driveway shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or
side walk area extending across the alley or
driveway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians
approaching on the sidewalk or side walk area.
Upon entering the roadway, the bicycle operator
shall yield the right –of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadways.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1108 Carrying articles.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle, or article which prevents the rider
from keeping at least one hand on the handle bars.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1109 Parking
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other
than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the
sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against
the building or at the curb in such a manner as to
afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1110 Riding on sidewalks.
A. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a
sidewalk within a business district.
B. The city council, by motion or resolution, is
authorized to have erected signs on any
sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of
bicycle thereon by any person; and when
such signs are in place, no person shall
disobey the same.
C. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle
upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the
right of way to any pedestrian and shall give
audible signal before overtaking and passing
such pedestrian. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1111 Lamps and equipment on bicycles.
A. Bicycles in use at night-time shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front which
shall emit a white light visible from a
distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to
the front and with a red reflector on the rear
of a type which shall be visible from fifty (50)
feet to three hundred (300) feet to the rear
when directly in front of lawful upper beams
of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp
emitting a red light
Visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet
to the rear may be used in addition to the red
reflector.
B. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is
equipped with a bell or other device capable
of giving a signal audible for a distance of a
least one hundred (100) feet.
C. A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor
shall any person use, any siren or whistle.
D. Bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which
will enable the operator to make the braked
wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
Chapter 12
(RESERVED)
Chapter 13
IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
Sections:
15-1301 Purpose and effect of
impoundment provisions.
15-1302 Place of impoundment.
15-1303 Duration of impoundment.
15-1304 Police granted authority to
impound vehicles.
15-1305 Disabled vehicles.
15-1306 Vehicles on bridge.
15-1307 Arrest and detention of driver of
vehicle.
15-1308 Vehicle constitutes traffic hazard.
15-1309 Illegal trespass by vehicle.
15-1310 Vehicles parked overtime.
15-1311 Vehicles blocking fire exists or
hydrants.
15-1312 Vehicles parked in intersection.
15-1313 Stolen vehicles; recovery by police.
15-1314 Vehicle with outstanding traffic
citations.
15-1301 Purpose and effect of impoundment
provisions.
The impoundment of vehicles under authority of
the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as
an enforcement procedure for protection of the
public peace, safety and welfare, and the
safeguarding of property, and shall be used
generally for the prevention and removal of traffic
hazards, prevention and abatement of public
nuisances arising from traffic law violations,
protection of the public rights in the use of streets
and thoroughfares from obstructions placed and left
in derogation of those rights, and for safeguarding
and protecting recovered stolen vehicles. (Prior
Code, Chapter 28)
State Law Reference: Ground for removal of
vehicle on highways by highway patrol, 47 O.S.
Section 955; removal of abandoned vehicles on
private property, 47 O.S. Section 954A.
15-1302 Place of impoundment.
Every vehicle that is impounded under the
provisions of this chapter shall be removed to the
nearest garage of place of safekeeping designated
by the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1303 Duration of impoundment.
A. Except as otherwise provided, any vehicle
impounded under the authority of this chapter shall
be stored and held safely until an order for its
release is received from an officer of the traffic
violations bureau or other proper police officer.
B. The order of release of an impounded vehicle
shall be conditioned upon the payment by the
person to whom the release is issued of all
impoundment costs and accrued storage charges
assessed against the vehicle. (Prior Code, Chapter
28)
15-1304 Police granted authority to impound
vehicles.
Members of the police department are hereby
authorized within the limits set forth in this chapter
to impound vehicles under the circumstances
hereinafter enumerated. No impoundment shall be
valid unless made under order of an authorized
police officer and in strict adherence with the
procedures required in this chapter. (Prior Code,
Chapter 28)
15-1305 Disabled vehicles.
A disabled vehicle upon a street or highway may
be impounded under the following circumstances:
1. If left unattended and improperly parked on
street or highway and constitutes a definite hazard
or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic; or
2. If the person in charge of the vehicle is
physically incapacitated to such extent as to be
unable to provide for its custody or removal and the
vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction
to traffic or a hazard.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1306 Vehicles on bridge.
An unattended vehicle left upon any bridge,
viaduct or causeway or in any tube or tunnel, where
the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic or
hazard, may be impounded. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1307 Arrest and detention of driver of
vehicle.
Whenever the driver or person in charge of any
vehicle is placed under arrest and taken into custody
and detained by police under circumstances which
leaves or will leave a vehicle unattended on any
street or highway, the vehicle may be impounded.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1308 Vehicle constitutes traffic hazard.
A vehicle left unattended upon any street, alley
or thoroughfare and so parked illegally as to
constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic shall be impounded.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1309 Illegal trespass by vehicle.
A. An unattended vehicle found to be in
violation of this code may be impounded
when the required complaint has been
properly made and filed as provided in this
section.
B. If a violation of the provision of this code
occurs, the owner or legal occupant who
complains shall sign a complaint against the
person parking the vehicle on the owner’s or
legal occupant’s property, or if the identity of
the person parking the vehicle is unknown,
then the complaint may be filed against the
registered owner of the vehicle. The
complaint shall be verified and shall allege
that the complaining party is the owner or
legal occupant of the property upon which
the vehicle is parked or standing.
C. Upon filing of the complaint by the property
owner or legal occupant, and if there appears
to be proper cause to believe the provisions
of this code have been violated, the police
department shall cause the vehicle to be
impounded from the property and placed in
storage. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1310 Vehicles parked overtime.
Any unattended vehicle which has been parked
for more than one hour in excess of the time
allowed for parking in any place shall be
impounded.
(Prior Coed, Chapter 28)
15-1311 Vehicles blocking fire exits or
hydrants.
Any vehicle illegally parked in such a manner
that it blocks a fire escape ladder, device or exit or
blocks ready access to a fire hydrant shall be
impounded.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1312 Vehicles parked in intersection.
Any unattended vehicle illegally parked in any
street intersection shall be impounded. A disabled
vehicle in an intersection with the person in charge
of the vehicle being present, shall be moved out of
the intersection and to the nearest available legal
parking space at the street curbing.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1313 Stolen vehicles; recovery by police.
A. Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by
police and the registered owner cannot be
found within a reasonable time not exceeding
one hour, or cannot be determined from the
registration papers or other identifying media
in the vehicle or from records or information
available from reports of stolen cars, the
vehicle may be removed to the nearest
authorized place to impoundment and the
registered owner of the vehicle shall be
notified of the location of the place of
impounded as soon as possible by the police
department.
B. If the registered owner is identified, located
and notified of the recovery of the stolen
vehicle, the owner shall be given the right to
make his own arrangement for the removal
of the vehicle within the period of one hour
from the time he is actually notified of its
recovery, and if the owner is unable or
unwilling to effect the removal within the
time specified the vehicle may be impounded.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15-1314 Vehicles with outstanding traffic
citations.
Any vehicle for which a citation has been issued,
pursuant to Section 15-217 of this code for violation
of an ordinance, and has not been presented as
required, may be impounded if parked in violation
of any provision of this part.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
Chapter 14
PENALTIES
Sections:
15-1401 Obedience to traffic code.
15-1402 Penalties.
15-1401 Obedience to traffic code.
A. It is an offense against the city for any person
to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act
required by this chapter.
B. It is an offense against the city for the parent
of any child or for the guardian of any ward to
authorize or knowingly permit any such any child
or ward to violate of the provisions of this chapter.
C. It is an offense for any person to authorize of
knowingly to permit any vehicle registered in his or
her name to be driven or to stand or to be parked in
violation of any of the provision of this part.
(Prior Code, Chapter 28)
15- 1402 Penalties.
Every person violating any of the provisions of
this part containing the traffic laws of the city shall
be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof
shall be fined or punished as provided in Section 1-
108 of this code. (Prior Code, Chapter 28)
PART 16
TRANSPORTATION
Chapters:
1 Railroads
2 Airport and Aircraft
Chapter 1
RAILROADS
Sections:
16-101 Railroads to improve streets and alleys.
16-102 Sidewalks to be constructed by railroads.
16-103 Climbing on trains.
16-104 Speed of trains.
16-105 Blocking streets.
16-101 Railroads to improve streets and alleys.
When a railway occupies any portion of a street with its tracks running in a general direction of such street,
either on or adjacent thereto, the railway company shall improve the space between its tracks and two (2) feet on
either side thereof in the same manner that the remainder of the street is to be, or has been, improved, or with
such other satisfactory material as the council by motion or resolution may approve. In case any railway company
shall occupy an alley with its track or tracks, such company shall improve, gutter, drain, and grade such
alley, and shall surface or pave it with the same material which is to be, or has been, used on the alley, or with
such other satisfactory material as the council by motion or resolution may approve. When the tracks of any railroad
company cross any street that is being or has been paved, the company shall pave as much of the street as is
occupied by its track or tracks and two (2) feet on each side, using the same material as is to be, or has been,
used on the street, or such other satisfactory material as the council by motion or resolution may approve. When
more than one track crosses a street within a distance of one hundred (100) feet, measuring from inside rail to
inside rail, the railroad company shall grade, gutter, drain, and curb the street area between its tracks, and surface
or pave it with the same material which the city is to use or has used, on the street. Railroad companies shall
keep all such improvements made by them in a good state of repair at all times. (Prior Code, Chapter 29 as
amended)
16-102 Sidewalks to be constructed by railroads.
Railway companies shall construct sidewalks crossing their rights of way, using the same material as is used
in adjacent sidewalks insofar as this is practicable under the circumstances. They shall construct sidewalks on
both sides of the streets when both sides are used by pedestrians. The company shall keep such sidewalks in a
good state of repair at all times. (Prior Code, Chapter 29 as amended)
16-103 Climbing on trains.
It is unlawful for any person to climb upon, hold to, or in any manner attach himself to, any railway train, locomotive,
or railway car, while such is in motion within the city, unless such person is acting in line of duty, or
to board any train or railroad car, including a passenger, freight, or other car, except with a proper ticket or the
permission of the person in charge of the train or car or in line of duty. (Prior Code, Chapter 29 as amended)
16-104 Speed of trains.
It is unlawful for any person to operate or drive a train or railroad engine at a speed greater than twenty (20)
miles per hour within the city. (Prior Code, Chapter 29 as amended)
16-105 Blocking streets.
It is unlawful for any railroad train or railroad car to block streets or avenues of the city for a longer period
than five (5) minutes except in the event of an emergency. (Prior Code, Chapter 29)
Chapter 2
AIRPORT AND AIRCRAFT
Sections:
Article A. General Provisions
16-201 Flying plane low over city.
16-202 Stunting prohibited.
16-203 Jumping exhibitions prohibited.
16-204 Airport description.
16-205 Governance and operation.
Article B. Airport Board
16-210 Airport board established.
16-211 Duties of board.
16-212 Finances and budget.
16-213 Rules and organization.
Article A. General Provisions
16-201 Flying plane low over city.
No person or persons shall operate, drive or propel in any manner any kind or character of aeroplane, over the
city at an altitude less than one thousand (1000) feet when in the process of taking off from or landing in a landing
area near the city.
16-202 Stunting prohibited.
No person or persons shall perform any stunt or aerobatic aeronautics with an aeroplane over the city or shall
use an aeroplane over the city in any way other than that which is necessary and proper for flying over the city at
the authorized height.
16-203 Jumping exhibitions prohibited.
No owner or pilot of an aeroplane or other aircraft shall permit any person, when the craft is over the city, to
jump from the craft as an exhibition, to perform any other exhibition on the craft, or to ride on the craft in any
place other than a place designed for occupancy by passengers. No person, when the craft is over the city, shall
jump from the craft, perform any other exhibitions thereon, or ride on the craft in any place not designed for occupancy
by passengers.
16-204 Airport description.
The Bristow Jones Memorial Airport consists of the following land:
1. A tract of land in the west half (W 1/2), of northwest, southwest, and west half (1/2), of west half (W
1/2), northwest. Beginning at the southwest corner, northwest, southwest, thence north three thousand, four hundred
and thirty-two (3432) feet, east four hundred and twenty-five (425) feet, south three thousand, four hundred
and thirty-two (3432) feet, west four hundred and twenty-five (425) feet to point of beginning. Thirty-three thousand,
six hundred and eighty-five (33,685) acres more or less; and
2. North one half (1/2), of southwest quarter (1/4), of the southwest quarter (1/4), of Section One, township
fifteen (15) north, range eight (8) east. Thirty (30) acres more or less.
16-205 Governance and operation.
The Bristow Jones Memorial Airport is operated by the Bristow Airport Authority.
Article B. Airport Board
16-210 Airport board established.
There is created a board to be known as the airport board of the city which shall consist of seven (7) members
to be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the city council. The creation of this board shall be by
appointment for three (3) members to a term of three (3) years, three (3) members for two (2) years, and one
member for a term of one year. Subsequent appointments shall be for terms of three (3) years, except for vacancies
on the board occurring otherwise than by expiration of the term of office, which shall be filled by the mayor
with the consent of the council for the remainder of the unexpired term. (Ord. No. 12-1-86, 12/1/86; Ord. No. 8-
3-87, 8/3/87)
Cross Reference: City planning commission, see Section 12-101 of this code.
16-211 Duties of board.
A. The board shall act in an advisory capacity and its functions and duties shall be to assist the city in all
operation, management and development of the airport, including advice over the improvements, equipment, and
other property used or leased in connection with the airport. The board shall assist in seeing that the airport is
operated and maintained in full accordance with any agreements between the city and the Federal Aviation Administration
or any other governmental agency.
B. The board shall assist the city in complying with all federal air regulations of the FAA pertaining to air
worthiness of aircraft, air traffic rules, certification of aircraft and operation of aircraft and ground vehicles as
may fall under the city’s jurisdiction.
C. The board shall give the city all necessary assistance in protecting all the aerial approaches to the airport.
The term airport includes air space within a five (5) stake mile radius of the runway, up to three thousand (3,000)
feet mean sea level.
D. The board shall advertise the airport to the maximum interest of the city and encourage or cause to permit
sufficient facilities to be available for all possible business in the community.
E. The board shall, when requested, assist the city in coordinating all planning and activity at the airport
with the state and federal aviation agencies.
16-212 Finances and budget.
The board shall recommend to the city annually before the city prepares its budget the amount of funds necessary
for maintenance, operation management or development of the facility. It shall also give an estimated revenue
which will come from the airport. The board shall recommend expenditure of funds in the airport budget in
accordance with accepted council procedures.
16-213 Rules and organization.
A. The board shall operate under parliamentary procedure according to Robert’s Rules of Order.
B. Any recommendations coming to the city council shall have the approval of the majority of the board
members.
C. The members of the board shall not be paid a salary for their services, but shall be enTitled to be reimbursed
for their actual expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
PART 17
UTILITIES
Chapters:
1 General Provisions
2 Water System
3 Sanitary Sewer System
4 Refuse; Collection and Disposal
5 Tulsa Cable Television, Inc.
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
17-101 Utility fees and billings in general.
17-102 Failure to pay utility bills; penalty and disconnection of service.
17-103 Utility taps and connections; fees; utility deposits.
17-104 Other utility fees or charges.
17-105 Lease of systems to municipal authority, regulations.
17-106 Mandatory connection required to city utilities.
17-101 Utility fees and billings in general.
All fees and charges in connection with any customer’s use of the city’s sanitary sewer system, the city’s water
system, or the operation of the city’s collection and disposal of refuse and garbage are billed in accordance
with applicable rates set by the city council or the municipal authority. All fees and charges owing for any of
these utility services shall be billed on one monthly bill submitted to the customer each month. The utility bills
submitted under the terms of this section shall be payable on or before the post due date which is printed on the
bill.
17-102 Failure to pay utility bills; penalty and disconnection of service.
Upon failure of a customer to pay any part of a utility bill submitted to customer by city for any utility service,
the following actions and penalties may result:
1. A penalty may be added to any utility bill which is not paid on or before the due date printed on the bill;
2. The city may terminate utility services to a customer for nonpayment of all or any part of utility bills,
charges, or penalties within ten (10) days of the date of the final notice as provided in paragraphs 3 and 4 of Section
17-102;
3. Prior to the termination of utility services for nonpayment, the customer shall be notified by final notice
that:
a. If the bill is not paid in full within ten (10) days of the date of final notice, the utility service will be terminated;
and
b. That the customer is enTitled to a pre-termination of service hearing with the mayor regarding the proposed
termination of utility service upon the customer’s written request submitted to the mayor;
4. The final notice as provided in paragraph 3 of Section 17-102 shall be given to the customer by certified
mail with return receipt requested at the address shown by the customer’s application for service or posting the
final notice on the premises affected; or
5. If any utility service is discontinued or disconnected pursuant to this section, the city shall not reconnect
or re-establish service until a reconnection fee and the full amount of any outstanding utility bills, penalties or
charges have been paid. (Ord. No. 9-19-88, 9/19/88)
17-103 Utility taps and connections; fees; utility deposits.
A. The city shall approve any request for a water tap and connection or a sewer tap. Prior to granting approval
by the city, the customer shall have paid the connection or tap charge as applicable and set by ordinance,
resolution or motion of the council. The deposit shall serve as a guarantee for the payment of charges for utility
service and other amounts owed to the city in connection with the utility service. It shall be held in trust by the
city. When a customer’s utility service is disconnected, the deposit or any part of such amount deposited which
remains after all such charges and amounts due the city have been satisfied, shall be returned to the customer.
B. A fee for reconnection of utility service where the service has been turned off or a meter has been disconnected
by the city for any reason shall be as set by the city council by motion, resolution or ordinance.
17-104 Other utility fees or charges.
The city council or municipal authority from time to time by motion or resolution shall have the power to establish
rates and charges governing all aspects of the city utility services, including monthly service fees, connection
fees and charges, and deposits.
17-105 Lease of systems to municipal authority, regulations.
The city council has leased its water and sanitary sewer system for operation and maintenance to the Bristow
Municipal Authority. The authority has the power to establish rules and regulations regarding operation and use
of these systems by motion or resolution.
17-106 Mandatory connection required to city utilities.
All facilities requiring service by city utilities, constructed within the city with funds furnished in whole or in
part by the Oklahoma Department of Commerce Economic Development CDBG Financing Program shall connect
to the city sewer, water and gas utility systems.
1. All developers, except low and moderate income developers, of commercial and manufacturing properties
that connect to infrastructure improvements financed in whole or in part by the Oklahoma Department of
Commerce Economic Development CDBG Financing Program shall pay for their own utilities, yard lines, hookups
and other expenses in connecting to the city’s utility systems in the area served by the improvements;
2. Should an entity or person (household) that is connecting to the city’s utility system that has been constructed
from funds provided by the CDBG Economic Development Program be determined as an entity or person
(household) that is defined as a low income household (under the guidelines of the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development LMI income definition) such connection shall be paid for by the city; and
3. Each entity connecting to the city’s utility services that have been constructed in whole or in part from
funds provided by the CDBG Economic Development Financing Program shall provide employment and beneficiary
information as requested by proper governmental agencies on a quarterly basis for a minimum period of
three (3) years after final total close-out to the applicable project. (Ord. No. 5-9-94)
Chapter 2
WATER SYSTEM
Sections:
17-201 Application for water service.
17-202 Deposit for water service.
17-203 One premises to a meter--Subsidiary connection not allowed.
17-204 Turning on water.
17-205 Water may be cut off.
17-206 Turning water on again.
17-207 Not responsible for water stoppage.
17-208 No service connection until bills have been paid.
17-209 Personnel may inspect private premises.
17-210 Interference with fire hydrants--Damage of water system.
17-211 Water shortages--Declaration of emergency.
17-212 Restriction on water use in emergency.
17-213 Proclamation and notice of emergency.
17-214 Grievances with water restrictions.
17-215 Penalties.
17-201 Application for water service.
Any person desiring to secure water from the city system shall make an application therefor. The applicant
shall give such reasonable information as may be requested.
17-202 Deposit for water service.
Every applicant for water service shall make a deposit to serve as a guarantee for the payment of charges for
water service and other amounts owed in connection with the service. When the customer’s service is discontinued,
the deposit or any part of such amount deposited which remains after all such charges and amounts due
have been satisfied, shall be returned to the customer.
17-203 One premises to a meter--Subsidiary connection not allowed.
Not more than one premises or living unit may be connected to any one water meter. No customer shall make
or permit to be made any subsidiary connection of another’s premises with his water service.
17-204 Turning on water.
It is unlawful for any person to turn the water on to any premises from the water system, except by permission
of the city or authority. The city or authority will see that the water is turned on when all requirements for service
have been complied with.
17-205 Water may be cut off.
Water may be cut off and service discontinued for any user for any of the following reasons:
1. Violation of any ordinance provision relating to the water system, or violation of any ordinance provision
or any provision of any code adopted by reference relating to water and sanitary plumbing;
2. Failure to pay all or a part of any water bill, charge or penalty in connection with Section 17-102 or in
connection with the water system or the sewer use fee by the time specified; and
3. Any act or omission in regard to the water system or sanitary sewer system, the use of water, or the disposal
of liquid wastes, which jeopardizes the public health or safety, creates a public nuisance, or interferes with
the rights of others. (Ord. No. 9-19-88A, 9/19/88)
17-206 Turning water on again.
When a customer’s water service has been cut off because of delinquency or act or omission of the customer,
as provided by ordinance, it may be turned on again when all charges have been paid or other change in the conditions
justify it. A charge shall be made for turning the water on again.
17-207 Not responsible for water stoppage.
Neither the city nor the authority shall be responsible for any damages due to stoppage or interruption of water
service.
17-208 No service connection until bills have been paid.
A person owing a water bill or other charges in connection with the water system shall not be extended water
service until such bills and charges have been paid.
17-209 Personnel may inspect private premises.
Authorized personnel in the service of the water system may enter any private premises served by the water
system at any reasonable times and inspect the water pipes and fixtures on the premises.
17-210 Interference with fire hydrants--Damage of water system.
A. It is unlawful for any person, except one duly authorized by city personnel, to open, turn on or off, interfere
with, attach any pipe or hose to, or connect anything with, any fire hydrant belonging to the city.
B. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct access to any fire hydrant by placing around or thereon brick,
lumber, dirt or other thing, or in any other manner.
C. It is unlawful for any person to damage, destroy, or tamper with any pipes, meters, or other equipment or
property which is a part of the water system.
D. Every person violating any provisions of Part 17, Chapter 2, Section 17-210 shall be deemed guilty of an
offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined and punished as provided in Part 1, Chapter 1, Section 1-108
of the code. (Ord. 3-4-96 §§ 1, 2)
17-211 Water shortages--Declaration of emergency.
A. Whenever an emergency exists by reason of a shortage of water due to inadequate supply, limited treatment
or distribution capacity or failure of equipment or material, the mayor is hereby authorized to restrict or
prohibit the use of water from the city’s water system.
B. An emergency exists whenever the mayor reasonably determines that the city’s water system is unable
or will within sixty (60) days become unable to supply the full commercial and domestic needs of the users
thereof, including adequate fire protection.
17-212 Restriction on water use in emergency.
A. Upon the determination that such an emergency exists the mayor shall issue a proclamation declaring the
emergency and setting out with particularity an order restricting use of water from the city system. The order
may:
1. Restrict water usage during certain periods of the day or week or according to any orderly and nondiscriminatory
scheme; and
2. Prohibit usages not essential to public health and safety. The order may be revised from time to time as
the mayor deems necessary.
B. A duly proclaimed emergency shall continue and the terms of the proclamation shall be in force for
thirty (30) days or until such time as the mayor shall cause to be published a proclamation that the emergency
has ended, whichever is shorter, unless the board by resolution approved by a majority of all its members votes
to terminate the emergency and proclamation upon a different date.
17-213 Proclamation and notice of emergency.
A. The proclamation required by the preceding section shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city or, if there is no such newspaper in which the proclamation may be published within twenty-four
(24) hours after the emergency arises, publication shall be by posting a copy of the proclamation in ten (10)
prominent places in the city. The emergency shall be in full force and effect upon publication. Substantial compliance
with this section is sufficient to effect the emergency.
B. Whenever a sudden or unexpected event so reduces the availability of water or water pressure as to create
an immediate threat to public health or safety the notice of the proclamation may be given by any reasonable
means, including electronic means. The emergency shall be in full force and effect upon such notice. However,
if any means other than that required in Paragraph A of this section is used, the proclamation shall be republished
in accordance with Paragraph A within twenty-four (24) hours of the first notice.
17-214 Grievances with water restrictions.
Any person feeling aggrieved by a proclamation of the mayor shall have the right to present the matter to the
next regular or special meeting of the city council or to any emergency session called to discuss the water emergency.
The board may exempt such aggrieved person, wholly or in part, from compliance with the proclamation
order upon a showing that compliance creates an immediate threat to the person’s health or safety. The ruling of
the council by a majority vote of all its members shall be final and binding as to the continuance of any terms of
the proclamation. Until and unless the action of the mayor is modified or revoked by action of the council all
water users shall be bound by the proclamation.
17-215 Penalties.
Any person who in any manner directly or indirectly violates or permits others under his supervision, custody
or control to violate any term of a duly published proclamation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any violation
of the provisions of the mayor’s proclamation or action of the board shall be punishable by a fine or imprisonment
as provided in Section 1-108 of this code.
Chapter 3
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
Sections:
17-301 Sewer use fee.
17-302 Prohibited discharges.
17-303 New sewers and connections.
17-304 Interceptors required.
17-305 Right of entry.
17-306 Penalty.
17-301 Sewer use fee.
For the purpose of providing funds for the maintenance of the sanitary sewer system of the city and for other
purposes, there shall be a system of fees and charges for the use of the sanitary sewer system as established by
motion or resolution of the city council or authority. In addition those fees and charges currently in force in the
city shall remain in force until changed by motion, resolution, or ordinance.
17-302 Prohibited discharges.
A. No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes
may:
1. Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities;
2. Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or
3. Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent.
B. All discharges shall be prohibited except those that meet the criteria for “Domestic Wastewater.” BOD
concentration shall not exceed 210* mg/l. SS shall not exceed 200* mg/l.
C. All industrial discharges are prohibited: At the present time there are no industrial users in the city. If an
industrial user should desire to locate in the city and make use of the sewerage system, an industrial cost recovery
system will be initiated in accordance with EPA and state regulations at that time to compensate for his use
of the system.
D. Any new connections from inflow sources into the sanitary sewer portions of the sewer system shall be
prohibited.
* Maximum limit for average domestic wastewater.
17-303 New sewers and connections.
A. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing codes and other applicable rules and regulations of the city.
B. When a public sewer becomes available within two hundred (200) feet, the building sewer shall be connected
to the sewer within sixty (60) days.
17-304 Interceptors required.
A. For the purposes of this section, the word “interceptor” means a device designed and installed so as to
separate and retain deleterious, hazardous or undesirable matter from normal waste and permit normal sewage or
liquid waste to discharge into the sewer system by gravity.
B. In any building, establishment, house, garage or place where vehicles are washed or where sand, dirt,
gravel, oil, gasoline, grease, or other grainy, deleterious or insoluble matter is washed or discharged into the
sanitary sewer system of the city, the drain into which such materials are discharged shall be equipped with a
sand trap or interceptor which shall be so designed and constructed as to be readily accessible for cleaning and
inspection and that part of the discharge line which is within the trap or interceptor leading from such interceptor
to the sewer, shall at all times be equipped with a water seal or vertically downward turned elbow of ninety degrees
(90°) and of not less than ten inches (10”) in length below the bottom of the outlet of such interceptor.
C. Whenever in the judgment of the water superintendent of the city, there is reason to believe that this section
is being violated, the water superintendent or any of the employees of the water department on orders of the
water superintendent, shall have the right and duty at all reasonable times during daylight hours to enter such
place for the purpose of inspecting the same to determine whether in fact this section is being violated. The refusal
to admit the water superintendent or any employee of the water department into any such place for the purposes
above mentioned by any owner, tenant, manager, or occupier of any such place shall be considered a violation
of this section. (Prior Code, Chapter 4, Article A)
17-305 Right of entry.
Authorized personnel in the service of the sewer system may enter any private premises or property served by
the sanitary sewer system at any reasonable time and inspect the pipes, lines and fixtures on the premises.
17-306 Penalty.
A. A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable
by a fine as provided in Section 1-108 of this code for each act of violation and for each day of violation.
B. In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection A of this section the city is entitled to pursue all
other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a
person continuing prohibited discharges.
C. The city reserves the right to terminate service to any customer that fails to pay bills when due or discharges
any prohibited wastes into the sewer system.
Chapter 4
REFUSE; COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Sections:
17-401 Containers.
17-402 Definitions.
17-403 Accumulations of garbage and other refuse.
17-404 Garbage cans to be provided.
17-405 Capacity, number, material.
17-406 Metal container for dry refuse.
17-407 Lids to be kept on cans.
17-408 Where cans are to be kept.
17-409 Inspection, enforcement.
17-410 Burning trash prohibited.
17-411 Use of municipal refuse service required.
17-412 Dumping on property without owner’s consent prohibited.
17-413 Penalty.
17-401 Containers.
The council or authority shall prescribe the size and kinds of containers in which garbage and other refuse
shall be placed, and the location where such containers are to be placed for pick-up. (Prior Code, Chapter 13, as
amended)
17-402 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, “wet garbage” means all vegetable or animal matter such as waste material
from kitchens, grocery stores, butcher shops, restaurants, cafes, hotels, rooming and boarding houses, and includes,
but is not limited to, scraps of meat, bread, bones, peelings of fruit and vegetables. “Dry refuse” includes,
but is not limited to, such items as feathers, coffee grounds, tin or other cans, paper and paper boxes, glass,
ashes, cinders, rocks, old clothes, shoes, broken dishes and utensils, metals and all kinds of junk and useless material
and waste. (Prior Code, Chapter 13, as amended)
17-403 Accumulations of garbage and other refuse.
No person shall permit garbage or other refuse to accumulate on premises occupied by him in such manner
that the garbage or other refuse becomes a hazard to the health or safety of others. Such an accumulation of garbage
or other refuse is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and may be abated as such. (Prior Code, Chapter 13, as
amended)
17-404 Garbage cans to be provided.
Every owner, occupant, tenant, lessee, or other legal entity occupying a residence, building, house, or structure
within the corporate limits of the city shall utilize the polycarts or bins provided by the city or its contractor
for garbage, refuse, or rubbish. (Prior Code, Chapter 13, as amended: Ord. 45-100404 § 1)
17-405 Capacity, number, material.
Repealed by Ordinance Number 46-100404 § 1.
(Prior Code, Chapter 13, as amended: Ord. 46-100404 § 1)
17-406 Metal container for dry refuse.
Repealed by Ordinance Number 47-100404 § 1.
(Prior Code, Chapter 13, as amended: Ord. 47-100404 § 1)
17-407 Lids to be kept on cans.
The lids or covers of all polycarts or bins shall at all times be kept on and closed so that flies and vermin may
not have access to the contents. The lids or covers of all polycarts or bins shall only be opened for the placement
or removal from the polycarts or bins of garbage, refuse, or rubbish. (Prior Code, Chapter 13, as amended: Ord.
48-100404 § 1)
17-408 Where cans are to be kept.
A. Every owner, occupant, tenant, lessee, or other legal entity shall at all times store all polycarts, except as
provided in subsection B of this section within three (3) feet of the house, residence, building, or structure occupied
by the owner, occupant, tenants, lessee, or other legal entity.
B. On those days which the city has designated as the day which the trash, garbage, refuse, or rubbish will
be collected, every owner, occupant, tenant, lessee, or other legal entity shall place the polycart within three (3)
feet of the street or such other location as determined by the city or contractor.
C. By eight a.m., on the day following the day the trash, garbage, refuse, or rubbish is collected by the
city’s contractor, every owner, occupant, tenant, lessee, or other legal entity shall return the polycart to a location
set forth in subsection A of this section.
D. In the event the polycart has not been returned as required by subsection C of this section, an assessment
of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be placed on the next utility bill applicable to the house, residence, building, or
structure where the polycart is located. (Prior Code, Chapter 13, as amended: Ord. 49-100404 § 1)
17-409 Inspection, enforcement.
The agents or employees of the city or authority may make, or cause to be made, inspections to determine.
A. Whether garbage, refuse, or rubbish is being properly disposed of; and
B. Whether polycarts have been or are properly located. (Prior Code, Chapter 13, as amended: Ord. 50-
100404 § 1)
17-410 Burning trash prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person or persons to burn trash or garbage within the city limits. (Prior Code, Chapter
13, as amended)
17-411 Use of municipal refuse service required.
All residents of the city who are served by the city water or use the city sanitary sewer facilities are required
to use the city refuse service or such service as shall be designated by the city or municipal authority, and shall
pay the required fee for such service as determined by the city or municipal authority. Each day of violation
hereof shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. 85-04, 4/15/85)
17-412 Dumping on property without owner’s consent prohibited.
No person shall dump or place any garbage, refuse or material of any kind upon any premises or in any container
or dumpster located on any premises without the consent of the owner of such premises. (Ord. No. 9-5-89)
17-413 Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of this code. Each day of violation hereof shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. No. 9-5-89)
Chapter 5
TULSA CABLE TELEVISION, INC.
Sections:
17-501 Short title.
17-502 Definitions.
17-503 Grant of permit.
17-504 Rules of grantee.
17-505 Service standards.
17-506 Regulation by city.
17-507 Conditions on use of public ways.
17-508 Erection, removal and joint use of poles.
17-509 Permit fee.
17-510 Rates to subscribers.
17-511 Liability of grantee--Insurance and indemnification.
17-512 Channel capacity.
17-513 System extension.
17-514 Operational standards.
17-515 Services to subscribers.
17-516 Governmental and educational uses.
17-517 Services to city.
17-518 Compliance and monitoring.
17-519 Default of grantee--Penalties and revocation.
17-520 Assignability.
17-521 Right of city to purchase system.
17-522 Nondiscrimination.
17-523 Modification.
17-524 Miscellaneous provisions.
17-525 Acceptance by grantee.
17-501 Short title.
Part 17, Chapter 5 of the code of ordinances of the city of Bristow is hereby created to provide as follows in
this chapter. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 1)
17-502 Definitions.
For the purposes of this permit, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning
given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future
tense, words in plural include the singular and words in the singular include the plural. The word “shall” is
always mandatory and not directory.
“Affiliate” means any person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership
or control with grantee.
“Basic cable service” means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast
signals and includes educational and government access channels.
“Cable Act” means the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection
and Competition Act (Public Law No. 102-385, 1992) and as the same may hereafter be amended.
“Cable channel” or “channel” means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a
cable television system and which is capable of transmitting a television channel as defined by the FCC.
“Cable service” means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video and audio programming or other programming
services and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of video and audio programming
or other programming services provided through electric or electronic signals, or which utilizes any
facility or equipment of the cable system.
“Cable television system” or “cable system” or “system” means facilities consisting of antennae, coaxial cables,
fiber optic cables, wave guides, conductors or other closed transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception and control equipment, and other equipment designed to provide cable service or other lawful
service to subscribers and users.
“City” means the city of Bristow, Oklahoma, a municipal corporation in its present incorporated form or in
any other reorganized or changed form.
“Council” means the city council of the city or any body constituting in the future the legislative body of the
city.
“FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission or its successor.
“Grantee” means Tulsa Cable Television, Inc., now doing business as TCI Cablevision of Tulsa or its lawful
successor, transferee or assignee.
“Gross operating revenues” means any and all fees, charges, cash, credits, property of any kind or nature, consideration,
compensation or receipts derived directly or indirectly by grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents,
or arising from or attributable to the operation of the cable television system, except that the term shall not include:
1. The amount of any refunds, corrective billing credits or other repayments made to subscribers or users;
2. Any taxes on service furnished by grantee, imposed directly or indirectly on any subscriber or user by
any municipal corporation, political subdivision, state or other governmental unit and collected by grantee for
the governmental unit;
3. Receipts for the sale or transfer of tangible property;
4. Receipts for the sale or transfer of the system;
5. Receipts from the installation or reconnection of cable service, the transfer of an existing connection, the
moving of a cable television outlet, or other nonrecurring charges to a subscriber or user for technical or installation
services; and
6. Charges, credits, compensation, or payments on a commercially reasonable basis to an affiliate, subsidiary
or parent for services rendered to grantee.
“Other lawful service” means any service other than cable service provided through electric or electronic signals
or which utilizes any facility or equipment of the cable system.
“Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust corporation or
governmental entity.
“Permit” means the rights and privileges granted by city to grantee to construct, operate, maintain and upgrade
a cable television system utilizing public ways within the corporate limits of the city of Bristow, Oklahoma,
for the purpose of offering cable service or other lawful service to subscribers.
“Public way” means the surface of and the space above and below and public street highway, freeway, bridge,
alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, drive, circle or other public right-of-way, including but
not limited to, public utility and communication easements, dedicated utility strips or rights-of-way dedicated for
compatible public uses, and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located within or held by city
in the service area which entitles city or grantee to its use for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing and
maintaining the cable television system.
“Service area” means the present corporate limits of the city and any additions caused by annexation or other
lawful means.
“State-of-the-art” means the most current technology which is economically feasible, has been performance
tested and is commonly accepted by industry standards for cable television systems of comparable size.
“Subscriber” means any person lawfully receiving cable service or other lawful service from the cable television
system. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 2)
17-503 Grant of permit.
A. City hereby grants to grantee a permit to enter upon the public ways to install, construct, operate, maintain,
rebuild and upgrade in, upon, along, across, above and under the public ways a cable television system for
the purpose of providing cable service and other lawful services to subscribers subject to the terms, conditions
and provisions contained in this permit, the charter and applicable laws and regulations of Oklahoma and the
United States of America.
B. This permit shall be the measure of the rights, privileges and liabilities of city as well as the grantee. In
any court proceeding involving any claim against the city or other governmental entity, or any official, member,
employee or agent of the city or entity, arising from the regulation of cable service or from a decision of approval
or disapproval with respect to a grant, renewal, transfer, or amendment of this permit, any relief, to the
extent such relief is required by any provision of federal, state or local law, shall be limited to injunctive relief
and declaratory relief.
C. This permit shall not be exclusive and nothing herein shall be construed to divest city of its control and
regulation of the public ways. The city reserves the right to grant similar or other uses of the public way to any
person or entity during the period of this nonexclusive franchise.
D. The term of this permit shall be ten (10) years. This permit shall expire on July 29, 2005, at eleven fiftynine
p.m., unless modified subject to the provisions set forth in Sections 7-518(C) and (D). (Ord. 6-5-95A § 3)
17-504 Rules of grantee.
The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate and enforce such reasonable rules, regulations, terms and
conditions governing the conduct of its business as it shall deem necessary to enable grantee to exercise its rights
and perform its obligations under this permit and to assure uninterrupted cable service to each and all of its subscribers.
Such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this permit,
the rules and regulations of the FCC or any other body having lawful jurisdiction. The rules of grantee shall become
effective only upon or after, if a later effective date is specified therein, the filing of copies of such rules
with the city clerk and the secretary to the council. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 4)
17-505 Service standards.
Grantee shall maintain and operate the cable system and render efficient cable service in accordance with such
rules and regulations as shall be promulgated by the FCC. Wherever it is necessary to interrupt cable service for
the purpose of making repairs, adjustments or installments, grantee shall do so at such time as will cause the
least inconvenience to subscribers, and unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary,
grantee shall give notice to subscribers. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 5)
17-506 Regulation by city.
A. Grantee in the installation, maintenance and operation of the cable television system shall, at all times,
be subject to the terms and provisions of the general ordinances of the city and to the lawful exercise of the police
power of the city.
B. Grantee shall be subject to the lawful exercise by city of all other powers, functions, rights, privileges
and immunities of regulation of the cable system, cable service or other lawful service granted or delegated to
city by the Charter, by the Constitution and laws of Oklahoma or the laws and regulations of the United States of
America. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 6)
17-507 Conditions on use of public ways.
A. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by grantee within the service
area shall be located so as not to obstruct or interfere with the proper use of the public ways and other public
places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights of property owners who abut any of the public ways
and places, and not to interfere with existing public utility installments. In all areas of the service area where all
cables, wires or other like facilities of public utilities are placed underground, grantee shall place its cables, wires
or other like facilities underground to the maximum extent existing technology reasonably permits and shall
mark such facilities, indicating their location by a method approved by city’s department of public works. Upon
request, grantee shall furnish to and file with city maps, plats and permanent records of the location and character
of all facilities constructed, including underground facilities. Such maps, plats, and permanent records shall
be updated as required by city.
B. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, grantee shall, at its own
expense, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or other surface of any public way disturbed in accordance
with the standards and specifications of the city.
C. If at any time during the period of this permit city shall elect to alter or change the grade or location of
any water line, sewer line, street, alley or other public way, grantee shall, upon reasonable notice by city, remove
and relocate its poles, wires, cables, conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense, and in each instance
comply with the standards and specifications of the city.
D. Grantee shall not place poles, conduits or other fixtures above or below ground where the same will interfere
with any gas, electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrant or other utility, and all such poles, conduits or
other fixtures placed in any public way shall be so placed as to comply with all requirements of the city.
E. Grantee shall, on request of any person holding a house moving permit issued by city, temporarily move
its cables, equipment or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings with the expense of such temporary removal
to be paid by the person requesting the same. Grantee shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours advance
notice to arrange for such temporary changes.
F. Grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees upon and overhanging the public ways of city so as to
prevent the branches of trees from coming in contact with the equipment and cables of grantee, except that at the
option of city such trimming may be done by city, or under its supervision and direction, to the expense and liability
of grantee and other franchise and permit grantees.
G. city shall not be liable to grantee for any injury to grantee’s cable television system caused by any city
employee while performing emergency repairs within the public ways. In all other circumstances when city employees
negligently injure grantee’s cable system, city shall only be liable to grantee for the grantee’s actual cost
of materials, equipment and labor necessary to effect repairs, with no allowance for interruptions to service or
loss of revenues, subject to any applicable limits of liability established by the Oklahoma Governmental Tort
Liability Act. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 7)
17-508 Erection, removal and joint use of poles.
A. No poles, conduits or other structures shall be erected or installed by grantee without prior approval of
city with regard to location, height, type and other pertinent aspects. Grantee shall not have a vested right to retain
the location of any pole, conduit or structure installed by grantee. Such poles, conduits or structures shall be
removed or modified by grantee at its own expense when necessary for the convenience of city.
B. where poles, conduits or other structures of any public utility company are available for use by grantee,
city may require grantee to use such poles, conduits and structures if the permission and consent of such public
utility company may be obtained by grantee and if the terms of the use available to grantee are just and reasonable.
C. Where a public utility serving city desires to make use of the poles, conduits or other structures of
grantee but an agreement with grantee cannot be reached, city may require grantee to permit such use for such
consideration and upon such terms as the council shall determine to be just and reasonable if the use would not
unduly interfere with use of the cable television system.
D. Where city owned utility poles are available for use by grantee, grantee shall pay city the same pole
rental per annum as paid by grantee for the use of pole owned by public utilities. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 8)
17-509 Permit fee.
Grantee shall pay to city as compensation for the rights and privileges enjoyed under this permit an annual fee
on a calendar year basis equal to three (3) percent of the gross operating revenues from the cable system in the
service area. The fee, together with any accumulated interest, shall be payable monthly on or before the fortyfifty
day after the end of each month on gross operating revenues received for that month. If the payment is not
timely made, interest upon any unpaid portion shall accrue at the rate of one and one-half (1 1/2) percent per
month until paid. Grantee shall file a complete and accurate verified statement of all gross operating revenues
within the service area during the period for which the monthly payment is made and an annual statement of
such gross operating revenues, verified by the grantee’s external certified public accountant, within sixty (60)
days after the end of each calendar year. Grantee’s first annual statement shall include the months of the calendar
year that preceded the first month in which this permit is effective. If grantee fails or refuses to pay such fee, city
may maintain an action against grantee for the amount of such fee and interest and all expenses of collecting
same, including reasonable attorneys fees. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 9)
17-510 Rates to subscribers.
Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, the Cable Act and the
Constitution and laws of Oklahoma, the council may regulate the rates of grantee for the basic cable service to be
furnished by grantee under this permit. No rates shall be adopted or changed by the council except after notice to
the public and to grantee and after a public hearing. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 10)
17-511 Liability of grantee--Insurance and indemnification.
Grantee shall defend and hold city harmless from all loss sustained by city by reason of any suit, judgment,
execution, claim or demand resulting out of copyright infringement and/or the construction, operation or maintenance
by grantee of a cable television system in the service area. Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect
for the term of this permit, at grantee’s sole expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy, in protection
of city, the council, and city officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, issued by a company
authorized to do business in the state of Oklahoma, protecting city and all persons against liability for loss or
damage for personal injury, death and property damage occasioned by the operations of grantee under this permit
in the minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00); provided, if the maximum liability of the
city under the Oklahoma Governmental Tort Liability Act should be increased to more than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00), the amount of liability insurance required hereunder shall be increased to that amount. Grantee
shall file with the city clerk certificates of the insurance required hereunder in a form satisfactory to the city attorney.
(Ord. 6-5-95A § 11)
17-512 Channel capacity.
A. The cable television system now owned and operated by grantee within the service area provides a
maximum of forty (40) video channels and consists of coaxial cables, amplifiers, conductors and other equipment
and facilities which represented the state-of-the-art at the time of construction. Channel capacity expansion
through the deployment of digital compression shall be implemented as soon as digital compression technology
reaches state-of-the-art as defined in this document and commonly available to similar communities nation wide.
In the event that digital compression does not reach state-of-the-art as defined herein within ten (10) years
grantee shall upgrade or rebuild the cable system to a capacity of at least seventy-two (72) video channels.
B. Grantee shall not charge a subscriber any direct fee or assessment for the system channel capacity expansion,
including the upgrade of drops required for service to a subscriber. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 12)
17-513 System extension.
The system shall be extended and cable service provided to any area where there are then existing thirty-five
(35) homes within one mile of existing cable system or ten (10) homes within one-quarter mile of the existing
cable system. In other areas, grantee may charge for extension of the cable system based upon the cost of labor
and materials. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 13)
17-514 Operational standards.
A. Grantee shall maintain and operate the cable system so as to provide video, audio and other signals to be
delivered with signal strength and quality levels which meet the parameters specified by the FCC and any other
normally accepted industry standards. Grantee shall construct the system channel capacity expansion and operate
and maintain the system in a manner consistent with all ordinary care and all applicable laws, ordinances, construction
standards and FCC technical standards. Upon request, grantee shall provide city a report of the results
of any FCC required proof of performance test conducted by grantee.
B. Grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby battery power for trunk amplifiers for a
minimum period of four (4) hours.
C. Grantee shall, as a part of the system channel capacity expansion, provide capacity for interactive services
which may be added to the system as such services become technically and economically feasible.
D. Grantee may interconnect the cable television system within the service area with cable television systems
owned or operated by grantee within adjacent cities.
E. Upon request, grantee shall provide subscribers with a parental control locking device or digital code
capable of blocking or otherwise preventing a television set from receiving a channel or audio signal, for which
grantee imposes a separate charge.
F. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following standards shall be met no less than ninety-five
(95) percent of the time on an annual basis:
1. Standard installations shall be performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed;
2. Twenty-four (24) hour response to isolated service outages;
3. Twenty-four (24) hour response to area outages (ten (10) or more subscribers);
4. Six (6) hour response to system wide outages.
G. Grantee shall establish procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints which
shall be subject to the approval of the city manager of the city.
H. City shall notify grantee in writing of any complaint from subscribers or of any failure of grantee to
comply with the terms and conditions of this permit. Grantee, upon receipt of such notice, shall promptly investigate
the complaint and take such action as is necessary to provide cable service to subscribers and to operate
the system as required. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 14)
17-515 Services to subscribers.
A. Grantee shall provide to subscribers as a part of its basic cable service local television broadcast signals
as required by the Cable Act and FCC regulations subject to obtaining the consent of the local broadcast stations
as required by law, and educational and public affairs programming including local educational and governmental
programs.
B. Upon completion of the system channel capacity expansion, grantee may offer to subscribers programming
on at least fifty (50) video channels including the video channels offered as a part of basic cable service.
C. Grantee shall provide stereo audio services. All re-transmitted broadcast signals that are broadcast in
stereo will be delivered in stereo. All programming services added to the system after the effective date of this
ordinance will be provided in stereo if available to grantee in stereo.
D. Upon request, and at a reasonable charge, grantee shall provide to subscribers an input selector switch to
permit broadcast television reception from an antenna. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 15)
17-516 Governmental and educational uses.
A. upon completion of the system channel capacity expansion, grantee shall provide two (2) channels on
the system for governmental and educational use at no cost to such users.
B. Grantee shall provide on free service outlet to the system with additional service outlets to be provided
at the cost of labor and materials, and with no monthly service charge for service outlets or for services which
are not offered on a premium or pay-per-view basis for each state accredited school and institution of higher
learning for the channels allocated for educational use.
C. Grantee shall have the right to temporarily use any unused portion of a channel allocated under subsections
A and C of this section for governmental and educational use which is not being fully utilized, as defined
herein; provided, such use shall not interfere with any educational or governmental use. If the channels provided
under this section for governmental and educational use are being fully utilized, grantee shall provide at no cost
to the user for governmental and educational use the first channel added to the cable television system above
eighty-four (84) channels, above ninety-six (96) channels, above one hundred eight (108) channels, and additional
channels in a like progression as channels are added to the cable television system. Generally, a channel
shall be considered as being fully utilized if more than an average of forty-eight (48) hours per week over a six
(6) month period of programming other than character generated programming is offered. School terms, seasonal
and special concerns shall be considered in determining whether a channel is fully utilized. If a channel allocated
for governmental or educational use is being temporarily used by the grantee, the governmental or educational
institution for which the channel has been allocated shall have the right to require the return of the channel or
portion thereof by a written statement to grantee that the institution is prepared to fully utilize the channel or portion
thereof in which event the channel or portion thereof shall be returned to such institution within three (3)
months after receipt by grantee of the statement.
D. Grantee shall not make any separate or premium charge to a subscriber for access to educational or governmental
channels.
E. All channels allocated for governmental and educational use shall be of the same technical quality as the
channels on the cable system for cable service. All channels allocated for educational use shall be available to
subscribers in the service area and the service areas of other cable television systems interconnected with the
cable system.
F. When a channel allocated for governmental or educational use has been assigned a channel number or
position by the grantee, such channel number or position shall not be changed until at least thirty (30) days written
notice has been given to the user of such channel. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 16)
17-517 Services to city.
Grantee shall provide the following services to city:
A. Channel space as provided in Section 17-516 at no charge for the dissemination of information to the
public;
B. A service outlet, at no cost to city, to each city facility within the service area including, but not limited
to, City Hall, the Police-Courts Building, fire stations. Additional service outlets shall be provided at the cost of
labor and materials with no monthly service charge for connections, service outlets or nonpremium services; and
C. A means of simultaneously interrupting all channels on the cable television system to present emergency
audio messages by local public safety, civil defense and other public officials. Grantee shall install at no cost to
city, in the City Hall, for the use of the emergency information system. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 17)
17-518 Compliance and monitoring.
A. Grantee will provide written notification to the city prior to offering any other lawful service and grantee
shall file with the city a copy of its authority to provide such service, if any has been obtained.
B. City may perform technical tests of the cable system during reasonable times and in a manner which
does not unreasonably interfere with the normal business operations of grantee or the cable system in order to
determine whether or not grantee is in compliance with the terms hereof and applicable state or federal laws. Except
in emergency circumstances, such tests may be undertaken only after giving grantee reasonable notice
thereof and providing a representative of grantee an opportunity to be present during such test. In the event that
such testing demonstrates that grantee has substantially failed to comply with a material requirement hereof, the
reasonable costs of such tests shall be borne by grantee. In the event that such testing demonstrates that grantee
has substantially complied with such material provisions hereof, the cost of such testing shall be borne by city.
Except in emergency circumstances, such testing shall be undertaken no more than two (2) times in a calendar
year and the results thereof be made available to grantee. Upon request, grantee shall furnish to and file with city
the results of technical tests that grantee conducts for itself or others.
C. On or after September 1, 1999 and every five (5) years thereafter, council may commence proceedings,
which afford public notice, public participation and open meetings, for the purpose of identifying future cable
system community needs and interests, including channel capacity and customer service, and reviewing
grantee’s performance during the preceding five (5) years. Upon request by the council, grantee shall cause to be
conducted a survey, as approved by the council, to determine community needs, desires and ratings of grantee’s
performance. The survey shall be made available to the public and shall specifically address, among other items,
the demand for new services in relation to the cost of providing such services so as to ascertain the overall need
for channel expansion.
D. upon completion of any five (5) year review provided for in this section, grantee and city shall meet,
confer and, if deemed necessary by either, renegotiate in good faith the terms and conditions of this permit relating
to community needs, channel capacity and customer service. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 18)
17-519 Default of grantee--Penalties and revocation.
A. The rights and privileges granted by the city to grantee under this permit shall continue and remain in
full force and effect until revoked by the council. In the event that city or the council believes that grantee has
not complied with the terms of this permit, city or the council shall notify grantee in writing of the exact nature
of the alleged default.
B. Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of a written notice of default to: (1) respond contesting
the alleged assertion of a default; or (2) cure such default or, in the event that, by the nature of default, such default
cannot be cured within the thirty (30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify
city or the council of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed.
C. In the event that grantee contests the assertion of a default or fails to respond to a notice of default or the
alleged default is not remedied within thirty (30) days after grantee is notified thereof, the council shall schedule
a hearing to investigate the default. The council shall notify grantee of the time and place of such hearing and
provide grantee with an opportunity to be heard.
D. In the event the council, after such hearing, determines that grantee is in default of any provision of this
permit, the council may:
1. Assess liquidated damages to city caused by the default by grantee as follows:
a. For default in the completion of the system channel capacity expansion as required by Section 17-513,
the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for the first thirty (30) days after the expiration of the
time for the completion of the system channel capacity expansion or part thereof as required by Section 17-513,
six hundred twenty-five dollars ($625.00) per day for each day more than thirty (30) days past the expiration of
the time for the completion of the system channel capacity expansion or part thereof as required by Section 17-
513 and eight hundred seventy-five dollars ($875.00) per day for each day more than sixty (60) days past the
expiration of the time for completion of the system channel capacity expansion or part thereof as required by
Section 17-513; provided, that the total amount of liquidated damages assessed under this subsection shall not
exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00);
b. For knowingly failing to provide data, documents or information as required in this permit, two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for each day the failure occurs or continues; and
c. For knowingly failing to comply with the service and operational standards of this permit, five hundred
($500.00) per day for each day the failure occurs or continues.
2. In the case of a default of a provision of this permit which is not cured by grantee or the subject of damages
assessed as provided herein, the council may revoke this permit in its entirety; or
3. Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, or injunctive
relief as an alternative to damages or termination of this permit.
Grantee shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply promptly with any provision of this permit by
reason of any failure of city to enforce prompt compliance.
E. Grantee shall not be held in default with the provisions of this permit, nor suffer any enforcement or
penalty relating thereto, where such alleged default is caused by strikes, acts of God, power outages or other
events reasonably beyond the ability of grantee to control. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 19)
17-520 Assignability.
A. If grantee shall at any time assign, sell, lease or otherwise transfer in any manner whatsoever its rights
and privileges under this permit to any person, such action shall be in writing and a duly authenticated copy shall
be filed with the city clerk. Such action shall not become effective until the transferee shall have agreed in writing
with city to become responsible for the full performance of all the conditions, liabilities, covenants and obligations
contained in this permit and until such action shall have been approved by the council; provided, such
approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The council may require evidence that the transferee possesses the
financial, technical and legal capability to perform all of the conditions, liabilities, covenants and obligations
contained in this permit. If the council fails to act upon a proposed transfer within sixty (60) days after the transferee
shall have agreed in writing to become responsible for the full performance of all of the conditions, liabilities,
covenants and obligations of this permit, then such action shall be deemed to have been approved.
B. No approval of city shall be required for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by
assignment of any rights, title or interest of grantee in this permit or the cable television system in order to secure
indebtedness of grantee. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 20)
17-521 Right of city to purchase system.
A. City shall have the right at any time after fifteen (15) years after the effective date of this permit granted
herein to purchase the cable television system of grantee located within the service area and to terminate this
permit, if the purchase is approved by a majority of the qualified electors of city voting at a special or general
election. At any time after the right to purchase the cable television system of grantee shall have accrued under
the terms hereof, the question of the purchase of the cable television system may be submitted by the council to
the qualified electors of the city for approval. The question of the purchase of the cable television system of
grantee shall be submitted at the next succeeding election of the city upon petition to the council of twenty-five
(25) percent of the qualified electors of the city. Grantee shall be compensated for the fair market value of the
cable television system located within the service area with such value to be determined by the majority of three
(3) appraisers, one to be appointed by the mayor of the city, one by grantee, and the third by the first two (2) appraisers.
The appraisers shall be persons of recognized skill, ability and experience with respect to the appraisal
and valuation of cable televisions systems. If grantee shall refuse to select an appraiser for thirty (30) days after
approval by the qualified electors of the city of the purchase, the value of the cable television system located
within the service area shall be fixed by the vote of a majority of the council. If the two (2) appraisers appointed
by the mayor and by grantee shall fail to agree upon the third appraiser within thirty (30) days after their appointment,
the third appraiser, upon the application of either city or grantee, shall be appointed by the presiding
judge of the District Court of Creek County, Oklahoma.
B. The fair market value of the cable television system shall be determined by the majority of the appraisers
within ninety (90) days after the appointment of the third appraiser. City shall have ninety (90) days from the
receipt of written notice of the decision of the appraisers within which to pay grantee in cash the appraised value
of the cable television system. Until such payment, grantee shall continue to operate the cable television system
pursuant to the terms of this permit; provided, that if between the date of the appraisal of the cable television system
and the date of payment therefor, reasonable and necessary additions, betterments and replacements shall
have been made by grantee to the cable television system, city shall pay in addition to the value established by
the appraisers the reasonable cost of such additions, betterments and replacements. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 21)
17-522 Nondiscrimination.
A. Grantee shall not deny any person or group of potential cable subscribers access to cable service because
of race, color, religion, national origin, age, gender, physical handicap or the income of residents in the local area
in which a person or group resides.
B. Grantee shall not discriminate in the rates or charges for cable services or in making available cable services
or facilities of the system. Grantee shall not extend any preference or advantage to any subscriber or potential
subscriber to the system or to any user or potential user of the system. Grantee may conduct promotional
campaigns to stimulate subscriptions to cable services or other lawful uses of the system and grantee may establish
bulk billing rates and rate schedules for different classes of subscribers and cable service which any subscriber
coming within such bulk billing group, rate or service classification shall be entitled.
C. Grantee shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color,
religion, age, gender or national origin. Grantee shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations of the
United States and of Oklahoma with respect to employment and personnel practices. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 22)
17-523 Modification.
The city, after notice and public hearing, may modify this permit to provide for such standards and exercise
such powers, functions, rights or privileges as may now or hereafter be mandated by federal or state law, rule or
regulation regarding the cable system, cable service or other lawful service. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 23)
17-524 Miscellaneous provisions.
A. Grantee shall keep books and records for periods of time reasonably established by the city to determine
compliance with the terms of this permit. City, after reasonable notice, shall have the right to review the books
and records, including any complaints, of grantee during normal business hours as is reasonably necessary to
monitor compliance with the terms hereof. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, any public records
required to be kept by grantee pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. Grantee shall not be required
to disclose information which it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature; provided,
this exception shall not be construed to include financial records necessary to enable the city to determine compliance
with grantee’s fee payment obligations. Subject to open meeting and record disclosure laws of the state
of Oklahoma, city agrees to treat any information disclosed by grantee to it on a confidential basis and only to
disclose it to employees, representatives and agents thereof that have a need to know, or in order to enforce the
provisions hereof. The council may inspect the books and records of grantee as necessary to determine compliance
with the terms of this permit, compel attendance of witnesses and may by ordinance revoke this permit as
provided in Section 17-520 for failure or refusal of grantee or any officer, employee or agent thereof to testify or
to produce such books or records.
B. Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by grantee to the FCC, or any other
federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting cable
television operations authorized pursuant to this permit, shall be submitted to the city clerk upon request.
C. Grantee shall pay the cost of publication of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
D. In the event city enters into a franchise, permit, license, authorization or other agreement of any kind
with any person other than grantee or city for the purpose of constructing or operating a cable television system
or providing cable service or other lawful service within the same service area, which contains terms more commercially
or economically favorable with regard to government and educational channels and service, system
operational service standards, fees to the city or rates to subscribers and users, or in the event city enters into a
franchise, permit, license, authorization or other agreement of any kind with any person other than grantee for
the purpose of constructing or operating a cable television system or providing cable service or other lawful service
within the same service area, which contains terms more favorable to city with regard to government and
educational channels and service, system operational service standards, fees to the city or rates to subscribers and
users, then grantee and city shall meet, confer and, if deemed necessary by either, renegotiate in good faith the
terms and conditions of this permit relating to government and educational channels and service, system operational
service standards, fees to the city or rate to subscribers and users.
E. Notices or responses serviced upon city or grantee shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to have been
duly given to the required party three (3) business days after having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly
addressed envelope by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, at the Post Office or branch thereof
regularly maintained by the U.S. Postal Service.
All notices or responses between the city and grantee shall be addressed and delivered by certified or registered
mail as follows: if to the city, City Clerk, City of Bristow, Bristow City Hall, 110 West 7th Street, Bristow,
Oklahoma 74010, with copies to the mayor, the chairman of the city council and the city attorney at the same
address; if to grantee, Tulsa Cable Television, Inc., d/b/a TCI Cablevision of Tulsa, 8421 East 61st Street, Suite
U, Tulsa, Oklahoma 74133 with a copy to Tulsa Cable Television, Inc., ATTN.: Legal Department, 4700 S.
Syracuse Street, Suite 1100, Denver, Colorado 80237. Any notice given by grantee to the city clerk shall be accompanied
by instructions to the clerk referencing this section and directing the clerk to file and maintain such
notice with the original of the ordinance codified in this chapter. City and grantee may designate other addresses
or addresses from time to time by giving notice to the other. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 24)
17-525 Acceptance by grantee.
A. Grantee shall file with the city clerk of the city within sixty (60) days after passage and approval and
prior to publication of the ordinance codified in this chapter a written acceptance, approved by parent corporations,
of this permit and the terms and conditions thereof as set out herein.
B. Grantee by the acceptance of this permit shall be deemed to have waived and released any claim the
grantee might have against the city by reason of a declaration, ruling or judgment by a court as to the invalidity
of this permit or any part thereof. (Ord. 6-5-95A § 25)
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE
1. LISTING OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Title or Subject Disposition
26 8/17/70 Bristow municipal authority. App. 4, Sec. 1 thru Sec. 2
436 4/21/60 Electric franchise. App. 1, Sec. 1 thru Sec. 12
528 12/9/77 Inspection of vehicles. 15-306
540 10/5/82 Adopt state traffic code. 15-104
557 4/6/70 Library. 11-204
603 Unauthorized person responding
to fire or police call.
10-614
749 6/16/70 Zoning ordinance definitions. 12-206
605 7/7/75 Adopting general code. NC
606 1/5/76 Levying additional sales tax
(to 2%) effective May 1,
1976.
7-201
607 1/19/76 Authority of city clerk; outside
city fire protection.
13-220, 13-221, 13-223--13-229
608 1/19/76 Administration of criminal
justice; municipal court.
6-101--6-124, 6-128, 6-130, 6-132--
6-134
612 2/2/76 Licensing and regulating operators
of ambulance.
NC
613 2/2/76 Prohibiting obstructing of
windows; amusements.
NC
614 2/16/76 Sick leave--full time employees.
NC
615 2/16/76 Amending Article C, Chapter
23, Zoning.
12-201 et seq.
616 2/16/76 Closing the alley in Block 50. Spec. Ords.
618 4/19/76 Repealing Article B, Chapter
L.
R
619 6/17/76 Utility tax levied. 7-401--7-405
619 6/21/76 Empowering city officials
enter into contract.
7-104
620 7/6/76 Requiring convicted felons
who reside temporarily or
permanently within the city
limits register with police.
NC
621 7/6/76 No charge renewing fire protection
agreements.
13-222
622 8/16/76 Repealing Sec. 14, Article C, R
Chapter 3.
623 10/4/76 Declaring circumstances constitute
public nuisance.
8-101 et seq., 8-401 et seq.
624 10/4/76 Repealing Sec. 1, Article A,
Chapter 11.
R
625 10/4/76 Adopting additional parking
regulations.
15-701 et seq.
626 1/17/77 Providing bond; declaring
acts to be offenses; providing
licensing owners, lessees;
equipment.
9-301--9-307
631 7/18/77 Closing dedicated street; public
use.
Spec. Ords.
632 8/31/77 Deleting certain exceptions. NC
633 8/31/77 Solicitors or fund raisers;
permission to enter commercial
establishments.
9-201 et seq.
528 12/9/77 Vehicle inspection. 15-306
12/19/77 Restricted materials. NC
9/18/78 Annexing Sikes Carpet Mill. Spec. Ords.
(Res) 9/18/78 Southern Plumbing Code. R
12/3/79 Green Country Ordinance be
published.
Spec. Ords.
12/3/79 Cable television franchise. App. 3, Sec. 1 thru Sec. 28
1-80 1/6/80 Purchasing equipment, supplies,
services, procedures.
7-105
1/7/80 Governing parking in alley. 15-718
2/18/80A 2/18/80 City clerk, treasurer as director
of finance.
2-403
2/18/80 Drivers license as bail. 6-125
2/18/80B 6-120, 6-125
4/20/80 Littering unlawful.
6/2/80B 7-104
6/20/80 Finance director duties. 2-403
8/8/80 Juvenile arrest procedures. NC
9/22/80 Fire department make runs; 5
miles, city limits.
13-220
11/3/80 Parks and recreation. 11-101--11-106
12/1/80 Street excavation. 14-201--14-207
1/5/81A To annex, bring into city limits
area north of existing city
limits, 27.42 acres.
Spec. Ords.
1 5/18/81 Council join in establishment; Spec. Ords.
a job known as director of
public works.
7/20/81 Swimming pools be fenced in
city limits.
R
10/19/81A Curfew hours changed. 10-410
4-5-82 4/5/82 Permit to conduct garage
sales.
NC
4-20-82 4/20/82 Anti-litter. 8-201--8-220
8-16-82 8/16/82 Annexing territory, providing
for zoning.
Spec. Ords.
8-16-82 8/16/82 Providing for a bond to cover
cleaning up the property.
NC
8/16/82B Outdoor events, permits required.
11-107
540 10/5/82 State traffic code. 15-104
6484 6/4/84 Annexation and zoning. Spec. Ords.
85-04 4/15/85 Requires use of municipal
refuse service.
17-411
85-04A 4/15/85 Enacts new Section 12-357
relating to satellite television
receiving antennas as part of
city code.
12-357
85-617 6/17/85 Enacts new Section 11-108
relating to closing hours for
city park.
11-108
85-08 8/1/85 Enacts new Sections 4-115,
4-116 and 4-117 relating to
animal control as part of city
code.
4-115, 4-116, 4-117
85-10 10/21/85 Amending Sections 13-221,
13-222 and 13-226 of city
code relating to fire department
fees.
13-222
5586A 5/5/86 Enacts new Chapter 12 of
Part 15 relating to the moving
of buildings.
5-601, 5-602, 5-603
5586B 5/5/86 Amends Section 12-382 of
relating to zoning notice.
12-382
5586C 5/5/86 Annexes property to the city. Spec. Ords.
102786 10/27/86 Levies additional sales excise
tax.
7-205, 7-207, 7-208, 7-225, 7-226
12-1-86 12/1/86 Amending Section 16-210;
deleting residency requirement
for airport board mem-
16-210
bers.
12-15-86 12/15/86 Annexing property. Spec. Ords.
51587 5/15/87 Enacts new Chapter 12 of
Part 5 of the city code.
5-1201 thru 5-1218
7-6-87 7/6/87 Amends Section 8-604 of city
code by establishing penalty
for violation of health and
sanitation ordinances.
8-604
8-3-87 8/3/87 Amends Section 16-210 of
city code creating airport
board.
16-210
6/20/88 6/20/88 Amends Section 1-108 of city
code to permit the penalty of
imprisonment not to exceed
30 days.
1-108, 6-134
8-1-88 8/1/88 Pertaining to reports of accumulation
of grass, weeds, or
trash on property; by amending
Section 8-103.
8-103
8-1-88A 8/1/88 Providing for hearing; notice
of hearing; consent of landowner
permitting city to remove
trash and mow grass or
weeds at landowner’s expense;
by amending Section
8-104.
8-104
8-1-88B 8/1/88 Permitting mowing, work
done by city employees or by
contract; by amending Section
8-105.
8-105
8-1-88C 8/1/88 Providing for determination
and assessment of costs for
mowing; by amending Section
8-106.
8-106
9-19-88 9/19/88 Amending Section 17-102 by
providing penalty and termination
of utility service for
unpaid utility bills and
charges.
17-102
9-19-88A 9/19/88 Amending Section 17-205(2);
providing water service may
be terminated for failure to
pay all or part of any water
bill.
17-205
11-15-
88A
11/15/88 Designating the name of the
cemetery; by amending Section
11-301.
11-301
11-15-
88B
11/15/88 Establishing a cemetery
board; establishing terms of
board members; providing for
removal of board members by
amending Section 11-302.
11-301.1, 11-301.2
11-15-
88C
11/15/88 Providing for the issuance of
deeds to cemetery lots; maintenance
of cemetery deed records;
and setting of cemetery
lot prices by city council by
amending Section 11-303.
11-303
11-15-
88D
11/15/88 Prohibiting curbs on cemetery
lots without prior approval of
city council by amending
Section 11-306.
11-306
11-15-
88E
11/15/88 Prohibiting the alteration of
grades or elevation of any
cemetery lot by amending
Section 11-304.
11-304
11-15-
88F
11/15/88 Prohibiting, in the cemetery,
the planting or placing of
trees or shrubs without prior
city council approval by
amending Section 11-305.
11-305
11-15-
88G
11/15/88 Permitting city employees or
agents to remove dead or
withered flowers from the
cemetery by amending Section
11-307.
11-307, 11-310
11-15-
88H
11/15/88 Regulating monuments, in
cemetery, requiring plans
prior to construction by
amending Section 11-309.
11-309
11-15-
88I
11/15/88 Prohibiting loitering or loafing
upon the grounds or the
cemetery.
11-310
11-15-
88J
11/15/88 Prohibiting three-wheel vehicles
and all-terrain-vehicles
within the confines of the
cemetery.
11-310
11-15- 11/15/88 Prohibiting the possession or 11-310
88K consumption of alcohol
within the confines of the
cemetery.
11-15-
88L
11/15/88 Establishing the penalty for
violating the provisions of
Section 11, cemetery, of the
city code.
11-312
1-9-89 1/9/89 Rural fire contract fees. 13-222
1-24-89 1/24/89 Requiring placement of concrete
box or vault in Bristow
City Cemetery.
11-311
1-24-89A 1/24/89 Providing for absentee ballots
during city elections.
2-102
2-21-89 __/__/__ Adopting BOCA National
Mechanical Code.
R
7-6-89A 7/6/89 Prohibiting fishing in city
park.
R
7-6-89B 7/6/89 Prohibiting entry to lakebed
located in city park.
11-110, 11-113
8-21-89 8/21/89 Establishing power of library
board of directors.
11-204
9-5-89 9/5/89 Prohibiting dumping on any
property without consent of
owner.
17-412, 17-413
11-6-89 __/__/__ Adopting BOCA National
Plumbing Code.
R
3-28-90 2/28/90 Establishing a merit system
for city personnel.
2-502 et seq.
04-16-
90.1
4/16/90 When competitive bidding is
not required.
7-107
6-18-90A 6/18/90 Designating name of lake in
Klingensmith Park.
11-109
6-18-90B 6/18/90 Limiting speed of boats upon
George Horany Lake.
11-112, 11-113
6-18-90C 6/18/90 Fishing limitations on George
Horany Lake.
11-111, 11-113
7-2-90-A 7/2/90 Probationary employees
evaluation and result of
evaluation.
2-502.2
7-2-90-B 7/2/90 Evaluation grade of employees
and results.
2-502.3
9-17-90 9/17/90 Regulating decorations at
cemetery.
11-308
1-22-91 1/22/91 Changing certain job classification
levels.
2-502.4
4-1-91 4/1/91 Change time of review of police
chief, fire chief, public
works supervisor and finance
director to second meeting in
March of city council.
2-502.4
4-15-91 4/15/91 Animal regulations. 4-102, 4-107, 4-114, 4-120, 4-121
5-6-91 5/6/91 Registration fee for each dog
and cat.
4-121
7-1-91 7/1/91 Suspension of sentence;
community service.
6-132
7-15-91 7/15/91 Annexing. Spec. Ord.
8-5-91 8/5/91 Hazardous waste materials
cleanup.
13-111
9-16-91A 9/16/91 Disposal of animals by animal
control officers.
4-131
9-16-91B 9/16/91 Providing for unclaimed or
non-redeemed animals.
4-137
12-16-91 12/16/91 Creating employee retirement
system.
2-730 et seq.
3-2-92 3/2/92 Changing ward boundaries. 1-202
9-21-92 9/21/92 Repealing Section 11-110
regarding entering lakebed
property.
11-110
9-21-92A 9/21/92 Designating official map of
city.
1-201
11-16-92 11/16/92 Oil and gas code. 5-1301 et seq.
1-4-93A 1/4/93 Providing for application and
filing fee for drilling oil well.
5-1304
1-4-93B 1/4/93 Annual inspection fee for oil
wells.
5-1308
1-4-93C 1/4/93 Deleting provision requiring
fee for plugging oil well.
5-1312
1-4-93D 1/4/93 Deleting provisions regarding
filing fee and annual renewal
and inspection fee for wells.
5-1344, 5-1345
1-4-93E 1/4/93 Providing transfer fee for
ownership in well.
5-1349
3-15-93A 3-15-93 Written statement to accompany
all petitions to modify
or change zoning classification
or regulations of land.
12-127
3-15-93B 3/15/93 Time limits for commencing 12-383
work after approval of regulation
modification or reclassification.
4-5-93A 4/5/93 Timeframe and regulations
for removing flowers from
cemetery.
11-307
4-5-93B 4/5/93 All decorations besides flowers
to be approved by cemetery
sexton.
11-308
4-5-93C 4/5/93 Monument plan required to
be submitted to cemetery sexton.
11-309
5-3-93 5/3/93 Uses allowed in C-2 Highway
Commercial District.
12-261
8-16-93 8/16/93E Establishing animal shelters;
board; regulations.
Repealed
9-7-93 9/7/93 Verified application to be
filed with board of adjustment;
requirements; procedure.
12-127
9-20-93 __/__/93 Impoundment fees. 4-134, 4-135
12-20-93 12/20/93 Cemetery lot certificates;
purchase price; transfer fee;
records.
11-303
1-4-94 1/4/94 Contract fee for fire pro- tection
outside city limits.
13-222
2-22-94 2/22/94 Amending Ord. 4-5-93C regarding
permit fee for monument
placement; re- gulations
and requirements for cemetery
monuments.
11-309
4-18-94A 4/18/94 Airport zoning. 12-501 et seq.
4-18-94B 4/18/94 Fee for solicitors license. 9-207
4-18-94C 4/18/94 Providing an amount for
taxes, registrations and tags
for dogs and cats.
4-121
5-9-94 5/9/94 Mandatory utility con- nections
to city utilities.
17-106
6-20-94A 6/20/94 48-hour public notice required
for special meetings of
city council.
2-305
6-20-94B 6/20/94 Providing for penalty for violations
of Part 8, Chapter 1 of
code.
8-112
6-20-94C 6/20/94 Repealing Sec. 8-103 through
8-208 of Part 8, Chapter 1 of
code.
8-103 to 8-108
9-6-94A 9/6/94 Establishing fee for issuance
of a certification as to existence
of special assessments
against a parcel of real estate.
7-501
9-6-94B 9/6/94 Uniform transient occupancy
ordinance.
7-601 et seq.
10-24-94 10-24-94 Hotel occupancy tax. 7-603, 7-617
1-17-95 1-17-95 Fire protection; hazardous
materials cleanup.
13-111
4-3-95 4-3-95 Excise tax for water and sanitary
sewer improvements.
7-2
6-5-95A 6-5-95 Cable television permit. 17-501 et seq.
6-5-95B 6-5-95 Tennis court regulations. 11-113
6-5-95C 6-5-95 Parks and recreation. 11-114
8-28-95 8-28-95 Municipal court. 6-135
12-4-95 12-4-95 Building codes. R
2-22-96A 2-22-96 Job classifications. 2-502.4(B)
2-22-96B 2-22-96 Compensation, city officials. 2-502.4(C)
2-22-96C 2-22-96 Compensation, fire department
members.
2-502.5(A)
2-22-96D 2-22-96 Compensation, fire department
members.
2-502.5(C)
2-22-96E 2-22-96 Compensation, fire department
members.
2-502.5(D)
2-22-96F 2-22-96 Compensation, fire department
members.
2-502.5(E)
2-22-96G 2-22-96 Cemetery regulations. 11-305
2-22-96H 2-22-96 Cemetery regulations. 11-304
2-22-96I 2-22-96 Cemetery regulations. 11-306
3-4-96 3-4-96 Interfering with fire hydrants. 17-210(D)
5-6-96 5-6-96 Employee retirement system. Spec. Ords.
8-19-96A 8-19-96 Merit compensation. 2-502.5(E)(1), 2-502.5(E)(2)
8-19-96B 8-19-96 Compensation, employees. 2-502.5(C)(1), (C)(2), (C)(3), (C)(4)
8-19-96C 8-19-96 Job classifications. 2-502.4(B)(1), (B)(2)
8-19-96D 8-19-96 Repeals 2-502.5(A) and 2-
502.5(B); renumbers 2-
502.5(4) to be 2-502.4(C).
2-502.5(A), (B), (C)
9-16-96 9-16-96 False statements to council. 2-308
5-5-97 5-5-97 Adds Ch. 5 to Part 9, Economic
development block
9-501, 9-502
grants: employment, beneficiary
information requirements.
7-21-97A 7-21-97 Building code adoption. R
7-21-97B 7-21-97 Building code. R
7-21-97C 7-21-97 Building code. R
7-21-97D 7-21-97 Building inspector. R
11-3-97A 11-3-97 Purchases, how made. 7-104(B)
11-3-97B 11-3-97 When competitive bidding
not required.
7-107(1)
2-16-98A 2-16-98 Abandoned, junked vehicles,
definitions.
8-501
2-16-98B 2-16-98 Abandoned, junked vehicles,
prohibited vehicles.
8-502
2-16-98C 2-16-98 Abandoned, junked vehicles,
nuisance declaration.
8-503
2-16-98D 2-16-98 Abandoned, junked vehicles,
abatement.
8-504
2-16-98E 2-16-98 Abandoned, junked vehicles,
abatement order.
8-505
2-16-98F 2-16-98 Abandoned, junked vehicles,
owner regains possession.
8-506
2-16-98G 2-16-98 Abandoned, junked vehicles,
violation penalty.
8-507
2-16-98H 2-16-98 Abandoned, junked vehicles,
appeals from enforcement
official.
8-508
2-16-98I 2-16-98 Abandoned, junked vehicles,
appeals to council.
8-509
2-16-98J 2-16-98 Abandoned, junked vehicles,
liability for costs.
8-510
2-16-98K 2-16-98 Abandoned, junked vehicles,
immediate removal of vehicle
obstructing traffic.
8-511
2-16-98L 2-16-98 Transient merchants, definitions.
9-601
2-16-
98M
2-16-98 Transient merchants, license
required.
9-602
2-16-98N 2-16-98 Transient merchants, license
fee.
9-603
2-16-98O 2-16-98 Transient merchants, violation
penalty.
9-604
3-2-98 3-2-98 Building code, certificate of
occupancy.
R
5-4-98 5-4-98 Bricks and parts of bricks,
surplus property designation.
Spec. Ords.
5-18-98B 5-18-98 Equal access to housing. 5-802--5-805
5-18-98H 5-18-98 Plumbing contractors, license
requirements.
5-204
6-15-98A 6-15-98 Use taxes. 7-701 et seq.
6-15-98B 6-15-98 Electrical code, licensing;
repeals Section 5-318.
5-317(A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), 5-318
6-30-98A 6-30-98 Penalty and judicial relief. 5-1101
6-30-98B 6-30-98 Mechanical license fees. 5-905
6-30-98C 6-30-98 Mechanical code, violation
penalties.
5-906
6-30-98D 6-30-98 Mechanical code, license required.
5-904
1-92198 9-21-98 Garage sales, definitions. 9-401
2-11298 11-2-98 Annexed property. Spec. Ords.
3-11199 1-11-99 Salary of mayor. R
4-12599 1-25-99 Salary of mayor. Spec. Ords.
5-12599 1-25-99 Compensation of councilmen. Spec. Ords.
6-41999 4-19-99 Official city map. 1-201, Spec. Ords.
9-031901 3-19-01 Uses permitted on review. 12-127
10-
040201
4-2-01 Electrical code. 5-302
11-
052101
5-21-01 Employee retirement system. Spec. Ords.
12-
071601
7-16-01 Cutting curbs or city streets. 14-110
13-
071601
7-16-01 Excavations in streets, permits
required.
14-201
14-
071601
7-16-01 Excavations in streets, bond
required.
14-202
15-
071601
7-16-01 Excavations in streets, repairs.
14-203
16-
071601
7-16-01 Excavations in streets, guard
rails.
14-204
17-
071601
7-16-01 Excavations in streets, completion
of work.
14-205
18-
100101
10-1-01 Animal regulations. R
19-
100101
10-1-01 Annexing property. Spec. Ords.
20-
110501
11-5-01 Building code; adds Section
5-110; repeals Sections 5-101
through 5-103.
5-101--5-103, 5-110
21-
111901
11-19-01 Meetings and procedures. 12-122
22-
030402
3-4-02 Zoning regulations. 12-271
23-
070102
7-1-02 Hotel occupancy tax. 7-603
24-
102102
10-21-02 Job classifications. 2-502.4(C)
25-
021703
2-17-03 Employee retirement system. Spec. Ords.
26-
050503
5-5-03 When competitive bidding
not required.
7-107
27-
061603
6-16-03 Establishing the purchase
price of a cemetery lot.
11-303(B)
28-
061603
6-16-03 Alcoholic beverages, taxation
and regulation.
3-102(8)
29-
110303
11-3-03 Fire department. 13-222
30-
010504
1-5-04 Residential code. 5-14
31-
010504
1-5-04 Plumbing code; repeals and
replaces Sections 5-201
through 5-203.
5-201--5-203
32-
010504
1-5-04 International existing building
code.
5-15
33-
010504
1-5-04 Mechanical code. 5-901--5-903
34-
010504
1-5-04 Building code; repeals and
replaces Sections 5-101 and
5-102; repeals Sections 5-103
through 5-109.
5-1
35-
012004
1-20-04 Life safety code. 5-16
36-
012004
1-20-04 Uniform fire code. 5-17
37-
030104
3-1-04 Fire department; repeals Section
13-226.
13-226
38-
030104
3-1-04 Fire department. 13-221
39-
040504
4-5-04 Zoning ordinance definitions. 12-206
40-
040504
4-5-04 Zoning ordinance definitions. 12-206
41- 4-5-04 Zoning regulations. 12-236
040504
42-
040504
4-5-04 Zoning regulations. 12-212
43-
050304
5-3-04 Adds Ch. 6 to Part 12, telecommunications
towers and
facilities.
12-6
44-
092004
9-20-04 Zoning regulations. 12-211
45-
100404
10-4-04 Refuse; collection and disposal.
17-404
46-
100404
10-4-04 Refuse; collection and disposal;
repeals Section 17-405.
17-405
47-
100404
10-4-04 Refuse; collection and disposal;
repeals Section 17-406.
17-406
48-
100404
10-4-04 Refuse; collection and disposal.
17-407
49-
100404
10-4-04 Refuse; collection and disposal.
17-408
50-
100404
10-4-04 Refuse; collection and disposal.
17-409
51-
111504
11-15-04 Animal regulations. 4-106(B)
52-
120604
12-6-04 Adopts district tax incentive. Spec. Ords.
53-
010605
1-6-05 Approves sale of an airport
hangar to Heartland Air Museum,
LLC.
Spec. Ords.
54-
011805
1-18-05 Police department. 13-411
55-
011805
1-18-05 Police department. 13-410
56-
032105
3-21-05 Animal regulations. 4-101(7)
57-
032105
3-21-05 Animal regulations; adds Section
4-108.1.
4-108.1
58-
032105
3-21-05 Animal regulations. 4-108(C)
59-
032105
3-21-05 Animal regulations; adds Section
4-122.3.
4-122.3
60-
032105
3-21-05 Animal regulations; adds Section
4-122.1.
4-122.1
61-
032105
3-21-05 Animal regulations; adds Section
4-122.2.
4-122.2
62- 3-21-05 Animal regulations; repeals 4-122
032105 Section 4-122.
63-
032105
3-21-05 Animal regulations; adds Section
4-421(3) [4-124].
4-124
64-
032105
3-21-05 Junked motor vehicles. 8-505
65-
032105
3-21-05 Junked motor vehicles; adds
Section 8-502.1.
8-502.1
66-
060605
6/6/05 Driving, overtaking, passing;
adds Section 15-558
15-558
67-
101705
10/17/05 Zoning regulations; amends
Section 12-271
12-271
68-
101705
10/17/05 Zoning regulations; amends
Section 12-364
12-364
69-
101705
10/17/05 Zoning regulations; amends
Section 12-365
12-365
70-
101705
10/17/05 Zoning regulations; amends
Section 12-383
12-383
71-
101705
10/17/05 Zoning regulations; amends
Section 12-273
12-273
72-
010306
1/3/06 Community development,
block grant economic development;
amends Sections 9-
501 and 9-502
9-501, 9-502
72-
010306
1/3/06 International property maintenance
code
5-1801
74-
020606
2/6/06 Closing dedicated street Spec. Ords.
75-
030606
3/6/06 Electrical code 5-302
76-
091806
9/18/06 Civil emergency management
organization
13-501
77-
091806
9/18/06 Civil emergency management
organization; adds Section
13-502
13-502
78-
091806
9/18/06 Civil emergency management
organization; adds Section
13-503
13-503
79-
091806
9/18/06 Civil emergency management
organization; adds Section
13-504
13-504
80-
091806
9/18/06 Civil emergency management
organization; adds Section
13-505
13-505
81- 9/18/06 Civil emergency management 13-506
091806 organization; adds Section
13-506
82-
091806
9/18/06 Civil emergency management
organization; adds Section
13-507
13-507
83-
091806
9/18/06 Civil emergency management
organization; adds Section
13-508
13-508
84-
091806
9/18/06 Civil emergency management
organization; adds Section
13-509
13-509
85-
091806
9/18/06 Civil emergency management
organization; adds Section
13-510
13-510
86-
091806
9/18/06 Civil emergency management
organization; adds Section
13-511
13-511
87-
091806
9/18/06 Civil emergency management
organization; adds Section
13-512
13-512
88-
091806
9/18/06 Civil emergency management
organization; adds Section
13-513
13-513
89-
091806
9/18/06 Civil emergency management
organization; adds Section
13-514
13-514
90-
091806
9/18/06 Civil emergency management
organization; adds Section
13-515
13-515
APPENDICES
Table of Contents
Appendix:
1 Electric Franchise
2 Gas Franchise (Reserved)
3 Cable Television Franchise
4 Bristow Municipal Authority
5 Provisions of Selected State Statutes
APPENDIX 1
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
Sections:
Section 1 Definitions.
Section 2 Grant of franchise.
Section 3 Not to impede traffic.
Section 4 Hold harmless.
Section 5 Rates.
Section 6 Assignment.
Section 7 Franchise fee.
Section 8 Service to the city.
Section 9 Termination of franchise, purchase of system by city.
Section 10 Election.
Section 11 Supersedes other franchises.
Section 12 Acceptance.
SECTION 1 DEFINITIONS.
The word “city” as hereinafter used shall mean and designate the City of Bristow, Creek County, Oklahoma,
and the word “company” as hereinafter used shall mean and designate the Oklahoma Gas and Electric Company,
a corporation organized and existing under and by virtue of the laws of the State of Oklahoma and its successors
and assigns. The word “property” as hereinafter used shall mean and designate all rights, and contracts of whatsoever
kind, and all poles, wires, cables and other appliances, appurtenances and fixtures owned by the company
and located within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. No. 436, 4/21/60)
SECTION 2 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
A. The franchise ordinance, when the same is approved by a vote of the qualified electors of the city, shall
and does grant to the company the right, privilege and authority to construct, maintain and operate a system of
poles, wires, conduits, transformers, substations and other fixtures and equipment in, upon, across, under and
over the streets, alleys, public grounds and other places in each and every part of the city for the purpose of
transmitting, distributing and selling electricity for all purposes for which it may be used, to the city and to the
public generally.
B. The franchise hereby granted shall be effective from and after the date of the approval of this ordinance
by the qualified electors of the city and shall remain in full force and effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years
unless terminated sooner as hereinafter provided. The rights granted herein shall not be exclusive. (Ord. No. 436,
4/21/60)
SECTION 3 NOT TO IMPEDE TRAFFIC.
The company shall construct and maintain its property in such a manner as not to obstruct nor impede traffic
unduly. (Ord. No. 436, 4/21/60)
SECTION 4 HOLD HARMLESS.
The company shall defend and indemnify the city against all lawful claims for injury to any person or property
caused by the negligence of the company in the construction or operation of its property. (Ord. No. 436,
4/21/60)
SECTION 5 RATES.
The rate or rates charged the city and the public generally shall be compensatory and reasonable and shall be
subject to the rules and regulations of the Corporation Commission of the State of Oklahoma or other legally
constituted authority. (Ord. No. 436, 4/21/60)
SECTION 6 ASSIGNMENT.
The company shall have the right to assign this franchise and the assignee by written acceptance thereof shall
be bound thereby. An authenticated copy of the assignment shall be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. No. 436,
4/21/60)
SECTION 7 FRANCHISE FEE.
The company shall pay to the city two percent (2%) of its gross receipts arising from the sale of electricity
within the city limits, such payment to be made on or before the 20th day of July each year after deducting therefrom
any amount due the company from the city. (Ord. No. 436, 4/21/60)
SECTION 8 SERVICE TO THE CITY.
The company shall furnish without charge current for buildings and institutions, including park lighting, occupied
and operated by the city in any amount not to exceed sixty thousand (60,000) kilowatt-hours in any one
fiscal year. (Ord. No. 436, 4/21/60)
SECTION 9 TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE, PURCHASE OF SYSTEM BY CITY.
A. The city reserves the right to terminate this franchise by the purchase of the company’s property as hereinafter
provided. The purchase price shall exclude all value of this franchise. The city, if it elects to terminate
this franchise, shall give the company written notice that at the expiration of one year after date of delivery of the
notice to the company, it intends to proceed to purchase the company’s property and terminate this franchise. If
at the expiration of such year the city elects to proceed further to exercise its rights of purchase, it shall so notify
the company in writing and shall demand on appraisement of the property, which will be made by three (3) engineers
of well-known ability, none of whom shall have been within one year previous an employee, a resident,
taxpayer, or employee of the city. Upon receipt by the company of the notice, it shall acknowledge receipt of
same and thereafter the city shall designate one engineer of the proper qualifications and communicate his name
to the company which shall appoint one engineer of the proper qualifications. If the engineers selected by the
city and the company fail or neglect to select its engineer, then a judge of the district court of Creek County,
Oklahoma, after ten (10) days’ notice by the city to the company of the time and place of hearing therefor, shall
have the power, unless in the meantime appointments have been made, to appoint such engineer or engineers.
The engineers so selected shall proceed to make an appraisement of the property of the company and agree upon
and fix the price thereof and make returns of such appraisement to the city and to the company and file a copy
thereof with the city clerk. Thereafter if the city elects to proceed further to exercise its right of purchase it shall
have a reasonable length of time, not to exceed six (6) months from the date of filing the appraisement with the
city clerk, within which to submit to the qualified property taxpaying voters at an election held for that purpose
the proposition of issuing its negotiable bonds with which to provide funds for acquiring the company’s property.
B. In the event the city shall finally acquire the property, the valuation fixed by the appraisers, or a majority
of them, shall be binding upon the parties hereto, providing the city shall pay, in addition to the valuation as
fixed by the appraisers, the actual cost of all additions, replacements and betterments made by the company between
the date of the fixing of the valuation by the appraisers and the date of payment therefor, provided all such
additions, replacements and betterments shall first be approved by the city council. In the event the city acquires
the property, the company shall at that time reimburse the city for one-half (1/2) of the expense of the appraisement.
C. If the bonds are not authorized at the election, or if for any other reason the city should fail to make
funds available for the purchase of the property within six (6) months after the appraisement has been made, the
notice of intention to purchase the property shall be null and void, and all expenses of the appraisement shall be
borne by the city. (Ord. No. 436, 4/21/60)
SECTION 10 ELECTION.
A special election is hereby called for the purpose of submitting this ordinance to the qualified electors of the
city for their approval or disapproval. The election shall be held on the 31st day of May, 1960, between the hours
of 7:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M. The mayor is authorized and directed to issue an election proclamation calling such
election and for the submission of this ordinance to the qualified electors of the city. If the qualified electors of
the city fail to approve this franchise at the election, no rights shall accrue hereunder. (Ord. No. 436, 4/21/60)
SECTION 11 SUPERSEDES OTHER FRANCHISES.
The franchise hereby granted shall, on its effective date, supersede and terminate any previous franchise
granted to or held by the company. (Ord. No. 436, 4/21/60)
SECTION 12 ACCEPTANCE.
In case the franchise hereby granted is approved at the election, the company shall file with the city clerk, in
writing, its acceptance of this ordinance. The acceptance shall be filed within thirty (30) days from and after this
ordinance has been approved by the electors. (Ord. No. 436, 4/21/60)
APPENDIX 2
GAS FRANCHISE
(RESERVED)
APPENDIX 3
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
Sections:
Section 1 Short Title.
Section 2 Definitions.
Section 3 Grant of non-exclusive authority.
Section 4 Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
Section 5 Territorial area involved.
Section 6 Liability and indemnification.
Section 7 Color TV.
Section 8 Operation and maintenance of system.
Section 9 Carriage of locally originated programming.
Section 10 Emergency use of facilities.
Section 11 Other business activities.
Section 12 Safety requirements.
Section 13 Conditions of street occupancy.
Section 14 Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited.
Section 15 Removal of facilities upon request.
Section 16 Transfer of non-exclusive franchise.
Section 17 City rights in non-exclusive franchise.
Section 18 Initial subscriber rates and charges.
Section 19 Proposed channel carriage and programming.
Section 20 Maps, plats, and reports.
Section 21 Forfeiture of non-exclusive franchise.
Section 22 City’s right of intervention.
Section 23 Further agreement and waiver by grantee.
Section 24 Duration and acceptance of non-exclusive franchise.
Section 25 Erection, removal, and common use of poles.
Section 26 Publication costs.
Section 27 Election.
Section 28 Community services.
SECTION 1 SHORT TITLE.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Green Country Cablevision of Bristow, Inc., Non-
Exclusive Franchise Ordinance.” (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
Note: This franchise was approved by the voters on November 27, 1979. Franchise fee is three percent (3%).
SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the
meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future,
words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory:
1. “City” is the City of Bristow and the Municipal Authority of the City of Bristow;
2. “Council” is the City Council of Bristow; and
3. “Green Country Cablevision of Bristow, Inc., hereinafter referred to as GCC System” or “System”,
means a system of coaxial cables or other electrical conductors and equipment used or to be used for the operation
and transmission of television and audio signals to subscribers for a fee. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 3 GRANT OF NON-EXCLUSIVE AUTHORITY.
A. There is hereby granted by the city to grantee the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and
maintain, in, upon, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out
or dedicated, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the city, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes, and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the
city of a GCC System.
B. The right to use and occupy the streets, alleys, public ways and places for the purposes herein set forth
shall not be exclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant a similar use of the streets, alleys, public ways and
places, to any person at any time during the period of this non-exclusive franchise. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 4 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND ORDINANCES.
The grantee shall, at all times during the life of this non-exclusive franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise
of the police power of the city and to such reasonable regulation as the city shall hereafter provide. (Ord. No.
12/3/79)
SECTION 5 TERRITORIAL AREA INVOLVED.
This non-exclusive franchise relates to the present territorial limits of the city and to any area henceforth
added thereto during the term of this non-exclusive franchise. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 6 LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION.
A. The grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of this non-exclusive franchise the grantee specifically
agrees that it will pay all damages and penalties which the city may legally be required to pay as a result of
granting this non-exclusive franchise. The damages and penalties shall include, but shall not be limited to, damages
arising out of copyright infringements and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation, or
maintenance of the GCC System authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized,
allowed, or prohibited by this non-exclusive franchise.
B. The grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of this non-exclusive franchise specifically agrees that it will
pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned in
Subsection A above. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses, including, but not limited to, attorney
fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the city attorney or his assistants
of any employees of the city.
C. The grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of this non-exclusive franchise specifically agrees that
it will maintain throughout the term of this non-exclusive franchise liability insuring the city and the grantee
with regard to all damages mentioned in Subsection A above in the minimum amounts of:
1. One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily injury or death to any one person, within the
limit, however, of Three Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily injury or death resulting from any
one accident;
2. Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
3. One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) for all other types of liability.
D. The insurance policy obtained by the grantee in compliance with this section must be approved by the
council and such insurance policy along with written evidence of payment of required premiums, shall be filed
and maintained with the city clerk during the term of this non-exclusive franchise. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 7 COLOR TV.
The facilities used by the grantee shall be capable of distributing color TV signals, and when the signals the
grantee distributes are received in color they shall be distributed in color when technically feasible. (Ord. No.
12/3/79)
SECTION 8 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.
The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause
and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall
occur during periods of minimum use of the system. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 9 CARRIAGE OF LOCALLY ORIGINATED PROGRAMMING.
Grantee shall be authorized to originate programming, two (2) way information services, music, advertising,
weather advisories, educational services and public service announcements as authorized and/or required by law
or regulation. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 10 EMERGENCY USE OF FACILITIES.
In case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of the mayor or council, make available
its facilities to the city for emergency use during the emergency or disaster period. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 11 OTHER BUSINESS ACTIVITIES.
A. Neither the grantee nor any principal or employee of the grantee shall engage in the business of selling,
repairing, or installing television receivers, radio receivers or accessories for such receivers, within the city during
the term of this non-exclusive franchise and grantee shall not allow any of its principals or employees to so
engage in any such business.
B. This non-exclusive franchise authorizes only the operation of a GCC System as provided for herein, and
does not take the place of any other non-exclusive franchise, license or permit which might be required by law of
the grantee. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 12 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
A. The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted
methods and devices f or preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or
nuisances to the public.
B. The grantee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in accordance with
the requirements of the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code and all applicable state
and local laws, and in such manner that they will not interfere with any installations of the city or of any public
utility serving the city.
C. All structures and all lines, equipment, and connections in, over, under, and upon the streets, sidewalks,
alleys, and public ways or places of the city, where situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained
in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order and repair. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 13 CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY.
A. All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment erected by the grantee within the city
shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property
owners who join any of the streets, alleys, or other public ways and places.
B. In case of disturbance of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area, the grantee shall, at its
own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city replace and restore such street, sidewalk, alley, public
way, or paved area in as good condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done, using materials
of the same nature as that covering the street, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved area.
C. If at any time during the period of this non-exclusive permit the city shall lawfully elect to alter or
change the grade of any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the
city, shall remove, relay, and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other fixtures
at its own expense.
D. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as
not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way.
E. The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city,
temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal
or raising or lowering of wires to permit the moving of buildings shall be paid by the person requesting the same,
and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less
than forty-eight (48) hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
F. The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and
public ways and places of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires and cables of the grantee, except that at the option of the city, such trimming may be done by it or under its
supervision and direction at the expense of the grantee.
G. In all sections of the city where the cables, wires, or other like facilities of public utilities are placed underground,
the grantee shall place its cables, wires, or other facilities underground to the maximum extent that
existing technology reasonably permits the grantee to do so. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 14 PREFERENTIAL OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
The grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service, service facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect,
make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage,
with the exception of the following:
1. There will be a twenty percent (20%) discount to people who are sixty-five (65) or older and head of
household, on all rates;
2. During the first sixty (60) days that GCC System service is available to a resident of Bristow, they may
subscribe without paying any installation charges;
3. GCC System will provide free of charge basic Cable TV service to all public schools and municipal
buildings provided that the cable installation does not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet. In the event the installation
does exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet, there will be time and materials charges for the installation;
4. GCC System will complete construction to eighty-five percent (85%) of the City of Bristow within
twelve (12) months after receiving all necessary permits. Construction to the remainder of the city as well as surrounding
county areas will proceed from that point on a basis of thirty-five (35) homes per mile. No residents
need subscribe prior to construction of the cable. GCC System will be thirty-five (35) channel two (2) way capable
and will expand as consumer demand and available cable programming make it feasible; and
5. As compensation to the city for the use of its property and in lieu of any license or other taxes or
charges, grantee shall, within thirty (30) days following the last day of each year of the grantee’s fiscal year, pay
to the city three percent (3%) of the gross receipts from subscribers, exclusive of convertor charges. Grantee
shall keep accurate records showing the names of its subscribers, the date of the installation of its equipment, and
the amount of money received by it from the subscribers each month. A statement shall be submitted to the city
and shall be signed and verified by an official of grantee as a true and correct statement of the gross receipts received
by it from subscribers for the preceding twelve (12) month period and shall accompany the check for
payment of three percent (3%) thereof. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 15 REMOVAL OF FACILITIES UPON REQUEST.
Upon termination of service to my subscriber, the grantee shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment
from the premises of such subscriber upon his request. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 16 TRANSFER OF NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE.
The grantee shall not transfer this non-exclusive franchise to another person without prior approval of the city.
(Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 17 CITY RIGHTS IN NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE.
A. The right is hereby reserved to the city or to the council to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained
herein and in existing applicable ordinances, such additional, regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise
of the police power; provided that such regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable and not in
conflict with the rights herein granted.
B. The city shall have the right to inspect the books, records, maps, plans, income tax returns, and other like
materials of the grantee at any time during normal business hours.
C. The city shall, have the right, during the life of this non-exclusive franchise, to install and maintain free
of charge upon the poles of the grantee any wire and pole fixtures necessary for a police alarm system, on the
condition that such wire and pole fixtures do not interfere with the GCC System operations of the grantee.
D. At the expiration of the term for which this non-exclusive franchise is granted, or upon its termination
and cancellation, as provided herein, the city shall have the right to require the grantee to remove at its own expense
all portions of the GCC System from all public ways within the city.
E. At the expiration of the term for which this non-exclusive franchise is granted, or upon its termination or
cancellation, as provided for herein, the city, at its election, and upon the payment of a sum equal to the fair
market value to the grantee, above price shall not include, and the grantee shall not receive, anything for the
valuation of any right or privilege appertaining to it under this non-exclusive franchise. Upon the exercise of this
option by the city and its service of an official notice of such action upon the grantee, the grantee shall immediately
transfer to the city possession and title to all facilities and property, real and personal, or the GCC System,
free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances not agreed to be assumed by the city in lieu of some portion
of the purchase price set forth above; and the grantee shall execute such warranty deeds or other instruments of
conveyance to the city as shall be entered into by it with reference to its operations under this non-exclusive
franchise that the contract shall be subject to the exercise of this option. Provided, however, that the city shall
have the right unilaterally to increase the purchase price provided for above, should it so elect, by an ordinance
amendatory hereto. But right shall not be construed as giving the grantee a right to any price in excess of that set
forth above.
F. Upon the exercise of the option by the city to purchase and take over the GCC System in its entirety, the
fair market value to the grantee of the system shall be determined by three (3) disinterested parties, one of such
parties to be selected by the mayor of the city, another to be selected by the grantee, and the two (2) parties so
selected shall mutually agree upon a third party and when all three (3) parties have been selected, they shall proceed
to appraise the system and determine the fair market value to the grantee, which determination shall be
binding upon the city and the grantee. In the event the two (2) parties selected by the city and the grantee are unable
to agree upon a third party, then the District Judge of Creek County, Oklahoma, shall serve as the third
party. The party selected by the mayor of the city shall be with approval of the council.
G. After the expiration of the term for which this non-exclusive franchise is granted, or after its termination
and cancellation, as provided for herein, the city shall have the right to determine whether the grantee shall continue
to operate and maintain, for a reasonable fee, the GCC System pending the decision of the city as to the
future maintenance and operation of such system. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 18 INITIAL SUBSCRIBER RATES AND CHARGES.
A. The following initial subscriber rates and charges are adopted:
1. Initial tap-in and connection charges, Fourteen Dollars and ninety-five cents ($14.95);
2. Additional connection at same location and at same time as original connection, free;
3. Subsequent connection at a later date, Seven Dollars and fifty-cents ($7.50);
4. Relocation of outlet, Seven Dollars and fifty-cents ($7.50);
5. Transfer to new residence, Seven Dollars and fifty-cents ($7.50);
6. Reconnection, Five Dollars ($5.00); and
7. Installation of Pay TV, Ten Dollars ($10.00).
B. The following monthly service rates are adopted:
1. First outlet TV or radio, Seven Dollars ($7.00);
2. Extra outlets TV or radio, One Dollar and fifty-cents ($1.50);
3. Pay TV, Eight Dollars and ninety-five cents ($8.95); and
4. Mini-Pay, Four Dollars and ninety-five cents ($4.95).
C. The following commercial rates are adopted:
Motels or apartments on a bulk billing contract ten (10) units or more, Three Dollars and ninety-five cents
($3.95).
D. The following converter charge is adopted:
Purchase, cost Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00), (estimate).
E. The rates set forth in the above schedule shall be subject to adjustment by the grantee based on extension
and improvements in the type and quality of service offered. Grantee may increase the above rates by filing with
the city council a proposed rate schedule provided increases shall not become effective if the city council disapproves
the rates proposed within sixty (60) days after filing of same. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 19 PROPOSED CHANNEL CARRIAGE AND PROGRAMMING.
We plan to offer a TWO-TIER Service. No converter is required for Tier-One. Tier-Two sub-scribers will be
provided a converter at operator’s cost. There are many advantages to this approach, including the following:
1. Lower cost to install service;
2. Only subscribers desiring a converter will have one; and
3. In some cases one converter will serve a multi-TV set household.
Channel
Number
Program
Alternative
2. 1. NBC Tulsa KTEW
3. 2. Independent Atlanta 17 WTBS
Considered the Number 1 Independent “Superstation” in America. Its
program format is generous with movies (Library of two thousand seven
hundred (2,700) titles and up to forty (40) showings per week); Sports
(carries the games of four (4) major sports); Family Programs (it has the
pick of the best); and it operates twenty-four (24) hours a day;
4. 3. Independent Chicago 9 WGN
Rated the Number 2 Independent “Superstation” in America. The programming
is heavily saturated with movies, sports, and syndicated family
shows.
5. 4. HBO Pay Television
Package
Recent surveys indicated that HBO: is now the leading pay TV package.
HBO’s combination of first run movies, sports, and special events is the
best currently available.
6. 5. CBS Tulsa 6 KOTV
7. 6. Christian Broadcasting Network CBN
Religious programming that runs twenty-four (24) hours per day with
the lead show being the “700 Club” which utilizes a “Variety/Talk
Show”, format.
8. 7. ABC Tulsa 8 KTUL
9. 8. Madison Square Garden
Live sports from the greatest name in sports, Madison Square Garden.
Presentations include NBA and College Basketball, NHL Hockey, Tennis,
Track and Field, Boxing, Wrestling, and much more.
9. 9. Calliope
A weekly series presentation of ninety (90) minutes in length which incorporate
several features of interest to children of all ages. Award winning
movies, free of commercial interruptions, programmed by the
“Learning Corporation of America” to help broaden childrens’ horizons
through creative entertainment.
9. 10. c-Span
Cable Satellite Public Affairs Network offering “Live, in Session” televised,
“Gavel to Gavel” proceedings of the U.S. House of Representatives.
Follow the events that shape the future of America.
10. 11. ED Tulsa Educational
11. 12. Program Guide
Weekly scheduling for pay and min-pay packages.
11. 13. Bristow Origination
Available to qualified parties.
11. 14. Bristow Weather
All the information you need to determine your outdoor activity for the
day.
12. 15. Bristow School Bulletin Board
A dedicated marque to highlight school activities such as sports, social,
and various class functions.
12. 16. Bristow Community Bulletin Board
A fully accessible marque to highlight community functions such as parades,
fund raisers, socials, and town meetings.
13. 17. Nickelodeon
Thirteen (13) hours per day of hearty, wholesome, commercial free programming,
that will delight parents, PTA’s and children. Designed by
distinguished.
ADDITIONAL PROGRAMMING -- TIER TWO CUSTOMERS
14. 18. Modern Cable Programs
Entertainment with some commerical breaks. Programming features
documentaries, sponsored films and sports. All programming hosted by
noteworthy personalities.
15. 19. Entertainment Sports Programming Network
A variety of top quality sporting events including Davis Cup tennis, professional
golf and NCAA games.
16. 20. Home Box Office 11 (Mini-Pay)
A cut down version of a full pay package designed for family viewing
featuring “G” and “PG” rated movies presented without commercial
interruption. These programs are scheduled to play at different times and
days in succeeding weeks. No ‘R’ rated movies.
17. 21. Reserved for local universities.
(Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 20 MAPS, PLATS, AND REPORTS.
The grantee shall, file with the city clerk true and accurate maps or plates of all existing and proposed installation.
Grantee will, simultaneously with the acceptance of this non-exclusive franchise, file a map of the city
showing the proposed construction schedule of grantee. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 21 FORFEITURE OF NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE.
A. In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the city by virtue of this non-exclusive franchise
or otherwise, the city reserves the right to terminate and cancel this non-exclusive franchise and all rights and
privileges of the grantee hereunder in the event that the grantee:
1. Violates any provision of this non-exclusive franchise or any rule, order, or determination of the city or
council made pursuant to this non-exclusive franchise except where such violation, is without fault or through
excusable neglect;
2. Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt;
3. Attemps to evade any of the practices of any fraud or deceit upon the city; and
4. Attempts to dispose of any of the facilities or property of its GCC business to prevent the city from purchasing
same, as provided for herein.
B. Such termination and cancellation shall be by ordinance duly adopted after sixty (60) days’ notice to the
grantee and shall in no way affect any of the city’s rights under this non-exclusive franchise or any provision of
law. In the event that such termination and cancellation depends upon a finding of fact, such finding of fact as
made by the council or its representative shall be conclusive. Provided, however, that before this non-exclusive
franchise may be terminated and cancelled under this section the grantee must be provided with an opportunity
to be heard before the council. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 22 CITY’S RIGHT OF INTERVENTION.
The grantee agrees not to oppose intervention by the city in any suit or proceeding to which the grantee is a
party. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 23 FURTHER AGREEMENT AND WAIVER BY GRANTEE.
The grantee agrees to abide by all provisions of this non-exclusive franchise, and further agrees that it will not
at any future time set up as against the city or the council the claim that the provisions of this non-exclusive
franchise are unreasonable, arbitrary or void. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 24 DURATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE.
A. This non-exclusive franchise and the right, privileges, and authority hereby granted shall take effect and
be in force from and after final passage hereof, as provided by law, and shall continue in force and effect for a
term of fifteen (15) years, provided that within thirty (30) days after the date of the passage of this ordinance the
grantee shall file with the city clerk its unconditional acceptance of this non-exclusive franchise and promise to
comply with and abide by all its provisions, terms, and conditions. Such acceptance and promise shall be in writing
duly executed and sworn to by or on behalf of the grantee before a notary public or other officer authorized
by law to administer oaths.
B. Should the grantee fail to comply with Subsection A above, it shall acquire no rights, privileges, or authority
under this non-exclusive franchise whatsoever. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 25 ERECTION, REMOVAL, AND COMMON USE OF POLES.
A. No poles or other wire-holding structures shall be erected by the grantee without prior approval of the
council with regard to location, height, type and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of any pole or
wire-holding structure of the grantee shall be vested interest and such poles or structures shall be removed or
modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the council determines that the public convenience would
be enhanced thereby.
B. Where poles or other wire-holding structures already exist for use in serving the city are available for use
by the grantee, but it does not make arrangements for such use, the council may require the grantee to use such
poles and structures if it determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby, and the terms of the
use available to the grantee are just and reasonable.
C. Where the city or a public utility serving the city desires to make use of the pales or other wire-holding
structures of the grantee but agreement therefor with the grantee cannot be reached, the council may require
grantee to permit such use for such consideration and upon such terms as the council shall determine to be just
and reasonable, if the council determines that the use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly
interfere with the grantee’s operations. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 26 PUBLICATION COSTS.
The grantee shall assume the cost of publication of this ordinance as such publication is required by law and
such is payable upon the grantee’s filing of acceptance of this non-exclusive franchise. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
SECTION 27 ELECTION.
It is understood by the grantee that in order for grantee to receive a license or franchise herein, that same must
be placed before the people of the city and voted on; in this connection grantee agrees to assume and be responsible
for payment of the cost of the election, provided, however, that no other cable TV system is selected by the
people of the city. (Ord. No.12/3/79)
SECTION 28 COMMUNITY SERVICES.
GCC System will provide the following services in its system in Bristow:
1. Service I.
a. A Community Bulletin Board Channel. This service is provided remotely by the use of a keyboard located
at a central facility such as city hall, or other mutually acceptable location. An electronic print-out of
transmitted information appears on a channel of the cable system. This information may be inserted by local
newspapers, schools, city hall, police department or public service groups;
b. System subscribers can quickly apprise themselves of interesting and important happenings as the information
reaches the community Bulletin Board Center. The information is continually cycled on the designated
channel of the subscribers TV set; or
c. This information equipment and access channel will be made available on a twenty-four (24) hour basis,
free of charge, for any community approved use;
2. Service II.
A local Weather Service. This will be a continuous monitoring of local weather conditions. This informlation
will be displayed on a twenty-four (24) hour basis on the subscriber’s TV set.
3. Service III.
Emergency Alert System. This system will allow the police department or some other acceptable organization
such as the civil defense organization to interrupt all TV channels on the cable system and make an audio announcement
of emergency warnings or important message to all cable subscribers.
4. Service IV.
a. GCC System will make available for use in Bristow mobile video and audio equipment for use in producing
local programming for use on the Cable TV system;
b. GCC System will provide this service on or before the subscriber count reaches one thousand (1,000);
c. GCC System will provide a studio and equipment to be used by the community to produce locally originated
programming; or
d. GCC System will provide this service on or before the subscriber count reaches two thousand (2,000);
5. Service V.
GCC System will maintain an office in the City of Bristow which shall serve the subscribers and shall have a
cable TV technician on duty twenty-four (24) hours a day. (Ord. No. 12/3/79)
APPENDIX 4
BRISTOW MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
Sections:
Section 1 Trust created.
Section 2 Emergency.
SECTION 1 TRUST CREATED.
The trust indenture by and between Bill Shibley, as trustor, and Bill Shibley, Jim Aston, John Cherry, E. O.
Turner, Mancel Murphy, Mary Cecil, Bob Thompson, Grady Martin and Grady Arthurs, as trustees, dated as of
August 17, 1970, creating the Bristow Municipal Authority, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city
clerk, wherein the City of Bristow is declared to be the beneficiary of the trust, be and the same is hereby approved
and the City of Bristow accepts the trust as beneficiary thereof. (Ord. No. 26, 8/17/70)
SECTION 2 EMERGENCY.
By reason of its being extremely advantageous to the city to accept the term of the trust, and by reason of the
city’s need of the facilities to be acquired, constructed and equipped by the Bristow Municipal Authority, it is
deemed and hereby declared necessary for the preservation of the public health, peace and safety that the trust be
accepted and to that end that this ordinance shall become operative immediately; wherefore, an emergency is
hereby declared to exist and this ordinance shall be in full force and effect immedately from and after its passage
and approval. (Ord. No. 26, 8/17/70)
APPENDIX 5
PROVISIONS OF SELECTED STATE STATUTES
APPLICABLE TO THE CITY
(FROM TITLE 11 OF THE OKLAHOMA STATUTES)
Article:
8 Officers--General Provisions
13 Municipal Charters
14 Municipal Ordinances
16 Municipal Elections
17 Municipal Finances
22 General Powers of Municipalities
27 Courts
STATE LAWS
APPENDIX
PROVISIONS OF SELECTED STATE STATUTES
APPLICABLE TO THE CITY
(FROM TITLE 11 OF THE OKLAHOMA STATUTES, CITIES AND TOWNS)
Article:
8 Officers--General Provisions
13 Municipal Charters
14 Municipal Ordinances
16 Municipal Elections
17 Municipal Finances
22 General Powers of Municipalities
27 Courts
ARTICLE VIII
OFFICERS--GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section:
8-101 Qualifications for Elected Office
8-102 Term of Office
8-103 Oath of Office
8-104 Who May Administer Oaths
8-105 Certain Officers to Give Bond
8-106 Nepotism--Dual Office Holding
8-107 Removal of Officers
8-108 Absence From Governing Body Meetings
8-109 Vacancies in Office
8-110 Method of City Official Becoming Candidate for County or State Office
8-111 Abstinence in Voting in Certain Meetings
8-112 Resignation of Municipal Officer
8-113 Certain Officers and Employees Prohibited from Conducting Certain Business with Municipality--
Violations
ARTICLE VIII
OFFICERS--GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 8-101. QUALIFICATIONS FOR ELECTED OFFICE
A municipal elected official shall be a resident and a registered voter of the municipality in which he serves,
and all councilmembers or trustees from wards shall be actual residents of their respective wards. If an elected
official ceases to be a resident of the municipality, he shall thereupon cease to be an elected official of that municipality.
SECTION 8-102. TERM OF OFFICE
Unless otherwise provided for by law, the term of office of an elected municipal official shall be four (4)
years. The term of office of an elected official shall begin at 12:00 noon on the second Monday following the
general municipal election, and such official shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified. If a newly
elected official does not qualify within thirty (30) days after his term of office begins, the office shall become
vacant and shall be filled in the manner provided by law. In order to complete the unexpired term, the office of
an official who is holding over shall be filled at the next general election in compliance with the provisions of
Sections 16-101 through 16-213 of this Title. (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 8-103. OATH OF OFFICE
Any officer, elected or appointed, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take and subscribe to the
oath or affirmation of office prescribed by the Oklahoma Constitution. The oath or affirmation shall be filed in
the office of the municipal clerk.
SECTION 8-104. WHO MAY ADMINISTER OATHS
All officers authorized by state law, the mayor, the municipal clerk, the city manager, the municipal judge or
judges and such other officers as the municipal governing body may authorize, may administer oaths and affirmations
in any matter pertaining to the affairs and government of the municipality.
SECTION 8-105. CERTAIN OFFICERS TO GIVE BOND
The municipal governing body shall require the municipal treasurer, and any other officers and employees as
the governing body may designate by ordinance, to give bond for the faithful performance of his duties within
ten (10) days after his election or appointment, in such amount and form as the governing body shall prescribe.
The municipality shall pay the premiums on such bonds.
SECTION 8-106. NEPOTISM--DUAL OFFICE HOLDING
No elected or appointed official or other authority of the municipal government shall appoint or elect any person
related by affinity or consanguinity within the third degree to any governing body member or to himself or,
in the case of a plural authority, to any one of its members to any office or position of profit in the municipal
government. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit an officer or employee already in the service of the
municipality from continuing in such service or from promotion therein. A person may hold more than one office
or position in a municipal government as the governing body may ordain. A member of the governing body
shall not receive compensation for service in any municipal office or position other than his elected office.
(Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 8-107. REMOVAL OF OFFICERS
A municipal elected official may be removed from office for any cause specified by applicable state law for
the removal of officers, and by the method or methods prescribed thereby.
SECTION 8-108. ABSENCE FROM GOVERNING BODY MEETINGS
Whenever a member of the municipal governing body is absent from more than one-half of all meetings of the
governing body, regular and special, held within any period of four (4) consecutive months, he shall thereupon
cease to hold office.
SECTION 8-109. VACANCIES IN OFFICE
A. When a vacancy occurs in an office of an elected municipal official except the mayor, the governing
body shall appoint, by a majority vote of the remaining members, a person to fill the vacancy until the next general
municipal election, or the next biennial town meeting if the municipality is subject to the Oklahoma Town
Meeting Act, Section 16-301 et seq. of this title, and to serve until a successor is elected and qualified. Any vacancy
shall then be filled at the next general municipal election or biennial town meeting by election of a person
to complete the balance of any unexpired term. If the vacancy has not been filled within sixty (60) days after it
occurs, the governing body shall call for a special election or a special town meeting for the purpose of filling
the vacancy for the duration of the unexpired term unless said vacancy occurs or said election would occur
within one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the first day of the filing period for the next general municipal
election or within one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the next biennial town meeting. If a vacancy is not
filled by the special election or at a special town meeting, it shall be filled by appointment as provided for in this
subsection.
B. If a majority of the offices of a governing body are become vacant more than sixty (60) days before the
beginning of a regular filing period for general municipal elections or more than sixty (60) days before the biennial
town meeting, the remaining members of the governing body shall call for a special election or a special
town meeting, if the municipality is subject to the Oklahoma Town Meeting Act, to be held as soon as possible
in the municipality for the purpose of filling all vacant offices for the remainder of their unexpired terms if the
election or town meeting can be held more than sixty (60) days before the beginning of the filing period for the
general election or more than sixty (60) days before the next biennial town meeting. The remaining members of
the governing body may pay claims in accordance with Section 17-102 of this title and, when necessary to avoid
financial loss or injury to a person or property, may take any action otherwise authorized for the governing body
except the enactment of an ordinance.
C. If all the offices of the governing body become vacant, the municipal clerk or acting municipal clerk
shall be the interim mayor until a member of the governing body is elected and qualified. If there is no municipal
clerk or acting municipal clerk in office, the municipal treasurer shall serve as interim mayor and acting municipal
clerk. If there is no municipal officer in office, the Governor may appoint a registered voter of the municipality
as interim mayor and acting municipal clerk. The appointed interim mayor shall give bond for the faithful
performance of his duties within ten (10) days after his appointment. The municipality shall pay the premium on
the bond.
D. The interim mayor shall exercise the authority of the governing body for only those purposes set out in
this section.
1. Within five (5) days of the occurrence of the last vacancy, the interim mayor shall call a special election
or a special town meeting, if the municipality is subject to the provisions of the Oklahoma Town Meeting Act,
for the purpose of filling the unexpired terms in accordance with subsection B of this section. If all of the offices
of the governing body become vacant sixty (60) days or less before the beginning of a regular filing period for
general elections or sixty (60) days or less before the next biennial town meeting, the interim mayor shall call the
regular general election or the biennial town meeting, whichever is appropriate. If the interim mayor fails or refuses
to call an election or town meeting, whichever is appropriate, the board of county commissioners of the
county in which the municipality is located shall call the election or town meeting. The county sheriff, or his
deputy, shall attend any town meeting called by the board of county commissioners and, if the interim mayor
fails to conduct the meeting, shall moderate the meeting. The interim mayor or the sheriff or deputy who is moderating
the meeting is authorized to appoint a registered voter of the municipality to take the minutes of the
meeting. If the vacancies are not filled by the election or town meeting called for the purpose, the Governor may
appoint registered voters of the municipality to fill the vacancies without regard to wards for the balance of the
unexpired term.
2. The interim mayor may pay claims in accordance with subsection C of Section 17-102 of this title. The
interim mayor shall submit a list of such payments to the governing body of the municipality no later than the
second regular meeting after the vacancies are filled.
E. To be eligible for appointment to fill a vacancy in an elected municipal office a person must meet the
same qualifications required for filing a declaration for candidacy for that office. (Amended 1989)
SECTION 8-110. METHOD OF CITY OFFICIAL BECOMING CANDIDATE FOR COUNTY OR
STATE OFFICE
Any member of a city governing body, the city clerk, and the city marshal, may not, unless he resigns from
the office held by him, be eligible to become a candidate for a county or state office. This provision shall not
apply to any municipality governed by charter, nor to incorporated towns.
SECTION 8-111. ABSTINENCE IN VOTING IN CERTAIN MEETINGS
If a member of the governing body of a municipality abstains from voting, he shall be deemed to have cast a
negative vote, which shall be recorded in the minutes. (Added, 11/1/84)
SECTION 8-112. RESIGNATION OF MUNICIPAL OFFICER
A municipal officer may resign by submitting his written resignation to the governing body of the municipality,
to the remaining members of the municipal governing body if some positions are vacant, to the interim
mayor or, if all positions of the governing body will become vacant upon the resignation, to the board of county
commissioners of the county in which the municipality is located. Delivery of the written resignation to the governing
body during a public meeting of such body or to the municipal clerk by mail or personal delivery during
regular office hours shall constitute submission of the resignation to the municipal governing body. Delivery of
the written resignation to the board of county commissioners during a public meeting of the commissioners or to
the county clerk by mail or hand delivery during regular office hours shall constitute submission of the resignation
to the board of county commissioners. A resignation submitted by a municipal officer may be withdrawn in
writing at any time prior to the effective date stated in the resignation. If no effective date is stated, the resignation
shall be effective immediately. Acceptance by the governing body shall not be required for the resignation
to be effective. (Amended 1988)
SECTION 8-113. CERTAIN OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES PROHIBITED FROM CONDUCTING
CERTAIN BUSINESS WITH MUNICIPALITY--VIOLATIONS
A. Except as otherwise provided by this section, no municipal officer or employee, or any business in
which said officer, employee, or spouse of the officer or employee has a proprietary interest, shall engage in:
1. Selling, buying, or leasing property, real or personal, to or from the municipality;
2. Contracting with the municipality; or
3. Buying or bartering for or otherwise engaging in any manner in the acquisition of any bonds, warrants,
or other evidence of indebtedness of the municipality.
B. For purposes of this section, “employee” means any person who is employed by a municipality more
than ten (10) hours in a week for more than thirteen (13) consecutive weeks and who enters into, recommends or
participates in the decision to enter into any transaction described in subsection A of this section. Provided that
any person who receives wages, reimbursement for expenses, or emoluments of any kind from a municipality,
any spouse of such person, or any business in which such person or spouse has a proprietary interest shall not
buy or otherwise become interested in the transfer of any surplus property of a municipality or a public trust of
which the municipality is beneficiary unless such surplus property is offered for sale to the public after notice of
the sale is published.
C. For purposes of this section, “proprietary interest” means ownership of more than twenty-five percent
(25%) of the business or of the stock therein or any percentage which constitutes a controlling interest but shall
not include any such interest held by a blind trust.
D. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any
transaction entered into in violation of the provisions of this section is void. Any member of a governing body
who approves any transaction in violation of the provisions of this section shall be held personally liable for the
amount of said transaction. (Amended 3/5/85)
ARTICLE XIII
MUNICIPAL CHARTERS
Section:
13-101 Municipalities May Adopt Charter
13-102 Procedure for Adopting Charters--Petition or Governing Body Resolution
13-103 Election on Question and Board of Freeholders
13-104 Canvassing Returns--Certification of Results
13-105 Preparation of Charter
13-106 Notice of Charter Election
13-107 Charter Election--Certification of Results--Approval by Governor
13-108 Deposit of Copies for Record--Judicial Notice
13-109 Charter Controls over Conflicting Laws
13-110 Payment of Expenses for Framing and Adopting Charter
13-111 Charter Amendments--Procedure
13-112 Revocation or Abolishment of Charter--Adopting Statutory Form--Procedure
13-113 Charter Revocation--Canvassing Returns--Proclamation of Governor--Election of Officers
13-114 Special Charter Provisions Relating to Abandonment of Municipal Charters
ARTICLE XIII
MUNICIPAL CHARTERS
SECTION 13-101. MUNICIPALITIES MAY ADOPT CHARTER
Any city or town containing a population of two thousand (2,000) inhabitants or more, as shown by the latest
federal census or other census recognized by the laws of Oklahoma, may frame a charter for its own government.
SECTION 13-102. PROCEDURE FOR ADOPTING CHARTERS--PETITION OR GOVERNING BODY
RESOLUTION
The mayor of an incorporated municipality shall issue an order calling for an election on the question of
whether or not the municipality shall frame a charter for its own government and elect a board of freeholders to
prepare the charter when:
1. A petition signed by not less then twenty-five percent (25%) of the registered voters of the municipality,
as shown by the preceding general election, is filed with the governing body; or
2. The governing body, by resolution, so directs.
The order calling for the election shall be issued within ten (10) days after a petition has been filed with the governing
body or within ten (10) days after the date of the governing body resolution.
SECTION 13-103. ELECTION ON QUESTION AND BOARD OF FREEHOLDERS
The election on the question and board of freeholders shall be held at a general or special election to be held
in the municipality within thirty (30) days after the order calling for the election. Notice of the election shall be
given in the manner required for municipal elections. The question submitted to the registered voters of the municipality
shall be substantially in the following form:
Shall the __________ (City or Town) of ____________ frame a charter for its own government?
( ) Yes.
( ) No.
The board of freeholders, which is to be voted on in the same election, shall consist of two qualified electors
from each ward in the municipality. The freeholders shall be elected by the registered voters of the respective
wards. The two candidates receiving the highest number of votes in each ward shall be elected as members of the
board of freeholders. The ballot shall be substantially in the following form:
For Freeholder from Ward One
(Vote for Two)
______________Name of candidate for freeholder.
______________Name of candidate for freeholder.
SECTION 13-104. CANVASSING RETURNS--CERTIFICATION OF RESULTS
The county election board shall canvass the returns and the secretary of the board shall, within five (5) days
after the canvass of the returns of the election, certify the results to the municipal governing body. If a majority
of the votes cast on the question are in favor of framing a charter for the municipality, the board shall tabulate
the votes on the election of freeholders and declare the results in the certification to the governing body.
SECTION 13-105. PREPARATION OF CHARTER
The board of freeholders shall prepare a charter for the municipality within ninety (90) days after their election.
The charter shall be consistent with and subject to the Oklahoma Constitution and shall not be in conflict
with the Constitution and laws relating to the exercise of initiative and referendum. The proposed charter shall be
signed in duplicate by at least a majority of the freeholders. One copy of the proposed charter shall be given to
the mayor and the other shall be given to the county clerk of the county in which the situs of the municipality is
located.
SECTION 13-106. NOTICE OF CHARTER ELECTION
Within twenty (20) days after receipt of the proposed charter from the board of freeholders, the governing
body shall publish the proposed charter and an announcement of the date for the charter election in a newspaper
of general circulation within the municipality for at least twenty-one (21) days, if in a daily paper, or in three (3)
consecutive issues, if in a weekly paper. The date for the charter election shall not be less than twenty (20) days
nor more than thirty (30) days after the last publication.
SECTION 13-107. CHARTER ELECTION--CERTIFICATION OF RESULTS--APPROVAL BY
GOVERNOR
The question of whether or not the municipality shall adopt the proposed charter shall be submitted to the registered
voters of the municipality at a general or special election. If a majority of the votes cast, as certified by
the secretary of the county election board, are in favor of adopting the charter, the charter shall then be certified
by the mayor of the municipality and authenticated by the seal of the municipality. The submission to and approval
by the registered voters shall be set forth on the charter. The charter shall then be submitted to the Governor
for his approval, and the Governor shall approve the charter if it is not in conflict with the Constitution and
laws of Oklahoma. Upon his approval, the charter shall become the organic law of the municipality and supersede
any existing charter and all ordinances in conflict with it.
SECTION 13-108. DEPOSIT OF COPIES FOR RECORD--JUDICIAL NOTICE
After the approval of the charter by the Governor, duplicate copies shall be made and one shall be deposited
in the office of the Secretary of State, and the other, after being recorded in the office of the county clerk of the
county in which the situs of the municipality is located, shall be deposited in the archives of the municipality.
Thereafter the charter shall be judicially noticed in all court proceedings.
SECTION 13-109. CHARTER CONTROLS OVER CONFLICTING LAWS
Whenever a charter is in conflict with any law relating to municipalities in force at the time of the adoption
and approval of the charter, the provisions of the charter shall prevail and shall operate as a repeal or suspension
of the state law or laws to the extent of any conflict.
SECTION 13-110. PAYMENT OF EXPENSES FOR FRAMING AND ADOPTING CHARTER
All charter election expenses shall be paid by the municipality. The municipality may provide for the payment
of the expenses incurred by the board of freeholders in the framing of the charter.
SECTION 13-111. CHARTER AMENDMENTS--PROCEDURE
Amendments to a municipal charter may be proposed by:
1. An initiative petition, signed by a number of the registered voters residing in the municipality equal to at
least twenty-five percent (25%) of the total number of votes cast at the preceding general election. Charter
amendments proposed by initiative petition shall be governed in all respects by the provisions of Sections 15-101
through 15-110 of this title; or
2. A resolution of the municipal governing body. Notice of charter amendments proposed by resolution and
the election on them shall be in the same manner provided for adoption of municipal charters as set forth in Section
13-106 and 13-107 of this title. If a majority of the votes cast in the election on the charter amendments, as
certified by the secretary of the county election board, are in favor of adopting the proposed amendments to the
charter, the charter shall be so amended, certified and authenticated by the mayor, and submitted to the Governor
for his approval. The Governor shall approve the charter amendments if they are not in conflict with the Constitution
and laws of Oklahoma. Upon his approval, the charter as amended shall become the organic law of the
municipality and supersede any existing charter and all ordinances in conflict with it. The charter amendments
shall be filed and recorded in the same manner provided for filing of municipal charters.
SECTION 13-112. REVOCATION OR ABOLISHMENT OF CHARTER--ADOPTING STATUTORY
FORM--PROCEDURE
A proposal to revoke or abolish the charter of a municipality shall be made in the same manner provided for
charter amendments and shall include the proposed statutory form of municipal government to be adopted when
the charter is revoked, unless the proposal includes the adoption of a new charter in lieu of the existing charter.
The question to be submitted to the registered voters of the municipality shall be substantially in the following
form:
Shall the (City or Town) of _____________ revoke the charter under which it is now operating, and adopt and
be governed under the statutory ____________ (name of proposed statutory form) form of municipal government
as provided by laws of Oklahoma?
( ) Yes.
( ) No.
SECTION 13-113. CHARTER REVOCATION--CANVASSING RETURNS--PROCLAMATION OF
GOVERNOR--ELECTION OF OFFICERS
The secretary of the county election board shall, within five (5) days after the canvass of the returns of the
election, certify to the Governor the results of the vote on the question. If a majority of the votes cast are in favor
of revoking the charter, the Governor, within twenty (20) days after receiving the certification, shall issue a proclamation
stating that the municipality has revoked its charter and adopted the statutory form of municipal government
specified in the question. The proclamation of the Governor shall also direct the governing body of the
municipality to divide the municipality into the number of wards required and to hold primary and general elections
in the manner provided by the statutory form of government which has been adopted. From the date of the
Governor’s proclamation, the charter of the municipality shall be revoked, and the municipality shall be governed
under the laws relating to the statutory form of government which the municipality has adopted.
SECTION 13-114. SPECIAL CHARTER PROVISIONS RELATING TO ABANDONMENT OF
MUNICIPAL CHARTERS
Where a municipality has adopted a charter containing a special provision to the effect that at the expiration of
a specified period after the adoption of the charter the governing body may submit to the registered voters of the
municipality the question of whether or not the charter shall be abandoned and the municipality governed under
a statutory form of government, and the specified time has expired and the governing body has failed to submit
the question, then the question shall be submitted to the registered voters at the next election which may be held
in the municipality. The secretary of the county election board shall submit the question substantially in the language
of the charter provision. If a majority of the votes cast, as certified by the secretary of the county election
board, are in favor of abandoning the charter and adopting a statutory form, the results of the election shall be
certified to the Governor in the manner provided for revocation of charters.
ARTICLE XIV
MUNICIPAL ORDINANCES
Section:
14-101 Municipal Ordinances--Authority
14-101.1 Rent Control--Prohibition
14-102 Ordinances--Procedure Governing Passage
14-103 Effective Date of Municipal Ordinances--Emergency Measures
14-104 Style of Ordinances--Title and Subject--Enacting Clause
14-105 Ordinance Book--Entries
14-106 Publication of Ordinances
14-107 Publication by Title and Condensed Summary of Certain Codes and Ordinances; Adoption and Enforcement
of Certain Building Codes
14-108 Codification of Municipal Ordinances
14-109 Mandatory Compilation of Penal Ordinances
14-110 Notice and Filing of Penal Ordinance Compilations--Judicial Notice
14-111 Enforcement and Penalties for Violation of Municipal Ordinances
14-112 Cancellation or Denial of Driving Privileges for Noncompliance with Municipal Court Sentence
14-113 Liability for Cost of Medical Care to Defendant in Custody of Municipal Jail
ARTICLE XIV
MUNICIPAL ORDINANCES
SECTION 14-101. MUNICIPAL ORDINANCES--AUTHORITY
The municipal governing body may enact ordinances, rules and regulations not inconsistent with the Constitution
and laws of Oklahoma for any purpose mentioned in Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes or for carrying out
their municipal functions. Municipal ordinances, rules or regulations may be repealed, altered or amended as the
governing body ordains.
SECTION 14-101.1 RENT CONTROL--PROHIBITION
A. No municipal governing body may enact, maintain, or enforce any ordinance or resolution which regulates
the amount of rent to be charged for privately owned, single-family or multiple unit residential or commercial
rental property.
B. This section shall not be construed to prohibit any municipality or any authority created by a municipality
for that purpose from:
1. Regulating in any way property belonging to that municipality or authority;
2. Entering into agreements with private persons which regulate the amount of rent charged for subsidized
rental properties; or
3. Enacting ordinances or resolutions restricting rent for properties assisted with federal Community Development
Block Grant Funds. (Added 1988)
SECTION 14-102. ORDINANCES--PROCEDURE GOVERNING PASSAGE
All proposed ordinances of a municipality shall be considered at a public meeting of the council or board of
trustees. A vote of a majority of all the members of the council or board of trustees shall be required for the final
passage of an ordinance.
SECTION 14-103. EFFECTIVE DATE OF MUNICIPAL ORDINANCES--EMERGENCY MEASURES
Every ordinance except an emergency ordinance shall go into effect thirty (30) days after its final passage
unless it specifies a later date. An emergency measure necessary for the immediate preservation of peace, health,
or safety shall go into effect upon its final passage unless it specifies a later date. Such an emergency measure
must state in a separate section the reasons why it is necessary that the measure become effective immediately.
The question of emergency must be ruled upon separately and approved by the affirmative vote of at least threefourths
(3/4) of all the members of the governing body of the municipality. (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 14-104. STYLE OF ORDINANCES--TITLE AND SUBJECT--ENACTING CLAUSE
An ordinance may contain only one subject and the subject shall be expressed in its title. The enacting clause
of all ordinances passed by a municipal governing body shall be:
1. “Be it ordained by the Council of the City of _________”, for city ordinances; or
2. “Be it ordained by the Board of Trustees of the Town of ____________”, for town ordinances.
The enacting clause of ordinances proposed by the voters under their power of initiative shall be “Be it ordained
by the People of the __________ (City or Town) of _____________”.
SECTION 14-105. ORDINANCE BOOK--ENTRIES
Every ordinance enacted by a municipal governing body shall be entered in an ordinance book immediately
after its passage. The entry shall contain the text of the ordinance and shall state the date of its passage, the page
of the journal containing the record of the final vote on its passage, the name of the newspaper in which the ordinance
was published, and the date of the publication. Compilations or codes of municipal law or regulations
need not be enrolled in full in the book of ordinances, but the ordinance adopting by reference or enacting such
compilation or code shall be entered and a copy of the compilation or code shall be filed and kept in the office of
the municipal clerk. (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 14-106. PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES
No ordinance having any subject other than the appropriation of monies shall be in force unless published or
posted within fifteen (15) days after its passage. Every municipal ordinance shall be published at least once in
full, except as provided in Section 14-107 of this title.
When publishing the ordinance, the publisher or managing officer of the newspaper shall prefix to the ordinance
a line in brackets stating the date of publication as “Published _____________”, giving the month, day,
and year of publication. (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 14-107. PUBLICATION BY TITLE AND CONDENSED SUMMARY OF CERTAIN CODES
AND ORDINANCES; ADOPTION AND ENFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN BUILDING CODES
A. If a municipal governing body enacts or adopts by reference ordinances which are compilations or codes
of law or regulations relating to traffic, building, plumbing, electrical installations, fire prevention, inflammable
liquids, milk and milk products, protection of the public health, or other matters which the municipality has the
power to regulate, such ordinances are not required to be published in full. Legal publication of these ordinances
may be by publishing the title and a condensed gist or summary of their contents in the manner provided by Section
14-106 of this title. At least one copy of these ordinances shall be kept in the office of the municipal clerk
for public use, inspection, and examination. The municipal clerk shall keep copies of the ordinances, code, or
compilations for distribution or sale at a reasonable price.
B. A municipality which adopts building standards shall adopt and enforce one of the following codes:
1. The BOCA Basic Building Code of the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Incorporated;
or
2. The Uniform Building Code of the International Conference of Building Officials; or
3. The Southern Standard Building Code of the Southern Building Code Congress, International, Incorporated;
or
4. The Code for Energy Conservation in New Building Construction prepared by the National Conference
of States an Building Codes and Standards, Inc. (NCSBCS); or
5. Any other code which the governing body deems desirable to promote safety, energy efficiency, health,
and welfare within the municipality.
C. Ordinances which are passed by the governing body with an emergency clause attached are not required
to be published in full, but may be published by title only in the manner provided by Section 14-106 of this title.
(Amended, effective 11/1/84)
SECTION 14-108. CODIFICATION OF MUNICIPAL ORDINANCES
A. The governing body of a municipality may, from time to time, authorize a codification of its ordinances.
Such a code may be kept up to date by use of a loose-leaf system and process of amendment. In a code of municipal
ordinances, the title, enacting clauses and emergency sections may be omitted and temporary and special
ordinances and parts of ordinances may also be omitted. Permanent and general ordinances and parts of ordinances
which are to be repealed by the code shall be omitted from the code. The ordinances and parts of ordinances
included in the code may be revised, rearranged, renumbered, and reorganized into some systematic arrangement.
The governing body may publish in connection with the code new matter, provisions of state law
relating to the municipality, a history of the municipality, the history of the municipal government, the names of
officials and other informational matter as the governing body may decide. The book or pamphlet containing the
code may also contain an index and forms and instructions as the governing body may decide.
B. At least three copies of the code shall be kept in the office of the municipal clerk for public use, inspection
and examination. The municipal clerk shall keep copies of the code for distribution or sale at a reasonable
price.
C. Notice of the publication of the code shall be in the manner provided for publication by title of certain
codes and ordinances in subsection A of Section 14-107 of this title.
SECTION 14-109. MANDATORY COMPILATION OF PENAL ORDINANCES
The penal ordinances of every municipality shall be compiled and published in a permanent form, either
printed or typed, periodically, but not less than once each ten (10) years. Each municipality shall also publish
biennial supplements to the permanent volume of compiled penal ordinances. No municipal ordinance shall be
enforced if it is not reflected in such a permanent volume or supplement if the ordinance was adopted before the
latest compilation or supplement. A codification of municipal ordinances which includes all penal ordinances is
sufficient for complying with this compilation requirement if the code is issued as a permanent volume with biennial
supplements and if the procedures for filing and notice, as outlined in Section 14-110 of this title, have
been complied with. Provided, further, the ten-year codification requirement shall be satisfied if the code complies
with the compilation requirement and the biennial supplements are made a part of the permanent volume
which are maintained in permanent form either bound or in a loose-leaf form. (Amended 1989)
SECTION 14-110. NOTICE AND FILING OF PENAL ORDINANCE COMPILATIONS--JUDICIAL
NOTICE
When a municipality has compiled and published its permanent volume or biennial supplement of penal ordinances,
the governing body of the municipality shall adopt a resolution notifying the public of the publication. A
copy of the resolution shall be filed in the office of the county clerk in each county in which the municipality is
located. The county clerk shall assign the filed resolution a book and page number. At least one copy of the permanent
volume and each biennial supplement shall be deposited free of cost by the municipality in the county
law library of each county wherein the municipality is located, and receipt of same shall be duly noted in writing
by the county librarian. A copy of the receipt may be filed with the county clerk who shall then assign a book
and page number. The permanent volume or biennial supplement of compiled penal ordinances shall be available
for purchase by the public at a reasonable price. Ordinances which have been compiled and filed in accordance
with this section shall be judicially noticed in all court proceedings. Provided, a court may consider a book and
page reference of the county clerk’s filings as satisfactory proof of compliance so that judicial notice may be
taken of an ordinance. (Amended 1989)
SECTION 14-111. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF MUNICIPAL
ORDINANCES
A. The governing body of a municipality may provide for enforcement of its ordinances and establish fines,
penalties, or imprisonment, as authorized by subsections B through D of this section, for any offense in violation
of its ordinances, which shall be recoverable with costs of suit. The governing body may provide that any person
fined for violation of a municipal ordinance, who is financially able but refuses or neglects to pay the fine or
costs, may be compelled to satisfy the amount owed by working on the streets, alleys, avenues, areas, and public
grounds of the municipality, subject to the direction of the street commissioner or other proper officer, at a rate
per day as the governing body may prescribe by ordinance, but not less than Five Dollars ($5.00) per day for
useful labor, until the fine or costs are satisfied.
B. Cities having a municipal criminal court of record may enact ordinances prescribing maximum fines of
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) and costs or imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days or both the fine and
imprisonment, but shall not have authority to enact any ordinance making unlawful an act or omission declared
by state statute to be punishable as a felony. Provided, that cities having a municipal criminal court of record
may enact ordinances prescribing maximum fines of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) and costs or imprisonment
not exceeding ninety (90) days or both such fine and imprisonment for violations of municipal ordinances
regulating the pretreatment of wastewater and regulating stormwater discharges.
C. Municipalities having a municipal court not of record may enact ordinances prescribing maximum fines
of Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) and costs pursuant to the provisions of Section 27-126 of this title or imprisonment
not exceeding thirty (30) days or both the fine and imprisonment, provided that municipalities having
only a municipal court not of record shall not have authority to enact any ordinance making unlawful any act or
omission declared by state statute to be punishable as a felony. A municipal ordinance may not impose a penalty,
including fine and costs, greater than that established by statute for the same offense. Provided, that municipalities
having a municipal court not of record may enact ordinance prescribing maximum fines of One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00) and costs or imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days or both such fine and imprisonment
for violations of municipal ordinances regulating the pretreatment of wastewater and regulating stormwater
discharges.
D. Municipalities having both municipal criminal courts of record and municipal courts not of record may
enact ordinances, within the authority of this section, for both such courts.
E. No municipality may levy a fine of over Fifty Dollars ($50.00) until it has compiled and published its
penal ordinances as required in Sections 14-109 and 14-110 of this title. (Amended 1990)
SECTION 14-112 CANCELLATION OR DENIAL OF DRIVING PRIVILEGES FOR
NONCOMPLIANCE WITH MUNICIPAL COURT SENTENCE
A. As used in this section:
1. “Department” means the Department of Public Safety;
2. “Notification form” means a form prescribed by the Department which contains a statement from the
court that the person has failed to satisfy the sentence of the court. It shall include the name, date of birth, physical
description, and the driver’s license number, if any, of the person;
3. “Reinstatement form” means a form prescribed by the Department which contains a statement from the
court that the person has satisfied the sentence of the court. It shall include sufficient information to identify the
person to the Department;
4. “Sentence” means any order of the court to pay a fine, penalty assessment or costs or to carry out a term
of community service or other remedial action.
B. When any person under the age of eighteen (18) years fails or refuses to satisfy a sentence of a municipal
court, the court shall notify the Department. Upon receipt of the notification form from the court, the Department
shall cancel or deny all driving privileges of the person without a hearing until the person satisfies the sentence
of the court.
C. When the person fulfills the sentence of the court, the court or court clerk shall provide a reinstatement
form to such person either directly or by first class mail, postage prepaid, at the last address given by the person
to the court. The driving privileges of a person who furnishes a reinstatement form to the Department shall be
granted or reinstated, if the person is otherwise eligible, in accordance with law. Upon such granting or reinstatement
of driving privileges, the Department may remove any record of the denial or cancellation of driving
privileges as provided for in this section from the file of the person and maintain an internal record of the denial
or cancellation for fiscal or other purposes.
D. At the time of sentencing the person, the court may take custody of the driver’s license of the person
until the terms of the sentence are fulfilled. In such case, the court shall issue to the person a receipt for the license.
Additionally, the court may notify the parents or other custodian of the person of the terms of the sentence
or any notice to the Department. (Added 1990)
SECTION 14-113 LIABILITY FOR COST OF MEDICAL CARE TO DEFENDANT IN CUSTODY OF
MUNICIPAL JAIL
When a defendant is in the custody of a municipal jail, the custodial municipality shall only be liable for the
cost of medical care for conditions that are not preexisting prior to arrest and that arise due to acts or omissions
of the municipality. Preexisting conditions ore defined as those illnesses beginning or injuries sustained outside
the custody of the municipal jail.
An inmate receiving medical care for a preexisting condition or a condition not caused by the acts or omissions
of the municipality shall be liable for payment of the cost of care, including but not limited to, medication,
medical treatment, and transportation costs, for or relating to the condition requiring treatment. (Added 1990)
ARTICLE XVI
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
Part 1. General Provisions
Section:
16-101 Notice of Municipal Elections
16-102 Provisions not Applicable to Municipalities Governed by Charter
16-103 General Municipal Elections--When Held
16-103.1 Withholding Certain Monies from City or Town that Fails to Hold Municipal Elections
16-104 Conduct of General Municipal Elections
16-105 What Candidate’s Name may be Placed on General Election Ballot
16-105.1 Elections to be Nonpartisan--Primary Elections in Nonpartisan Elections Abolished
16-106 Unopposed Candidates in General Election
16-107 Primary Elections--When Held
16-108 Conduct of Primary Elections
16-109 Manner of Becoming a Party Candidate--Declaration of Candidacy
16-110 Independent Candidates
16-111 Unopposed Candidates in Primary Election
16-112 Special Elections--Questions Which may be Submitted
16-113 Special Election Ballot--Preparation and Arrangement
16-114 Conduct of Special Elections Held for Electing Officers
Part 2. Specific Provisions for Statutory Cities and Towns
16-201 Aldermanic Cities with One Councilmember per Ward--Officers to be Elected--Terms
16-202 First Election Held in Aldermanic Cities with One Councilmember per Ward
16-203 Aldermanic Cities with Two Councilmembers per Ward--Officers to be Elected--Terms
16-204 First Election Held in Aldermanic Cities with Two Councilmembers per Ward
16-205 Towns--Officers to be Elected--Terms
16-206 First Election Held in Town
16-207 Aldermanic Cities and Towns--Appointment of Certain Officials after Submission to Vote
16-208 Council-Manager Cities--Officers to be Elected--Terms
16-209 First Election Held in Council-Manager City
16-210 Strong-Mayor-Council Cities--Officers to be Elected--Terms
16-211 First Election Held in Strong-Mayor-Council City
16-212 Council-Manager and Strong-Mayor-Council Cities--Form of General Municipal Election Ballot
16-213 Transitional Provisions for Municipalities not in Conformance with General Election Procedure
Part 3. Oklahoma Town Meeting Act
16-301 Short Title
16-302 Municipalities Required to Hold Town Meetings--Election--Ordinance Providing Alternative Procedure-
-Repeal of Ordinance
16-303 Time for Town Meeting--Purpose--Special Town Meetings
16-304 Notice--Publication--Posting--Contents
16-305 Special Town Meeting--Meeting Called by Board of County Commissioners
16-306 Presiding Officer--Rules of Order, Conduct and Decorum--Minutes--Ballots--Nomination and Election
of Officials--False Affidavits
16-307 Voting Eligibility--Pollbook--Illegal Voting--Penalty
16-308 Election of Municipal Officers
16-309 Filing of List of Municipal Officers Elected--Notification of Changes in List
16-310 Contest of Election by Nominee
16-311 Petition Alleging Fraud--Bond--Hearing--Answer--Judgment--Ineligibility for Office--Liability of Contestant--
Damages
16-312 Petition Alleging Irregularities Other than Fraud--Sufficiency of Allegations--Hearing
16-313 Impossibility of Determining Winner--Special Town Meeting to Fill Contested Office
16-314 Omission of or Noncompliance with Notice Requirements--Correction--Rectification of Other Errors
and Omissions--Validation of Business of Original Action
16-315 Elections Conducted by County Election Board--Option to be Held at Town Meeting
ARTICLE XVI
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 16-101. NOTICE OF MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
Notice of a general municipal election or a special election shall be given by publishing the resolution of the
municipal governing body calling for the election. The resolution shall set forth:
1. The date or dates of the election; and
2. The offices to be filled or the questions to be voted upon at the election.
The resolution shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least ten (10) days
before the beginning of the filing period for a general municipal election, or at least ten (10) days before the date
of a special election. If there is no newspaper of general circulation in the municipality, the notice shall be given
by posting a copy of the resolution in at least five (5) public places in the municipality.
SECTION 16-102. PROVISIONS NOT APPLICABLE TO MUNICIPALITIES GOVERNED BY
CHARTER
A. The provisions of Section 16-101 et seq. of this title shall not apply to any municipality which is governed
by charter; provided, that in any election such a municipality may, by indicating in its resolution calling
the election, choose to follow any provision of state law governing elections conducted by a county election
board when the municipality’s charter or ordinances are silent on the matter addressed by such provision. In such
instance, if the municipal election or any substantial portion thereof is not conducted by a county election board,
the duties required of the county election board or its secretary shall be performed by the municipal authority
designated by the municipal governing body and nothing herein shall be construed to require the county election
board to perform any such duties. The residency requirements of Sections 16-109 and 16-110 of this title shall
apply to all municipalities except to the extent that such residency requirements are governed by municipal charter.
B. The provisions of Sections 16-101 through 16-114 of this title shall not apply to any municipality subject
to the provisions of the Oklahoma Town Meeting Act; provided, Section 16-103.1 of this title shall apply to such
municipalities. (Amended 1988)
SECTION 16-103. GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS--WHEN HELD
General municipal elections shall be held in cities and towns on the first Tuesday in April in each oddnumbered
year.
SECTION 16-103.1 WITHHOLDING CERTAIN MONIES FROM CITY OR TOWN THAT FAILS TO
HOLD MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
No monies shall be distributed pursuant to Section 1104 Title 47 and Section 504 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma
Statutes to any incorporated city or town which has failed to hold a general municipal election or a biennial town
meeting as provided in Section 16-101 et seq. of this title or the Oklahoma Town Meeting Act, respectively, on
the dates required by law for two consecutive general municipal elections or biennial town meetings. Such monies
shall be remitted to the county in which the incorporated city or town is located and deposited to the county
highway fund of that county to be used as otherwise provided by law. An incorporated city or town shall henceforth
send the county treasurer of the county in which it is located and the chairman of the Oklahoma Tax Commission,
or a person designated by the Oklahoma Tax Commission to receive service of process, a copy of the
municipality’s notice of a biennial town meeting or resolution calling for its regular municipal elections, whichever
is appropriate. The copy of the resolution shall include a notation by the county election board showing that
the resolution was received and the date it was received. (Amended 1988)
SECTION 16-104. CONDUCT OF GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
The laws applicable to general elections shall govern general municipal elections except as otherwise provided.
Municipal elected officials, including those from wards as well as at large, shall be elected at large by the
registered voters of the entire municipality.
SECTION 16-105. WHAT CANDIDATE’S NAME MAY BE PLACED ON GENERAL ELECTION
BALLOT
No candidate’s name shall be printed upon the official ballot for a general municipal election unless such candidate
shall have been nominated by some political party at the primary election or unless his name is presented
as an independent candidate as provided in Section 16-110 of this title.
SECTION 16-105.1 ELECTIONS TO BE NONPARTISAN--PRIMARY ELECTIONS IN NONPARTISAN
ELECTIONS ABOLISHED
Municipal elections shall be nonpartisan and all candidates shall file as independent candidates unless, prior to
the date for notifying the county election board of the call for the election, the municipality has in effect an ordinance
providing for a partisan primary election consistent with Section 16-101 et seq. of Title 11 of the Oklahoma
Statutes. No primary elections shall be held in a nonpartisan election. Any election proclamation or notice
of election providing for a primary election shall be deemed to be amended by operation of this act to delete the
call for a primary election unless a copy of the ordinance authorizing the primary election is attached to the election
resolution filed with the county election board. If such a copy is not attached, each candidate shall appear on
the ballot as an independent candidate without party or other designation. Provided, any municipality which is
governed by a charter may provide otherwise by charter or ordinance.
SECTION 16-106. UNOPPOSED CANDIDATES IN GENERAL ELECTION
Any candidate who is unopposed for an office in a general municipal election shall be deemed elected and
certified; and his name shall not appear on the general election ballot. If there is only one candidate for each of
the offices which are to be filled at the election, and no questions are to be voted upon at the election, the general
municipal election shall not be held.
SECTION 16-107. PRIMARY ELECTIONS--WHEN HELD
A primary election shall be held in cities and towns on the first Tuesday of March in each odd-numbered year,
at which time the several political parties shall nominate candidates for offices which are to be elected at the upcoming
general municipal election. (Amended eff. 10/19/81)
SECTION 16-108. CONDUCT OF PRIMARY ELECTIONS
The general laws relating to primary elections shall govern municipal primaries except as otherwise provided.
Party candidates for municipal office, including those from wards as well as at large, shall be nominated at large
by the registered voters of the respective parties of the entire municipality.
SECTION 16-109. MANNER OF BECOMING A PARTY CANDIDATE--DECLARATION OF
CANDIDACY
To be eligible to become a candidate for a political party nomination in the municipality’s primary election, a
person must for at least six (6) months prior to filing a declaration of candidacy be a registered voter at an address
within the municipality or in the ward if an office is from a ward. To become a party candidate, a declaration
of candidacy must be filed with the county election board no earlier than 8:00 a.m. on the first Monday in
February and no later than 5:00 p.m. on the next succeeding Wednesday. (Amended eff. 7/1/87)
SECTION 16-110. INDEPENDENT CANDIDATES
An independent candidate may have his name printed upon the general municipal election ballot as candidate
for any office to be filled at the election. To become an independent candidate, a Declaration of Candidacy must
be filed with the county election board no earlier than 8:00 a.m. on the first Monday in February and no later
than 5:00 p.m. on the next succeeding Wednesday. An independent candidate must also be a registered voter at
an address within the municipality, or of the ward where the office is from a ward for at least six (6) months
prior to filing a declaration of candidacy. Filing as an independent candidate in an election or voting for such
candidate shall not affect one’s party affiliation or regularity. (Amended eff. 10/19/81)
SECTION 16-111. UNOPPOSED CANDIDATES IN PRIMARY ELECTION
Any candidate who is unopposed for an office in a primary election shall be deemed nominated and so certified;
and his name shall not appear on the primary election ballot. If there are unopposed candidates for each of
the offices which are up for election, no primary election shall be held.
SECTION 16-112. SPECIAL ELECTIONS--QUESTIONS WHICH MAY BE SUBMITTED
When the municipal governing body shall deem it advisable, it may, by resolution or ordinance, authorize the
mayor to call a special election for the purpose of submitting to the registered voters of the municipality the
question of issuing municipal bonds, of granting any franchise, or for any other purpose authorized by law.
SECTION 16-113. SPECIAL ELECTION BALLOT--PREPARATION AND ARRANGEMENT
The ballot for a special election shall be prepared by the secretary of the county election board and shall set
forth the proposition or propositions to be voted upon, and if more than one proposition is submitted, they shall
be arranged so that each proposition may be voted upon separately.
SECTION 16-114. CONDUCT OF SPECIAL ELECTIONS HELD FOR ELECTING OFFICERS
When the office of a municipal elected official is to be filled at a special election, the resolution or order of
the governing body calling the election shall contain the following facts:
1. A filing period of three (3) days, on a Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, not less than fifteen (15) days
from the date of the resolution or order;
2. The date of the Special Primary Election, if any, not less than thirty (30) days after the close of the filing
period; and
3. The date of the Special General Election, not less than thirty (30) days after the date of the Primary Election,
if any, but if no primary election is called, not less than thirty (30) days after the close of the filing period.
A copy of the resolution or order shall be filed with the secretary of the county election board. The election shall
be conducted under the laws applicable to general municipal elections. (Amended eff. 7/1/87)
PART 2. SPECIFIC PROVISIONS FOR STATUTORY CITIES AND TOWNS
SECTION 16-201. ALDERMANIC CITIES WITH ONE COUNCILMEMBER PER WARD--OFFICERS
TO BE ELECTED--TERMS
In a statutory aldermanic city with one (1) councilmember per ward, the terms of the elected officers shall be
staggered so that at any one general municipal election, the following officers are to be elected for four-year
terms:
1. Councilmembers from odd-numbered wards;
2. The mayor;
3. The clerk;
4. The marshal; and
5. The street commissioner.
At the next general municipal election, the following officers are to be elected for four-year terms:
1. Councilmembers from even-numbered wards; and
2. The treasurer.
If the office of treasurer has been consolidated with any other office, elections for the office of treasurer and the
office with which it has been consolidated shall be held at the time the election to fill the other office is held. The
term of the consolidated office shall be concurrent with the term of the other office.
SECTION 16-202. FIRST ELECTION HELD IN ALDERMANIC CITIES WITH ONE
COUNCILMEMBER PER WARD
At the first general municipal election held in the odd-numbered year following adoption of the aldermanic
form of government with one (1) councilmember per ward, the officers to be elected and their terms are as follows:
1. Four-year terms: Councilmembers from odd-numbered wards; the mayor; the clerk; the marshal; and the
street commissioner.
2. Two-year terms: Councilmembers from even-numbered wards; and the treasurer.
At general municipal elections held thereafter, the successors of the officers whose terms are expiring shall be
elected for four-year terms.
SECTION 16-203. ALDERMANIC CITIES WITH TWO COUNCILMEMBERS PER WARD--
OFFICERS TO BE ELECTED--TERMS
In a statutory aldermanic city with two councilmembers per ward, the terms of the elected officers shall be
staggered so that at any one general municipal election, the following officers are to be elected for four-year
terms:
1. One (1) councilmember from each ward of the city;
2. The mayor;
3. The clerk;
4. The marshal; and
5. The street commissioner.
At the next general municipal election, the following officers are to be elected for four-year terms:
1. One councilmember from each ward of the city; and
2. The treasurer.
If the office of treasurer has been consolidated with any other office, elections for the office of treasurer and the
office with which it has been consolidated shall be held at the time the election to fill the other office is held. The
term of the consolidated office shall be concurrent with the term of the other office.
SECTION 16-204. FIRST ELECTION HELD IN ALDERMANIC CITIES WITH TWO
COUNCILMEMBERS PER WARD
At the first general municipal election held in the odd-numbered year following adoption of the aldermanic
form of government with two councilmembers per ward, the officers to be elected and their terms are as follows:
1. Four-year terms: One councilmember from each ward of the city; the mayor; the clerk; the marshal; and
the street commissioner.
2. Two-year terms: One councilmember from each ward of the city; and the treasurer.
At general municipal elections held thereafter, the successors of the officers whose terms are expiring shall be
elected for four-year terms.
SECTION 16-205. TOWNS--OFFICERS TO BE ELECTED--TERMS
In a statutory town, the terms of the elected officers shall be staggered so that at any one general municipal
election, the following officers are to be elected for four-year terms:
1. Trustees from odd-numbered wards; and
2. The clerk.
At the next general municipal election, the following officers are to be elected for four-year terms:
1. Trustees from even-numbered wards; and
2. The treasurer.
If the office of treasurer has been consolidated with any other office, elections for the office of treasurer and the
office with which it has been consolidated shall be held at the time the election to fill the other office is held. The
term of the consolidated office shall be concurrent with the term of the other office.
SECTION 16-206. FIRST ELECTION HELD IN TOWN
At the first general municipal election held in the odd-numbered year following adoption of the town board of
trustees form of government, the officers to be elected and their terms are as follows:
1. Four-year terms: Trustees from odd-numbered wards; and the clerk.
2. Two-year terms: Trustees from even-numbered wards; and the treasurer.
At general municipal elections held thereafter, the successors of the officers whose terms are expiring shall be
elected for four-year terms.
SECTION 16-207. ALDERMANIC CITIES AND TOWNS--APPOINTMENT OF CERTAIN OFFICIALS
AFTER SUBMISSION TO VOTE
A. The city council of any city may provide by ordinance for the submission to a vote of the registered voters
of the city the question of providing for the appointment by the mayor, with the approval of the council, of
the city marshal, the street commissioner, the city clerk, the city treasurer, or the city clerk-treasurer.
B. The board of trustees of any town may provide by ordinance for the submission to a vote of the registered
voters of the town the question of providing for the appointment by the board of trustees of the town clerk,
the town treasurer or the town clerk-treasurer.
C. The question of appointing each official shall be submitted separately on the ballot. The question providing
for the appointment of the clerk or the treasurer may be consolidated into one question provided the two offices
are to be consolidated into the office of clerk-treasurer. The question providing for the appointment of any
official shall read substantially as follows:
Shall the (Marshal, Street Commissioner, Clerk, Treasurer, Clerk-Treasurer) be appointed by the (mayor, with
the approval of the council, board of trustees)?
( ) Yes.
( ) No.
If a majority of the votes cast are in favor of appointment to the office, the appointive position shall take effect at
the end of the current term of the office. In cities, the appointive officer shall be appointed and may be removed
by the mayor, with the approval of the council. In towns, the appointment and removal shall be by a majority
vote of all the members of the board of trustees.
SECTION 16-208. COUNCIL-MANAGER CITIES--OFFICERS TO BE ELECTED--TERMS
In a statutory council-manager city, the terms of the elected officers shall be staggered so that at any one general
municipal election, the following officers are to be elected for four-year terms:
1. Councilmembers from Wards One, Two and Five (if one).
At the next general municipal election, the following officers are to be elected for four-year terms:
1. Councilmembers from Wards Three, Four and Six (if one); and
2. The councilmember at large.
SECTION 16-209. FIRST ELECTION HELD IN COUNCIL-MANAGER CITY
At the first general municipal election held in the odd-numbered year following adoption of the statutory
council-manager form of government, the officers to be elected and their terms are as follows:
1. Four-year terms: Councilmembers from Wards One, Two and Five (if one).
2. Two-year terms: Councilmembers from Wards Three, Four and Six (if one); and the councilmember at
large.
At general municipal elections held thereafter, the successors of the officers whose terms are expiring shall be
elected for four-year terms.
SECTION 16-210. STRONG-MAYOR-COUNCIL CITIES--OFFICERS TO BE ELECTED--TERMS
In a statutory strong-mayor-council city, the terms of the elected officers shall be staggered so that at any one
general municipal election, the following officers are to be elected for four-year terms:
1. Councilmembers from Wards One, Two and Five (if one).
At the next general municipal election, the following officers are to be elected for four-year terms:
1. Councilmembers from Wards Three, Four and Six (if one); and
2. The mayor.
SECTION 16-211. FIRST ELECTION HELD IN STRONG-MAYOR-COUNCIL CITY
At the first general municipal election held in the odd-numbered year following adoption of the statutory
strong-mayor-council form of government, the officers to be elected and their terms are as follows:
1. Four-year terms: Councilmembers from Wards One, Two and Five (if one).
2. Two-year terms: Councilmembers from Wards Three, Four and Six (if one); and the mayor.
At general municipal elections held thereafter, the successors of the officers whose terms are expiring shall be
elected for four-year terms.
SECTION 16-212. COUNCIL-MANAGER AND STRONG-MAYOR-COUNCIL CITIES--FORM OF
GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTION BALLOT
The ballots for the general election in a statutory council-manager or statutory strong-mayor-council city shall
be of the office block type, listing the names of independent candidates and party nominees for each office under
the respective office without party designation or emblems as follows:
For Councilmember from Ward One
(Vote for One)
________Name of independent candidate or party nominee
________Name of independent candidate or party nominee
For Councilmember from Ward Two
(Vote for One)
________Name of independent candidate or party nominee
________Name of independent candidate or party nominee
SECTION 16-213. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR MUNICIPALITIES NOT IN CONFORMANCE
WITH GENERAL ELECTION PROCEDURE
A. If the term of an elected officer as set forth in the notice of the last election for the office will expire in
an even-numbered year, a regular municipal election or town meeting, if the municipality is subject to the Oklahoma
Town Meeting Act, shall be held in order to elect a successor. The term of the successor shall be either
three (3) or five (5) years as necessary in order to comply with the provisions of Section 16-101 et seq. of this
title. Thereafter, the term of said office shall be four (4) years. Any such election or town meeting held in an
even-numbered year shall be conducted in the manner provided by law applicable to municipal elections or town
meetings, whichever is appropriate.
B. If the term of an elected officer as set forth in the notice of the last election for the office will expire in
an odd-numbered year, but the term of office does not coincide with the offices named in Section 16-201 et seq.
of this title, a regular municipal election or town meeting shall be held in order to elect a successor. The term of
the successor shall be either two (2) or four (4) years as necessary in order to comply with the provisions of Section
16-101 et seq. of this title. Thereafter, the term of said office shall be four (4) years. (Amended 1988)
PART 3. OKLAHOMA TOWN MEETING ACT
SECTION 16-301 SHORT TITLE
Sections 1 through 15 of this act shall be known and may be cited as the “Oklahoma Town Meeting Act”.
(Added, 1988)
SECTION 16-302 MUNICIPALITIES REQUIRED TO HOLD TOWN MEETINGS--ELECTION--
ORDINANCE PROVIDING ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURE--REPEAL OF ORDINANCE
A. Except as otherwise provided in this act, Section 16-301 et seq. of this title, sixty (60) days after the effective
date of this act, all municipalities with fewer than one thousand (1,000) residents, according to the latest
Federal Decennial Census, that are not governed by charter, shall elect officers and consider questions raised by
initiative or referendum, pursuant to Section 15-101 et seq. of this title, at biennial town meetings or special
town meetings of the voters of each municipality as provided in this act. Provided, that a municipality of fewer
than one thousand (1,000) residents may at any time adopt an ordinance requiring that its officers shall be
elected and initiative and referendum questions shall be decided only through elections conducted by the county
election board pursuant to Section 16-101 et seq. of this title. Any municipality that passes an ordinance pursuant
to this section shall upon adoption of the ordinance provide a copy of the ordinance to the county election board
of the county in which the municipality is located.
B. If the ordinance is repealed, elections of the municipality shall be at a town meeting. The municipality
shall provide a copy of the repealer to the county election board of the county in which the municipality is located.
If a municipality with fewer than one thousand (1,000) residents fails to hold its regular municipal elections
as required by law, the municipality shall be subject to the provisions of the Oklahoma Town Meeting Act,
Section 16-301 et seq. of this title; provided, further, that such municipality may adopt a resolution requiring that
its elections be conducted by the county election board as provided in this section. (Amended 1989)
SECTION 16-303 TIME FOR TOWN MEETING--PURPOSE--SPECIAL TOWN MEETINGS
In municipalities subject to the provisions of Section 16-301 et seq. of this title, a biennial town meeting of the
voters shall be held on the first Tuesday in April in each odd-numbered year for the purpose of electing municipal
officers and considering questions raised by initiative or referendum pursuant to Section 15-101 et seq. of
this title.
In addition to the election proceedings of said meeting the mayor or presiding officer may upon compliance
with the Open Meeting Act, Section 301 et seq. of Title 25 of the Oklahoma Statutes and other provisions appropriate
to the law, conduct regular business meetings or any other town business which would be in order and of
interest to those citizens in attendance. Special town meetings for these purposes may be called at other times as
provided in this act. (Amended 1990)
SECTION 16-304 NOTICE--PUBLICATION--POSTING--CONTENTS
Notice of the biennial town meeting or special town meeting for the purposes of electing officers and considering
initiative or referendum questions shall be given by the governing body of the municipality in accordance
with the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act, Section 301 et seq. of Title 25 of the Oklahoma Statutes. The notice shall
be signed by a majority of the members of the governing body.
In addition to the requirements of the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act, notice of the biennial town meeting and
any special town meeting shall be given by publishing notice of the meeting stating the date, time, place and
agenda in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least ten (10) days before the date of the
meeting. If there is no newspaper of general circulation in the municipality, the notice shall be given by posting a
copy of the notice and agenda in at least five (5) public places in the municipality. The notice shall list the offices
to be filled, including the number of officers to be elected for four-year terms and the number of officers to
be elected to fill unexpired terms, and the questions to be voted on, if any. (Added 1988)
SECTION 16-305 SPECIAL TOWN MEETING--MEETING CALLED BY BOARD OF COUNTY
COMMISSIONERS
A. When a municipality fails to hold a biennial meeting on the first Tuesday of April in an odd-numbered
year, the governing body shall immediately schedule and give notice of a special town meeting for the purpose
of electing officers. Such notice shall be in accordance with Section 4 of this act.
B. If the governing body fails or refuses to hold a biennial or special town meeting for the purpose of electing
officers, the board of county commissioners of the county in which the municipality is located shall call a
town meeting for the purpose of electing officers. The sheriff, or his deputy, of the county in which the municipality
is located shall attend any town meeting called by the board of county commissioners, and if the municipal
officers fail to conduct the meeting, shall moderate the meeting. (Added 1988)
SECTION 16-306 PRESIDING OFFICER--RULES OF ORDER, CONDUCT AND DECORUM--
MINUTES--BALLOTS--NOMINATION AND ELECTION OF OFFICIALS--FALSE AFFIDAVITS
A. Except as otherwise provided in this act, Section 16-301 et seq. of this title, the mayor shall be the presiding
officer of town meetings, shall decide questions of order and shall make public declaration of votes taken.
Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern all town meetings, except when such rules are inconsistent with Oklahoma
law. The presiding officer may establish other rules of conduct and decorum for the meetings consistent with the
Oklahoma Town Meeting Act, Section 16-301 et seq. of this title. When the office of mayor is vacant or if the
mayor is unable to attend the town meeting, one of the members of the governing body shall be elected by the
remaining members of the governing body to preside over the town meeting.
B. The municipal clerk shall keep the minutes of the meeting. The minutes shall separately record the number
of votes for and against each candidate and each question and shall record the total number of votes cast for
each position. Paper ballots shall be preserved in the municipal clerk’s office for a period of six (6) months following
the town meeting at which said ballots were cast.
C. Officials elected at town meetings shall be nominated and elected at large by the registered voters present
from nominations taken from the floor. Prior to accepting any nominations the presiding officer shall state
the number of governing body offices to be elected for four-year terms and the number of governing body offices
to be elected to fill unexpired terms, if any. There shall be separate nominations and balloting for each designated
term. The nominee who receives a plurality of the votes cast for the office of the designated term shall be
elected for that designated term. If more than one office is to be filled for a designated term, the voters shall vote
for the designated number of offices to be filled and, the nominees receiving the largest pluralities shall be
elected to those offices. All votes shall be taken by secret ballot; provided that if there is only one candidate for
an office, he or she may be elected by acclamation upon proper motion. In case of a tie vote, the municipal clerk
shall immediately select the electee or electees by lot as follows: The clerk shall write or print the names of the
tied nominees on similar pieces of paper and place the papers in a container in view of the persons attending the
town meeting. The clerk shall designate a person, who shall not be one of the nominees, to draw one name for
each office to be filled and the nominee or nominees whose names are so drawn shall be deemed elected. All
other papers in the container shall then be exposed for examination. Only a registered voter who has been a registered
voter at an address within the municipality for at least six (6) months prior to the date of the town meeting
at which the elections are held shall be qualified for nomination for office. To be eligible for election, any
person who is nominated for office must swear under oath that he or she has been a registered voter at an address
within the municipality for the last six (6) months. Only qualified registered voters who are present at the town
meeting at which the elections are held shall be eligible for nomination for municipal office, provided that a
qualified registered voter who is not present may be nominated if he or she has agreed in writing to accept the
office if elected and has sworn an affidavit that he or she has been a registered voter at an address within the municipality
for the last six (6) months. Any person who falsely swears or signs a false affidavit that he or she is
qualified for municipal office shall be guilty of a felony. (Amended 1989)
SECTION 16-307 VOTING ELIGIBILITY--POLLBOOK--ILLEGAL VOTING--PENALTY
A. The presiding officer at a town meeting shall follow reasonable and necessary procedures to ensure that
persons who are not registered voters of the town do not vote. Registered voters shall be seated in a clearly
marked area separate from persons not registered to vote.
B. To be eligible to vote at a town meeting, a person must be registered with the county election board at an
address located within the municipality. Before being seated in the section reserved for registered voters, each
voter shall sign his or her name in a pollbook, said signature to constitute a sworn affidavit on the part of the
voter that he or she is eligible to vote at the election. The pollbook shall be prepared by the municipal clerk and
shall be substantially the same form as the pollbook prescribed by the State Election Board for school district
elections. For such purpose, the municipal clerk or designee of the municipal clerk shall be authorized to administer
the oath or affirmation contained in the affidavit. The pollbook shall be on file in the office of the municipal
clerk and shall be open to public inspection during reasonable office hours; provided, however, that such pollbooks
may be destroyed by the municipal clerk at the end of six (6) months from the date of the election wherein
such pollbook was used. Any person knowingly voting illegally or found guilty of casting more than one vote for
any office or on any question considered at the meeting shall be punished by a fine of not more than One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not to exceed thirty (30) days or both such
fine and imprisonment. (Added 1988)
SECTION 16-308 ELECTION OF MUNICIPAL OFFICERS
A person present at the meeting electing him or her to municipal office shall be treated as accepting, unless he
or she declines before the meeting is adjourned. When not present, he or she shall be served as soon as possible
with a written notice of election, signed and mailed by the municipal clerk. No person elected shall assume the
duties of the office until he or she has signed the oath of office as required by law. (Added 1988)
SECTION 16-309 FILING OF LIST OF MUNICIPAL OFFICERS ELECTED--NOTIFICATION OF
CHANGES IN LIST
The municipal clerk shall file with the secretary of the county election board a list of the names and addresses
of the municipal officers elected and shall notify the secretary of the county election board of any changes in the
list as filed. (Added 1988)
SECTION 16-310 CONTEST OF ELECTION BY NOMINEE
Any person nominated for municipal office may, at any time before 5:00 p.m. of the third business day following
the town meeting in which he or she was nominated, contest the correctness of the announced results of
said election by filing a written petition with the district court of any county in which the municipality is located.
(Added 1988)
SECTION 16-311 PETITION ALLEGING FRAUD--BOND--HEARING--ANSWER--JUDGMENT--
INELIGIBILITY FOR OFFICE--LIABILITY OF CONTESTANT--DAMAGES
When a petition alleging fraud is filed, said petition must be accompanied by a cash bond of Five Thousand
Dollars ($5,000.00), running in favor of the contestee and conditioned upon payment of any and all liabilities or
judgments arising from the contest so filed. In said petition, contestant must allege the specific act constituting
such alleged fraud and the names of the alleged perpetrators of such fraud. If such petition is filed in the manner
herein provided, the district judge of the county in which the alleged fraud occurred, or such other judge as may
be assigned by the Supreme Court, shall hear and determine said issue without delay or continuance of more
than one (1) day. On the day of such hearing, the contestee may file answer to such petition or may file cross
petition, setting forth in detail, as required of a petitioner herein, such claim of fraud. An original petition or
cross petition must be under oath and under penalty of perjury. The judge shall try and determine the issues
formed by such pleadings and render such judgment as he or she may deem just and proper, according to the
evidence submitted. The decision of said district judge shall be final as to any changes in the total votes, and a
copy of such judgment and decision shall be furnished the officer who presided at the town meeting. In any case
where fraud is proved on the part of a nominee, he or she shall be declared ineligible for the office for which he
or she was nominated. In all cases where a petition is filed which alleges fraud, but after hearing said allegations
are not reasonably sustained by competent evidence, the contestant shall be civilly liable in damages to the contestee
for all damages sustained, including a reasonable attorney fee and all reasonable and proper costs of conducting
such contest; and in the event it be alleged and found that such petition was frivolous in nature, the contestee
may also be allowed punitive damages to be paid by said petitioner. (Added 1988)
SECTION 16-312 PETITION ALLEGING IRREGULARITIES OTHER THAN FRAUD--
SUFFICIENCY OF ALLEGATIONS--HEARING
When a petition alleging irregularities other than fraud is filed, the petition must allege a sufficient number of
irregularities and of such nature as to:
1. Prove that the contestant is lawfully entitled to be announced the winner; or
2. Prove that it is impossible to determine with mathematical certainty which nominee is entitled to be announced
the winner. Proof of failure of the presiding officer to take the vote by a paper ballot shall be sufficient
proof of this requirement.
If such allegations are not made, the petition shall be deemed frivolous by the presiding judge and shall be dismissed.
Said petition must set forth specific allegations of irregularities. If said petition is filed in the manner
herein provided, the district judge of the county or such other judge as may be assigned by the Supreme Court
shall hear and determine said issue in the same manner as provided for a petition alleging fraud. (Amended
1989)
SECTION 16-313 IMPOSSIBILITY OF DETERMINING WINNER--SPECIAL TOWN MEETING TO
FILL CONTESTED OFFICE
In the event, after a hearing is conducted pursuant to Section 11 or 12 of this act, it is deemed impossible to
determine who should be announced the winner, the judge shall notify the presiding officer of the town meeting
of the same. It shall then be the duty of the presiding officer to call a special town meeting for the purpose of
filling the contested office, provided that any nominee upon whom fraud has been proved shall not be a nominee
in the new election. (Added 1988)
SECTION 16-314 OMISSION OF OR NONCOMPLIANCE WITH NOTICE REQUIREMENTS--
CORRECTION--RECTIFICATION OF OTHER ERRORS AND OMISSIONS--VALIDATION OF BUSINESS
OF ORIGINAL ACTION
When any of the requirements of this act as to notice of a biennial or special town meeting have been omitted
or not complied with, the omission or noncompliance, if the meeting and the business transacted at it is otherwise
legal and within the scope of the municipal powers, may be corrected and legalized by a majority vote of
the registered voters present at a regular town meeting or special town meeting of the municipality called for that
purpose, with notice as required by Section 4 of this act. The question to be voted upon shall substantially be,
“Shall the action token at the meeting of this town held on (state date) in spite of the fact that (state error or
omission), and any act or action of the municipal officers or agents pursuant thereto be readopted, ratified and
confirmed?”. Errors or omissions in the conduct of an original meeting which are not the result of an unlawful
notice or noncompliance within the scope of the notice, may be rectified by a resolution of the governing body of
the municipality passed by a majority of the members of the governing body at a regular meeting or a special
meeting called for that purpose, stating that the defect was the result of oversight, inadvertence or mistake. When
an error or omission of this nature has been thus corrected by resolution, all business within the terms of the action
of the qualified voters shall be as valid as if the requirements had been initially complied with, on condition,
however, that the original action thereby corrected by the governing body was in compliance with the legal exercise
of its governing powers. (Added 1988)
SECTION 16-315 ELECTIONS CONDUCTED BY COUNTY ELECTION BOARD--OPTION TO BE
HELD AT TOWN MEETING
Whenever in Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes provisions are made for election of officers or consideration of
questions at elections conducted by the county election board pursuant to Section 16-101 et seq. of Title 11 of
the Oklahoma Statutes, such elections may be held or questions considered at biennial or special town meetings,
if the municipality is subject to the provisions of this act. (Added 1988)
ARTICLE XVII
MUNICIPAL FINANCES
Part 1. General Provisions
Section:
17-101 Borrowing, Appropriation of Moneys--Investments
17-102 Payment of Claims--Warrant and Check as One Instrument--Emergency Payments
17-103 Actions Against Municipality
17-104 Liability for Voting Unlawful Claims
17-105 Annual Audit of Books and Accounts
17-105.1 Filing of Audits and Reports--Forms--Public Inspection--Compiling Information
17-106 Contents of Audit Report
17-107 Failure to File Audit Report
17-108 Trusts Exempt
17-109 Capital Improvement Fund--Authority To Create
17-110 Capital Improvements--Definitions
17-111 Approval of Claims From Capital Improvement Fund
17-112 Manufacturing Establishments and Public Utilities--Exemption From Municipal Taxation
17-113 Publication of City Financial Statements
17-114 Vendor Invoices and Contract Estimates--Payment Procedures--Uniform Jackets
Part 2. Municipal Budget Act
17-201 Municipal Budget Act
17-202 Public Policy
17-203 Application--Continuation
17-204 Definitions
17-205 Budget Required--Chief Executive Officer
17-206 Contents--Estimates--Budget Requirements
17-207 General Fund and Other Fund--Sinking Fund
17-208 Notice and Hearing
17-209 Adoption of Budget--Filing--Appropriation--Levy by County Excise Board
17-210 Protests--Public Record
17-211 Deficits--Prohibitions--Violations--Penalty
17-212 Establishment of Funds--Accounts
17-213 Classification of Revenues and Expenditures
17-214 Reserve
17-215 Funds and Account Transfers
17-216 Supplemental Appropriations--Limitations Procedure
ARTICLE XVII
MUNICIPAL FINANCES
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 17-101. BORROWING, APPROPRIATION OF MONEYS--INVESTMENTS
A. Any act of a municipal governing body which provides for the borrowing of monies or for appropriating
monies shall not be valid unless a majority of the governing body of the municipality votes in favor of the action.
The municipal governing body may not appropriate or draw any order on the treasurer for monies unless the
same has been appropriated in the manner provided by law or ordered in pursuance of some object provided for
by law.
B. A municipality may invest its funds in any bond, note, or other evidence of indebtedness issued by those
agencies, authorities, instrumentalities, or public entities whose governing boards are appointed by the municipality
or issued by any public trust of which it is sole beneficiary, excluding obligations which are industrial development
bonds as defined in the provisions of Section 103 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1953, as amended,
and regulations promulgated thereto.
C. If a municipality has established a system for the separate accounting of monies by fund sources that has
been certified by the auditor of the municipality, the treasurer of such municipality acting as an officer of the
municipality or as agent of any instrumentality or public trust of the municipality may deposit into one or more
accounts of an authorized depository all monies coming into his custody. Unless otherwise provided for by law,
interest earnings shall be prorated according to fund source. (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 17-102. PAYMENT OF CLAIMS--WARRANT AND CHECK AS ONE INSTRUMENT--
EMERGENCY PAYMENTS
A. Any invoice against a municipality must be presented in writing and examined in the manner provided
by law. No account or invoice may be paid by the municipality unless it has been audited and allowed by the
governing body and an entry of the account or invoice is made in the proper books kept for that purpose. Except
as otherwise provided for in this subsection, monies may be drawn from the municipal treasury only upon a
proper warrant as provided by law. In lieu of issuing such warrant, a municipality may enter the warrant on the
warrant register and record payment of the warrant by check, wire transfer, direct payroll deposit, or other instrument
or method of disbursement through the Federal Reserve System.
B. A city or town may issue a negotiable instrument which will serve as both a warrant on the municipal
treasury and a check ordering payment of the warranted amount of money from the municipality’s account. This
instrument shall be prepared and issued in accordance with procedures and requirements provided by law for a
municipal warrant and a municipal check and shall be signed by the municipal clerk, treasurer and mayor. Printing
on the instrument shall indicate that the instrument is a “warrant” of the municipality and a “check” drawn
on the municipality’s account. The provisions of state law on uniform facsimile signatures of public officials,
Sections 601 through 606 of Title 62 of the Oklahoma Statutes, shall be applicable to instruments authorized by
this section.
C. If a majority or all of governing body offices in a town municipality become vacant, thereby preventing
approval of amounts lawfully owing on invoices and purchase orders, the interim mayor or the remaining governing
body members, as the case may be, may authorize emergency payments of amounts owing on invoices or
purchase orders for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days after the date that a majority of the offices become
vacant. The interim mayor or the remaining governing body members may also authorize payment of purchase
orders for payroll, utility bills, or other usual and regular obligations of the municipality. Any such authorization
and payment shall not exceed the unencumbered and unexpended balance of the appropriation made for that
purpose, nor may the total amount of such emergency authorizations and payments exceed fifteen percent (15%)
of the total appropriations approved for the town government for the fiscal year. Any warrant issued pursuant to
this section shall state that it is being issued under emergency circumstances and by special authority of this section.
(Amended 1988)
SECTION 17-103. ACTIONS AGAINST MUNICIPALITY
No costs may be recovered against a municipality, in any action brought against it, for any unliquidated claim
which has not been presented to the governing body for auditing, nor for claims allowed in part unless the recovery
shall be for a greater sum than the amount allowed with the interest due. No action may be maintained
against a municipality in exercising or failing to exercise any corporate power or authority where such action
would not lie against a private individual under like circumstances.
SECTION 17-104. LIABILITY FOR VOTING UNLAWFUL CLAIMS
Any governing body member who intentionally votes to appropriate money or to allow any bill or claim
which is not authorized by law shall be personally liable to the municipality for the amount of such money appropriated,
or bills or claims allowed, with costs of suit, in an action before any court of competent jurisdiction.
SECTION 17-105. ANNUAL AUDIT OF BOOKS AND ACCOUNTS
The governing body of each municipality with an income of Twenty-five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) or
more to its general fund during a fiscal year shall cause to be prepared, by an independent licensed public accountant
or a certified public accountant, an annual audit of the funds, assets, books and records of the clerk and
treasurer of the municipality. Such audit shall be ordered within thirty (30) days of the close of each fiscal year.
Certified copies shall be filed with the county clerk and the State Auditor and Inspector within six (6) months
after the close of the fiscal year in accordance with the provisions of Sections 24102 and 24103 of Title 68 of the
Oklahoma Statutes. The expense of the audit shall be paid from the general fund of the municipality. (Amended,
effective 11/1/87)
SECTION 17-105.1 FILING OF AUDITS AND REPORTS--FORMS--PUBLIC INSPECTION--
COMPILING INFORMATION
An auditor shall file with the State Auditor and Inspector, at the same time a certified copy of an audit is filed
as required in Section 17-105 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes, two (2) copies of a report setting forth for the
fiscal year audited the funds available to the municipality and the use of those funds. The report shall also include
information relating to the duly constituted authorities of the municipality and shall be on a form approved
by the State Auditor and Inspector. Copies of said audit and the report shall be made available for public inspection
by the municipality and the State Auditor and Inspector. The State Auditor and Inspector may contract for
the compilation and reporting of the information submitted on the report. (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 17-106. CONTENTS OF AUDIT REPORT
The annual audit report of a municipality shall contain:
1. A statement of the scope of the examination;
2. The auditor’s opinion as to whether the audit was made in accordance with generally accepted auditing
standards applicable in the circumstances;
3. The auditor’s opinion as to whether the financial statements included in the audit report present fairly the
results of the operations during the period audited;
4. The auditor’s opinion as to whether the financial statements accompanying the audit were prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable to cities and towns;
5. The reason or reasons an opinion is not rendered with respect to paragraphs 3 and 4 of this section in the
event the auditor is unable to express an opinion with respect thereto; and
6. Financial statements presented in such form as to disclose the operations of each fund of the municipality
and a statement of the operation of all funds.
SECTION 17-107. FAILURE TO FILE AUDIT REPORT
If a municipality does not file a copy of its audit as provided in Section 17-105 of this title, the State Auditor
and Inspector shall notify the Oklahoma Tax Commission which shall withhold from the municipality its
monthly allocations of gasoline taxes until the audit report is filed. (Amended, effective 4/6/79)
SECTION 17-108. TRUSTS EXEMPT
The requirements of Sections 17-105 through 17-107 of this title shall not apply to trusts of which a city or
town is the beneficiary, the same being covered under Section 180.1 of Title 60 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
SECTION 17-109. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND--AUTHORITY TO CREATE
The municipal governing body may create a capital improvement fund and place in the fund any money available
to the municipality. Money in the fund may be accumulated from year to year. The fund shall be placed in
an insured interest bearing account. The fund shall be nonfiscal and shall not be considered in computing any
levy when the municipality makes its estimate to the excise board for needed appropriations. Money in the capital
improvement fund may be expended for any capital improvement.
SECTION 17-110. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS--DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of creating a capital improvement fund and expending money therefrom, capital improvement
shall mean all items and articles, either new or replacements, not consumed with use but only diminished in
value with prolonged use, including but not limited to roads and streets, drainage improvements, water and sewerage
improvements, machinery, equipment, furniture and fixtures, all real property, all construction or reconstruction
of buildings, appurtenances and improvements to real property, the cost and expenses related thereto of
rights-of-way or other real property, engineering, architectural or legal fees, and payment for improvements for
which subsequent reimbursement is made to the capital improvement fund.
SECTION 17-111. APPROVAL OF CLAIMS FROM CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND
No funds may be appropriated or expended from the capital improvement account in the absence of a recorded
vote by the governing body and until claims duly verified by affidavit are presented and approved by the
governing body.
SECTION 17-112. MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENTS AND PUBLIC UTILITIES--EXEMPTION
FROM MUNICIPAL TAXATION
Any municipality may, by a majority vote of the registered voters of the municipality voting on the question,
exempt from municipal taxation for a period not to exceed five (5) years new manufacturing establishments and
public utilities locating in the municipality.
SECTION 17-113. PUBLICATION OF CITY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
The council of each city having a population in excess of five thousand (5,000) persons, according to the latest
federal census, shall cause to be published in October and in April of each year a full and detailed statement
of the receipts, expenditures and indebtedness of the city for the periods ending on the last day of September and
the last day of March, respectively. All publications mentioned in this section shall be made in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any city governed by charter
where the charter provides for the manner or procedure for publication of such financial information.
SECTION 17-114. VENDOR INVOICES AND CONTRACT ESTIMATES--PAYMENT PROCEDURES-
-UNIFORM JACKETS
To facilitate the payment of vendor invoices and contract estimates the municipal finance officer may design a
uniform jacket to be used by all departments and divisions of the municipality whereon shall be provided summarized
information relative to the enclosed invoices or contract estimates, together with a space for the approval
of the head of the department or division approving said vendor invoices or contract estimates for payment.
Vendor invoices and contract estimates may be accepted by the municipality in lieu of the claim form previously
required in the same manner as commercial invoices are paid. It utilized, vendor invoices and contract
estimates shall be filed with the department or division receiving the merchandise or services in the same manner
as invoices are filed with commercial firms. Upon receipt of invoices or contract estimates the head of the department
or division or his authorized agent, may approve said documents for payment by executing a certificate
of delivery or acceptance of the goods or services. Whereupon, the authorized official of said agency may approve
said invoices or contract estimates for payment by enclosing the invoice or contract estimate in a jacket
provided for such purpose and affixing his or her approval in the space provided on the jacket. (Added 1990)
PART 2. MUNICIPAL BUDGET ACT
SECTION 17-201. MUNICIPAL BUDGET ACT
This act may be cited as the “Municipal Budget Act”. (Effective 10/1/79)
SECTION 17-202. PUBLIC POLICY
The purpose of this act is to provide an alternate budget procedure for municipal governments which will:
1. Establish standard and sound fiscal procedures for the adoption and administration of budgets;
2. Make available to the public and investors sufficient information as to the financial conditions, requirements
and expectations of the municipal government; and
3. Assist municipal governments to improve and implement generally accepted standards of finance management.
(Effective 10/1/79)
SECTION 17-203. APPLICATION--CONTINUATION
This act shall apply to any incorporated city or town which, by resolution of the governing body, opts to come
under and comply with all its provisions and requirements. Once a municipality has selected the Municipal
Budget Act to govern its budget procedures, the provisions of this act shall take precedence over any other state
laws applicable to municipal budgets, except as may be provided otherwise in this act, and supersede any conflicting
laws. Any action of a municipal governing body to implement, rescind or repeal the application of the
Municipal Budget Act shall be effective as of the beginning or end of a budget year pursuant to this act. (Effective
10/1/79)
SECTION 17-204. DEFINITIONS
As used in this act:
1. “Account” means an entity for recording specific revenues or expenditures, or for grouping related or
similar classes of revenues and expenditures and recording them within a fund or department;
2. “Appropriation” means an authorization and allocation of money to be expended for a purpose;
3. “Budget” means a plan of financial operations for a fiscal year, including an estimate of proposed expenditures
for given purposes and the proposed means for financing them;
4. “Budget summary” means a tabular listing of revenues and expenditures by fund and by department
within each fund for the budget year;
5. “Budget year” means the fiscal year for which a budget is prepared or being prepared;
6. “Chief executive officer” means the mayor of an aldermanic city or a strong-mayor-council city, the
mayor of a town, or the city manager or chief administrative officer as it may be defined by applicable law, charter
or ordinance;
7. “Current year” means the year in which the budget is prepared and adopted, or the fiscal year immediately
preceding the budget year;
8. “Deficit” means the excess of the liabilities, reserves, contributions and encumbrances of a fund over its
assets as reflected by its book of account;
9. “Department” means a functional unit within a fund which carries on a specific activity, such as a fire
department or a police department within a general fund;
10. “Estimated revenue” means the amount of revenues estimated to be received during the budget year in
each fund for which a budget is prepared. Revenue includes any appropriated fund balance in the budget of
revenues for a fund for the budget year;
11. “Fiscal year” means the annual period for reporting fiscal operations which begins and ends on dates as
the Legislature provides;
12. “Fund” means an independent fiscal and accounting entity with a self-balancing set of accounts to record
cash and other financial resources, together with all liabilities, which are segregated for the purpose of carrying
on specific activities or attaining certain objectives;
13. “Fund balance” means the excess of the assets of a fund over its liabilities, reserves, contributions and
encumbrances, as reflected by its books of account;
14. “Governing body” means the city council of a city, the board of trustees of a town, or the legislative
body of a municipality as it may be defined by applicable law or charter provision;
15. “Immediate prior fiscal year” means the year next preceding the current year;
16. “Levy” means to impose ad valorem taxes or the total amount of ad valorem taxes for a purpose or entity;
17. “Operating reserve” means that portion of the fund balance which has not been appropriated in a budget
year; and
18. “Municipality” means any incorporated city or town. (Amended, effective 5/27/80)
SECTION 17-205. BUDGET REQUIRED--CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
At least thirty (30) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, a budget for the municipality shall be prepared
by the chief executive officer and submitted to the governing body. The chief executive officer may require
any other officer or employee who is charged with the management or control of any department or office
of the municipality to furnish estimates for the fiscal year covering estimated revenues and expenditures of the
department or office on or before a date set by the chief executive officer. (Effective 10/1/79)
SECTION 17-206. CONTENTS--ESTIMATES--BUDGET REQUIREMENTS
A. The municipal budget shall present a complete financial plan for the municipality and shall present information
necessary and proper to disclose the financial position and condition of the municipality and the revenues
and expenditures thereof, both past and anticipated.
B. The budget shall contain a budget summary. It shall also be accompanied by a budget message which
shall explain the budget and describe its important features. The budget format shall be as provided by the governing
body in consultation with the chief executive officer. It shall contain at least the following in tabular form
for each fund, itemized by department and account within each fund:
1. Actual revenues and expenditures for the immediate prior fiscal year;
2. Revenues and expenditures for the current fiscal year as shown by the budget for the current year as
adopted or amended; and
3. Estimates of revenues and expenditures for the budget year.
C. The estimate of revenues for any budget year shall include probable income by source which the municipality
is legally empowered to collect or receive at the time the budget is adopted. The estimate shall be
based on a review and analysis of past and anticipated revenues of the municipality. Any portion of the budget of
revenues to be derived from ad valorem property taxation shall not exceed the amount of tax which is available
for appropriation, as finally determined by the county excise board, or which can or must be raised as required
by law. The budget of expenditures for each fund shall not exceed the estimated revenues for each fund. No
more than ten percent (10%) of the total budget for any fund may be budgeted for miscellaneous purposes. Included
in the budget of revenues or expenditures for any fund may be amounts transferred from or to another
fund. Any such interfund transfer must be shown as a disbursement from the one fund and as a receipt to the
other fund. (New, effective 10/1/79)
SECTION 17-207. GENERAL FUND AND OTHER FUND--SINKING FUND
Any monies received or expended by a municipality must be accounted for by fund and account. Each municipality
shall prepare a budget for the general fund and for other funds as the governing body may require pursuant
to Section 17-212 of this title. The municipal governing body shall determine the needs of the municipality
for sinking fund purposes, pursuant to Section 431 of Title 62 of the Oklahoma Statutes, Section 2497 of Title 68
of the Oklahoma Statutes, and Section 28 of Article 10 of the Oklahoma Constitution, and include these requirements
in the debt service fund budget for the budget year. (Amended 7/1/84)
SECTION 17-208. NOTICE AND HEARING
The municipal governing body shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget no later than fifteen (15)
days prior to the beginning of the budget year. Notice of the date, time and place of the hearing, together with the
proposed budget summary, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality not less
than five (5) days before the date of the hearing. The municipal clerk shall make available a sufficient number of
copies of the proposed budget as the governing body shall determine and have them available for review or for
distribution or sale at the office of the municipal clerk. Whenever the total operating budget, not including debt
service, does not exceed Twelve Thousand Dollars ($12,000.00) per year, the proposed budget summary and
notice may be posted at the governing body’s principal headquarters in lieu of publication in a newspaper. At the
public hearing on the budget any person may present to the governing body comments, recommendations or information
on any part of the proposed budget. (Effective 10/1/79)
SECTION 17-209. ADOPTION OF BUDGET--FILING--APPROPRIATION--LEVY BY COUNTY
EXCISE BOARD
After the hearing and at least seven (7) days prior to the beginning of the budget year, the governing body
shall adopt the budget. The governing body may add or increase items or delete or decrease items in the budget.
In all cases the proposed expenditures shall not exceed the estimated revenues for any fund.
B. The adopted budget shall be filed with the excise board of each county in which the municipality is located
on or before the first day of the budget year. At the same time that the budget is filed with the excise board,
one copy of the budget as adopted shall be transmitted to the State Auditor and Inspector and one copy shall be
kept on file in the office of the municipal clerk.
C. The adopted budget shall be in effect on and after the first day of the fiscal year to which it applies. The
budget as adopted and filed with the State Auditor and Inspector shall constitute an appropriation for each fund,
and the appropriation thus made shall not be used for any other purpose except as provided by law.
D. At the time required by law, the county excise board shall levy the taxes necessary for the municipality’s
sinking fund for the budget year pursuant to Section 431 of Title 62 of the Oklahoma Statutes. (Effective
10/1/79)
SECTION 17-210 PROTESTS--PUBLIC RECORD
Within fifteen (15) days after the filing of any municipal budget with the State Auditor and Inspector, any
taxpayer may file protests against any alleged illegality of the budget in the manner provided by this section and
Sections 24104 through 24111 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes. The fifteen-day protest period begins upon
the date the budget is received in the Office of the State Auditor and Inspector. After receipt of a taxpayer protest,
the State Auditor and Inspector shall transmit by certified mail one copy of each protest to the municipal
clerk, and one copy of each protest to the county treasurer and the excise board of each county in which the municipality
is located. The taxpayer protest shall specify the alleged illegality in the budget and the grounds upon
which the alleged illegality is based. Any protest filed by any taxpayer shall inure to the benefit of all taxpayers.
If no protest is filed by any taxpayer within the fifteen (15) day period, the budget and any appropriations thereof
shall be deemed legal and final until amended by the governing body or the county excise board as authorized by
law. Taxpayers shall have the right at all reasonable times to examine the budget on file with the municipal
clerk, the county excise board, or the State Auditor and Inspector for the purpose of checking illegalities in the
budget or for filing protests in accordance with this section and Sections 24104 through 24111 of Title 68.
(Amended, effective 5/27/80)
SECTION 17-211. DEFICITS--PROHIBITIONS--VIOLATIONS--PENALTY
A. No expenditure may be authorized or made by any officer or employee which exceeds any fund balance
for any fund of the budget as adopted or amended or which exceeds the appropriation for any fund of the budget
as adopted or amended. Any balance remaining in a fund at the end of the budget year shall be carried forward to
the credit of the fund for the next budget year.
B. It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the municipality in any budget year:
1. To create or authorize creation of a deficit in any fund; or
2. To authorize, make or incur expenditures or encumbrances in excess of ninety percent (90%) of the appropriation
for any fund of the budget as adopted or amended until revenues in an amount equal to at least ninety
percent (90%) of the appropriation for the fund have been collected. Any fund balance which is included in the
appropriation for the fund is considered revenue in the budget year for which it is appropriated. Expenditures
may then be made and authorized so long as any expenditure does not exceed any fund balance.
C. Any obligation that is contracted or authorized by any officer or employee in violation of this act shall
become the obligation of the officer or employee himself and shall not be valid or enforceable against the municipality.
Any officer or employee who violates this act shall forfeit his office or position and shall be subject to
such civil and criminal punishments as are provided by law. Any obligation, authorization for expenditure or
expenditure made in violation of this act shall be illegal and void. (Effective 10/1/79)
SECTION 17-212. ESTABLISHMENT OF FUNDS--ACCOUNTS
A municipality shall establish funds consistent with legal and operating requirements. Each municipality shall
maintain according to its own needs some or all of the following funds or ledgers in its system of accounts:
1. A general fund, to account for all monies received and disbursed for general municipal government purposes,
including all assets, liabilities, reserves, fund balances, revenues and expenditures which are not accounted
for in any other fund or special ledger account. All monies received by the municipality under the motor
fuel tax or under the motor vehicle license and registration tax and earmarked for the street and alley fund may
be deposited in the general fund and accounted for as a “street and alley account” within the general fund. Expenditures
from this account shall be made as earmarked and provided by law. All references to the street and
alley fund or to the special fund earmarked for state-shared gasoline and motor vehicle taxes may mean the street
and alley account provided in this section;
2. Special revenue funds, as required, to account for the proceeds of specific revenue sources that are restricted
by law to expenditures for specified purposes;
3. Debt service fund, which shall include the municipal sinking fund, established to account for the retirement
of general obligation bonds or other long term debt and payment of interest thereon and judgments as provided
by law. Any monies pledged to service general obligation bonds or other long term debt must be deposited
in the debt service fund;
4. Capital improvement fund, to account for financial resources segregated for acquisition, construction or
other improvement related to capital facilities other than those financed by general long term debt;
5. Enterprise funds, to account for each utility or enterprise or other service, other than those operated as a
department of the general fund, where the costs are financed primarily through user charges or where there is a
periodic need to determine revenues earned, expenses incurred or net income for a service or program;
6. Trust and agency funds, to account for assets held by the municipality as trustee or agent for individuals,
private organizations or other governmental units or purposes, such as a retirement fund or a cemetery perpetual
care fund;
7. Special assessment funds, to account for the financing of public improvements or services deemed to
benefit properties against with special assessments are levied; a separate fund for each special improvement district
established by the governing body shall be established, each of which shall be known as a special assessment
fund;
8. Internal service funds, to account for the financing of goods or services provided by one department or
agency of the municipality to another department or agency, or to another government, on a cost reimbursement
basis;
9. A ledger or group of accounts in which to record the details relating to the general fixed assets of the
municipality;
10. A ledger or group of accounts in which to record the details relating to the general bonds or other long
term debt of the municipality; or
11. Such other funds or ledgers as may be established by the governing body. (Effective 10/1/79)
SECTION 17-213. CLASSIFICATION OF REVENUES AND EXPENDITURES.
Each fund shall be made up of accounts for classifying revenues and expenditures. Revenues shall be classified
separately by source. Expenditures shall be departmentalized within each fund and shall be classified into at
least the following accounts:
1. Personal services, which may include expenses for salaries, wages, per diem or other compensation,
fees, allowances or reimbursement for travel expenses, and related employee benefits, paid to any officer or employee
for services rendered or for employment. Employee benefits may include employer contributions to a
retirement system, insurance, sick leave, terminal pay or similar benefits;
2. Materials and supplies, which may include articles and commodities which are consumed or materially
altered when used, such as office supplies, operating supplies and repair and maintenance supplies, and all items
of expense to any person, firm or corporation rendering a service in connection with repair, sale or trade of such
articles or commodities;
3. Other services and charges, which may include all current expenses other than those listed in paragraphs
1, 2, 4 or 5 of this section, such as services or charges for communications, transportation, advertising, printing
or binding, insurance, public utility services, repairs and maintenance, rentals, miscellaneous items and all items
of expenses to any person, firm or corporation rendering such services;
4. Capital outlays, which may include outlays which result in acquisition of or additions to fixed assets
which are purchased by the municipality, including machinery and equipment, furniture, land, buildings, improvements
other than buildings, and all construction, reconstruction, appurtenances or improvements to real
property accomplished according to the conditions of a contract; and
5. Debt service, which may include outlays in the form of debt principal payments, periodic interest payments,
or related service charges for benefits received in part in prior fiscal periods as well as in current and future
fiscal periods. (Effective 10/1/79)
SECTION 17-214. RESERVE
A municipality may create an operating reserve for the purpose of providing a fund or reserve out of which to
meet emergency expenditures. (Effective 10/1/79)
SECTION 17-215. FUNDS AND ACCOUNT TRANSFERS
The chief executive officer, as authorized by the governing body, may transfer any unexpended and unencumbered
appropriation or any portion thereof from one account to another within the same department or from
one department to another within the same fund; except that no appropriation for debt service or other appropriation
required by law or ordinance may be reduced below the minimums required. Any fund balance in an enterprise
fund of the municipality may be transferred to another fund of the municipality as authorized by the governing
body. Other interfund transfers may be made only as authorized by this act or as provided in the budget as
adopted or amended according to Sections 17-206 or 17-216 of this title. Whenever the necessity for maintaining
any special fund of a municipality has ceased to exist and a balance remains in the fund, the governing body may
authorize the transfer of the balance to the general fund. Applicable law shall govern the use or transfer of balance
in any debt service or special assessment fund. (Amended, effective 5/27/80)
SECTION 17-216. SUPPLEMENTAL APPROPRIATIONS--LIMITATIONS PROCEDURE
A. The governing body may amend the budget to make supplemental appropriations to any fund up to the
amount of additional revenues which are available for current expenses as shown by a fund balance for the fund
due to:
1. Revenues received from sources not anticipated in the budget for that year;
2. Revenues received from anticipated sources but in excess of the budget estimates therefor; or
3. Unexpended unencumbered cash balances on hand at the end of the preceding fiscal year which had not
been anticipated in the budget. Any appropriation authorizing the creating of an indebtedness shall be governed
by the applicable provisions of Article 10 of the Oklahoma Constitution.
B. If at any time during the budget year it appears probable that revenues available will be insufficient to
meet the amount appropriated, or that due to unforeseen emergencies there is temporarily insufficient money in a
particular fund to meet the requirements of appropriation for the fund, the governing body shall take action as it
deems necessary. For that purpose, it may amend the budget to reduce one or more appropriations or it may
amend the budget to transfer money from one fund to another fund, but no appropriation for debt service may be
reduced and no appropriation may be reduced by more than the amount of the unencumbered and unexpended
balance thereof. No transfer shall be made from the debt service fund to any other fund except as may be permitted
by the terms of the bond issue or applicable law.
C. A budget amendment as provided in this section authorizing supplemental appropriations or a decrease
or change in appropriation or funds shall be adopted at a meeting of the governing body and filed with the municipal
clerk, the county excise board of each county in which the municipality is located, and the State Auditor
and Inspector. (Effective 10/1/79)
ARTICLE XXII
GENERAL POWERS OF MUNICIPALITIES
Section:
22-101 Corporate Powers of Municipalities
22-101.1 Political Activities by Municipal Employees--Exceptions--Filing as Candidate
22-101.2 Coercion Prohibited
22-101.3 Penalties
22-102 Proof of Legal Organization or Ordinances
22-103 Service of Notice or Process on Municipality
22-104 Right to Engage in Business--Public Utilities and Improvements--Eminent Domain--Issuance of Bonds--
Lease of Public Utility
22-105 Condemnation of Private Property
22-106 License Tax on Occupations--Authority to Levy And Collect--Penalties
22-107 Licenses Regulated by Ordinance--Expiration--Issuance
22-107.1 Community Antenna Television Systems
22-108 Power to Suppress Gaming and Gambling
22-109 Disorderly Houses and Public Indecencies
22-110 Riots, Assaults and Disturbances--Firearms and Fireworks
22-111 Cleaning and Mowing of Property--Hearing--Costs--Lien
22-112 Condemnation of Dilapidated Buildings--Notice--Removal--Lien
22-112.1 Boarding and Securing Dilapidated Buildings--Procedure--Notice
22-113 Fire Hazards and Building Location Restrictions
22-114 Entry Upon Private Property for Surveys and Examinations--Reimbursement for Damages
22-115 Animals Running at Large--Regulation and Taxation
22-116 Jurisdiction over Public Grounds and Navigable Streams
22-117 Traffic Regulations--Control of Streets--School Zones
22-117.1 Possession of Security Verification Form may be Required for Certain Vehicles
22-118 Regulation of Taxicabs--Specific Requirements
22-119 Regulation of Railway and Freight Operations Within Municipal Limits
22-120 Public Health, Hospitals and Quarantine
22-121 Nuisances
22-122 Trees
22-123 Vagrancy
22-124 Market Places--Municipal Buildings
22-125 Gifts to Institutions in State System of Higher Education
22-126 Participation in Federal Programs
22-127 Establishing Residency Requirements
22-128 Authority for Public Improvements--Borrowing Money--Bond Issues
22-129 Warrants Against Lots for Special Assessments
22-130 Reassessments for Void or Illegal Assessments
22-131 Municipal Records--Destruction, Sale or Disposition After Certain Time Limitations
22-132 Authority to Have Records Photographed or Reproduced on Film--Original Record--Storage
22-132.1 Municipal Records--Maintenance and Protection--Availability
22-133 Contesting Reasonableness of Oil and Gas Drilling Fee
22-134 Purchasing or Accounts Payable--Approval by Electronic Process
ARTICLE XXII
GENERAL POWERS OF MUNICIPALITIES
SECTION 22-101. CORPORATE POWERS OF MUNICIPALITIES
All incorporated municipalities shall be bodies corporate and politic, and shall have the powers to:
1. Sue and be sued;
2. Purchase and hold real and personal property for the use of the municipality;
3. Sell and convey any real or personal property owned by the municipality and make orders respecting the
same as may be conducive to the best interests of the municipality;
4. Make all contracts and do all other acts in relation to the property and affairs of the municipality, necessary
to the good government of the municipality, and to the exercise of its corporate and administrative powers;
and
5. Exercise such other powers as are or may be conferred by law.
SECTION 22-101.1. POLITICAL ACTIVITIES BY MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES--EXCEPTIONS--FILING
AS CANDIDATE
Municipal employees may attend and express their views at city council meetings, or any other public meetings
of municipal entities.
Any municipal employee may actively participate in partisan and nonpartisan political activities. Provided, the
political activity in which the employee participates shall be exercised only during off-duty hours and while not
in uniform. Any federal statutes restricting the political activities of certain municipal employees shall supersede
the provisions of this section as to such employees. Municipal corporations may establish employment requirements
requiring municipal employees to refrain from filing as a candidate for public office while employed by
said municipality. (Amended 6/24/83)
SECTION 22-101.2. COERCION PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for the governing body or officer of any municipal corporation in this state to directly or
indirectly coerce or attempt to coerce any municipal employee to participate or refrain from participation in municipal
political activities or public meetings. (Added eff. 10/19/81)
SECTION 22-101.3. PENALTIES
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Added
eff. 10/19/81)
SECTION 22-102. PROOF OF LEGAL ORGANIZATION OR ORDINANCES
A. If a suit is instituted by a municipality, the municipality shall not be required to post bond or to show its
compliance with any of the provisions of law as to its organization or publication of ordinances unless the same
is controverted by affidavit.
B. A municipality shall be entitled to recover its costs and attorney fees on the same terms and in the same
manner as any other party. (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 22-103. SERVICE OF NOTICE OR PROCESS ON MUNICIPALITY
Any notice or process affecting a municipality shall be served upon the municipal clerk, or in his or her absence
then upon a deputy municipal clerk or upon the mayor. (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 22-104. RIGHT TO ENGAGE IN BUSINESS--PUBLIC UTILITIES AND IMPROVEMENTS-
-EMINENT DOMAIN--ISSUANCE OF BONDS--LEASE OF PUBLIC UTILITY
Every municipality shall have the right to:
1. Engage in any business or enterprise which may be engaged in by a person, firm or corporation by virtue
of a franchise from the municipality and to do all things necessary and proper in the discretion of the governing
body of the municipality pursuant to the authority granted to it by the Constitution and laws of this state to maintain
said business or enterprise for the benefit of the municipality; and
2. Acquire, own, and maintain, within or without its corporate limits, real estate for sites and rights-of-way
for any municipal purpose including but not limited to public utility and public park purposes, and for the location
thereon of waterworks, electric light and gas plants and other facilities for generating or distributing energy,
ports, airports, hospitals, quarantine stations, garbage reduction plants, pipelines for the transmission and transportation
of gas, water, stormwater, and sewerage, and for any plant for the manufacture of any material for public
improvement purposes and public buildings; and
3. Exercise the right of eminent domain for any municipal purpose, within or without its corporate limits,
and to establish, lay, and operate any plant or pipeline upon any land or right-of-way taken pursuant to eminent
domain. Any business or profession which is affected by the right of eminent domain as exercised pursuant to
the provisions of this section shall be considered as a property right of the owner thereof and proper allowance
therefor shall be made; and
4. Exercise the right to manufacture any material for public improvement purposes, and to barter or exchange
the same for other material to be used in public improvements in the municipality, or to sell the same;
and
5. Issue and sell bonds subject to and by virtue of the provisions of the Constitution of this state and in the
manner and form provided by law in order to raise the monies to establish and maintain public utilities, parks
and improvements; and
6. Sell or lease to any consumer or corporation, within or without its boundaries, the commodities and services
supplied by such municipally owned or controlled public utility, business enterprise, or improvement and
to enter into such short- or long-term contracts, agreements, and stipulations and do all things necessary and
proper to further the capability of the municipality pursuant to the authority granted to it by the Oklahoma Statutes
and the Constitution of this state to provide said commodities and services as may be deemed appropriate by
the governing body of the municipality; and
7. Lease at a stipulated rental any public improvement or utility from any person, firm, or corporation
which will contract to furnish the same. Any such rental contract shall reserve for the municipality the option to
purchase the improvement or utility in the future. (Amended 11/1/87)
SECTION 22-105. CONDEMNATION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY
Private property may be taken for public use, or for the purpose of giving a right-of-way or other privilege for
any necessary purpose, in the manner provided by law; but in every case the municipality shall make adequate
compensation to the person or persons whose property shall be taken or injured thereby as provided by law.
SECTION 22-106. LICENSE TAX ON OCCUPATIONS--AUTHORITY TO LEVY AND COLLECT--
PENALTIES
A. A municipal governing body may levy and collect a license tax on auctioneers, contractors, druggists,
hawkers, peddlers, bankers, brokers, pawnbrokers, merchants of all kinds, grocers, confectioners, restaurants,
butchers, taverns, public boarding houses, billiard tables, bowling alleys, and other amusement devices, drays,
hacks, carriages, omnibuses, carts, wagons and other vehicles used in the municipality for pay, hay scales, lumber
dealers, furniture dealers, saddle or harness dealers, stationers, jewelers, livery stable keepers, real estate
agents, express companies or agencies, telegraph companies or agencies, shows, theatres, all kinds of exhibitions
for pay, also photographers, photographers’ agents, agents of all kinds and solicitors. The taxes so levied and
collected shall be applied for the use and benefit of the municipality as the governing body may direct.
B. All scientific and literary lectures and entertainments shall be exempt from license taxation, and also all
concerts and musical or other entertainments given exclusively by the citizens of the municipality.
C. The governing body may establish penalties for any failure to observe the license provisions or to pay
the tax provided for by ordinance.
SECTION 22-107. LICENSES REGULATED BY ORDINANCE--EXPIRATION--ISSUANCE
Text as amended by Laws 1984, c. 102, Section 1:
A. Municipal licenses and license fees shall be regulated by ordinance. A municipality may establish such
license requirements as it deems appropriate in the exercise of its police power and may provide that each applicant
supply his state sales tax identification number or proof of exemption pursuant to provisions of the Sales
Tax Code. Any license issued by the governing body shall expire no later than one (1) year after the date of its
issuance or on April 30 of each year. No license may be issued until the amount prescribed therefor is paid to the
municipal treasurer. No license in any case may be assigned or transferred. Licenses shall be signed as provided
for by ordinance. The clerk shall affix the corporate seal of the municipality to the license. A municipality and
the Oklahoma Tax Commission may exchange information to further the collection or enforcement of state and
local taxes.
B. The municipality, its officers and employees shall preserve the confidentiality of such information in the
same manner and be subject to the same penalties as provided by Section 205 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes,
provided that the municipal prosecutor and other municipal enforcement personnel may receive all information
necessary to enforce municipal sales tax ordinances or licensing ordinances. (Amended 4/5/84)
Text as amended by Laws 1984, c. 126, Section 41:
Municipal licenses and license fees shall be regulated by ordinance. A municipality may establish such license
requirements as it deems appropriate in the exercise of its police power and may provide that each applicant supply
his state sales tax identification number or proof of exemption pursuant to the provisions of Title 68 of the
Oklahoma Statutes. Any license issued by the governing body shall expire no later than one (1) year after the
date of its issuance or on June 30 of each year. No license may be issued until the amount prescribed therefor is
paid to the municipal treasurer. No license in any case may be assigned or transferred. Licenses shall be signed
as provided for by ordinance. The clerk shall affix the corporate seal of the municipality to the license. A municipality
and the Oklahoma Tax Commission may exchange information to further the collection or enforcement
of state and local taxes. The municipality and the officers and employees of the municipality shall preserve
the confidentiality of such information in the same manner and be subject to the same penalties as provided for
by Section 205 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes, provided that the municipal prosecutor and other municipal
enforcement personnel may receive all information necessary to enforce municipal sales tax ordinances or licensing
ordinances. (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 22-107.1 COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS
A. A municipality may by ordinance or otherwise issue a certificate, license or permit, for the operation of a
cable television system. A municipality may establish such certificate, license or permit requirements as it deems
appropriate in the exercise of its power. Any certificate, license or permit issued by the governing body shall be
nonexclusive and shall not exceed a period of twenty-five (25) years and may be revocable by the governing
body if said body determines that the holder of the certificate, license or permit has willfully failed or neglected
to perform duties pursuant to the terms of the grant of the certificate, license or permit. A certificate, license or
permit may be assigned or transferred subject to approval of the governing body of the municipality. Nothing
herein shall limit the authority of a municipality to comply with state or federal law.
B. No municipality shall grant any overlapping certificate, license, permit or franchise for cable television
service within its jurisdiction on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome than those in any existing
certificate, license, permit or franchise within such municipality.
C. No municipal provisions regulating a cable television system may be adopted which are inconsistent
with either state or federal law relating to cable television operations. (Amended 1988)
SECTION 22-108. POWER TO SUPPRESS GAMING AND GAMBLING
The municipal governing body may enact ordinances to restrain, prohibit, and suppress games and gambling
houses, bowling alleys, pool and billiard tables, and other gambling tables. The powers granted to municipalities
in this section shall not be construed to repeal any gambling law now on the statute books, but shall be cumulative
only.
SECTION 22-109. DISORDERLY HOUSES AND PUBLIC INDECENCIES
The municipal governing body may enact ordinances to restrain, prohibit, and suppress houses of prostitution
and other disorderly houses and practices, and all kinds of public indecencies. No municipal officer shall accept
or receive any hush money, or any money or valuable things, from any person or persons engaged in any such
business or practice, or grant any immunity or protection against a rigid enforcement of the laws and ordinances
enacted to restrain, prohibit and suppress any such business or practice.
SECTION 22-110. RIOTS, ASSAULTS AND DISTURBANCES--FIREARMS AND FIREWORKS
The municipal governing body may regulate or prohibit riots, assaults, batteries, petty larceny, disturbances or
disorderly assemblies, and immoral or indecent shows, exhibitions or concerts, in any street, house or place in
the municipality; and may regulate, punish, and prevent the discharge of firearms, rockets, powder, fireworks, or
other dangerously combustible material in the streets, lots, grounds, alleys or about, or in the vicinity of any
buildings. The governing body may also regulate the carrying of firearms or other deadly weapons, concealed or
otherwise, as provided in Section 1289.24 of Title 21 of the Oklahoma Statutes. (Amended 11/1/85)
SECTION 22-111. CLEANING AND MOWING OF PROPERTY--HEARING--COSTS--LIEN
A. A municipal governing body may cause property within the municipal limits to be cleaned of trash and
weeds or grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with the following procedure:
1. At least ten (10) days’ notice shall be given to the owner of the property by mail at the address shown by
the current year’s tax rolls in the county treasurer’s office before the governing body holds a hearing or takes
action. The notice shall order the property owner to clean the property of trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or
grass on the property, as appropriate, and said notice shall further state that unless such work is performed within
ten (10) days of the date of the notice the work shall be done by the municipality and a notice of lien shall be
filed with the county clerk against the property for the costs due and owing the municipality. At the time of mailing
of notice to the property owner, the municipality shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service,
which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. However, if the property
owner cannot be located within ten (10) days from the date of mailing by the municipal governing body, notice
may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property or by publication, as defined in Section 1-102 of
this title, one time not less than ten (10) days prior to any hearing or action by the municipality. If a municipal
governing body anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in accordance with the provisions of subsection B
of this section, the notice, whether by certified mail, posting or publication, shall state: that any accumulations of
trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the owner’s property occurring within six (6) months after the removal
of trash or cutting or mowing of weeds or grass on the property pursuant to such notice may be summarily
abated by the municipal governing body; that the costs of such abatement shall be assessed against the owner;
and that a lien may be imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without further prior notice to the
property owner;
2. The owner of the property may give his written consent to the municipality authorizing the removal of
the trash or the mowing of the weeds or grass. By giving said written consent, the owner waives his right to a
hearing by the municipality;
3. A hearing may be held by the municipal governing body to determine whether the accumulation of trash
or the growth of weeds or grass has caused the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit, and welfare
of the public and the community or a hazard to traffic, or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property;
4. Upon a finding that the condition of the property constitutes a detriment or hazard, and that the property
would be benefited by the removal of such conditions, the agents of the municipality are granted the right of entry
on the property for the removal of trash, mowing of weeds or grass, and performance of the necessary duties
as a governmental function of the municipality. Immediately following the cleaning or mowing of the property,
the municipal clerk shall file a notice of lien with the county clerk describing the property and the work performed
by the municipality, and stating that the municipality claims a lien on said property for the cleaning or
mowing costs;
5. The governing body shall determine the actual cost of such cleaning and mowing and any other expenses
as may be necessary in connection therewith, including the cost of notice and mailing. The municipal clerk shall
forward by mail to the property owner specified in paragraph 1 of this subsection a statement of such actual cost
and demanding payment. If the cleaning and mowing are done by the municipality, the cost to the property
owner for said cleaning and mowing shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance, and equipment
required. If the cleaning and mowing are done on a private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the
lowest and best bidder;
6. If payment is not made within thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the statement, the municipal
clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the cost to the county treasurer of the county in
which the property is located and the same shall be levied on the property and collected by the county treasurer
as other taxes authorized by law. Until fully paid, the cost and the interest thereon shall be the personal obligation
of the property owner from and after the date the cost is certified to the county treasurer. In addition the cost
and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the date the cost is certified to the county treasurer,
coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and prior and superior
to all other titles and liens against the property, and the lien shall continue until the cost shall be fully paid. At
the time of collection, the county treasurer shall collect a fee of Five Dollars ($5.00) for each parcel of property.
Said fee shall be deposited to the credit of the general fund of the county. At any time prior to the collection as
provided in this paragraph, the municipality may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and
interest thereon including an action in personam against the owner and an action in rem to foreclose its lien
against the property. A mineral interest, if severed from the surface interest and not owned by the surface owner,
shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien created pursuant to this section. Upon receiving payment, if any,
the municipal clerk shall forward to the county treasurer a notice of such payment and directing discharge of the
lien; and
7. The municipality may designate by ordinance an administrative officer or administrative body to carry
out the duties of the governing body in subsection A of this section. The property owner shall have a right of
appeal to the municipal governing body from any order of the administrative officer or administrative body.
Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal with the municipal clerk within ten (10) days after
the administrative order is rendered.
B. If a municipal governing body causes property within the municipal limits to be cleaned of trash and
weeds or grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with the procedures provided for in subsection A of this section,
any subsequent accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the property occurring within
a six-month period may be declared to be a nuisance and may be summarily abated without further prior notice
to the property owner. At the time of each such summary abatement the municipality shall notify the property
owner of the abatement and the costs thereof. The notice shall state that the property owner may request a hearing
within ten (10) days after the date of mailing the notice. The notice and hearing shall be as provided for in
subsection A of this section. Unless otherwise determined at the hearing the cost of such abatement shall be determined
and collected as provided for in paragraphs 5 and 6 of subsection A of this section. Provided, however,
that this subsection shall not apply if the records of the county clerk show that the property was transferred after
notice was given pursuant to subsection A of this section.
C. The municipal governing body may enact ordinances to prohibit owners of property or persons otherwise
in possession or control located within the municipal limits from allowing trash to accumulate, or weeds to
grow or stand upon the premises and may impose penalties for violation of said ordinances.
D. As used in this section:
1. “Weed” includes but is not limited to poison ivy, poison oak, or poison sumac and all vegetation at any
state of maturity which:
a. exceeds twelve (12) inches in height, except healthy trees, shrubs, or produce for human consumption
grown in a tended and cultivated garden unless such trees and shrubbery by their density or location constitute a
detriment to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and community or a hazard to traffic or create a fire
hazard to the property or otherwise interfere with the mowing of said weeds;
b. regardless of height, harbors, conceals, or invites deposits or accumulation of refuse or trash;
c. harbors rodents or vermin;
d. gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
e. constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or
f. is dead or diseased.
The term “weed” shall not include tended crops on land zoned for agricultural use which are planted more
than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a parcel zoned for other than agricultural use.
2. “Trash” means any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible materials, rubbish, offal, or
waste, or matter of any kind or form which is uncared for, discarded, or abandoned.
3. “Owner” means the owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the county treasurer.
4. “Cleaning” means the removal of trash from property.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property zoned and used for agricultural purposes.
(Amended 1990)
SECTION 22-112. CONDEMNATION OF DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS--NOTICE--REMOVAL--LIEN
A municipal governing body may cause dilapidated buildings within the municipal limits to be torn down and
removed in accordance with the provisions of this section:
1. At least ten (10) days’ notice that a building is to be torn down or removed shall be given to the owner of
the property before the governing body holds a hearing. A copy of the notice shall be posted on the property to
be affected. In addition, a copy of said notice shall be sent by mail to the property owner at the address shown by
the current year’s tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer. Written notice shall also be mailed to any mortgage
holder as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk to the last-known address of the mortgagee.
At the time of mailing of notice to any property owner or mortgage holder, the municipality shall obtain a receipt
of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of
the mailee. However, if neither the property owner nor mortgage holder can be located, notice may be given by
posting a copy of the notice on the property, or by publication, as defined in Section 1-102 of this title. Such notice
may be published once not less than ten (10) days prior to any hearing or action by the municipality pursuant
to the provisions of this section.
2. A hearing shall be held by the governing body to determine if the property is dilapidated and has become
detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public and the community, or if said property creates a
fire hazard which is dangerous to other property.
3. Pursuant to a finding that the condition of the property constitutes a detriment or a hazard, and that the
property would be benefited by the removal of such conditions, the governing body may cause the dilapidated
building to be torn down and removed. The governing body shall fix reasonable dates for the commencement
and completion of the work. The municipal clerk shall immediately file a notice of dilapidation and lien with the
county clerk describing the property, the findings of the municipality at the hearing, and stating that the municipality
claims a lien on said property for the destruction and removal costs and that such costs are the personal
obligation of the property owner from and after the date of filing of said notice. The agents of the municipality
are granted the right of entry on the property for the performance of the necessary duties as a governmental function
of the municipality if the work is not performed by the property owner within dates fixed by the governing
body.
4. The governing body shall determine the actual cost of the dismantling and removal of dilapidated buildings
and any other expenses that may be necessary in conjunction with the dismantling and removal of the buildings,
including the cost of notice and mailing. The municipal clerk shall forward a statement of such actual cost
attributable to the dismantling and removal of the buildings and a demand for payment of such costs by mail to
the property owner. In addition, a copy of said statement shall be mailed to any mortgage holder at the address
provided for in paragraph 1 of this section. At the time of mailing of the statement of costs to any property owner
or mortgage holder, the municipality shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall
indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. If a municipality dismantles or removes any
dilapidated buildings, the cost to the property owner shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance
and equipment required for dismantling and removal of the dilapidated buildings. If dismantling and removal of
dilapidated buildings is done on a private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder.
5. When payment is made to the municipality for costs incurred, the municipal clerk shall file a release of
lien, but if payment attributable to the actual cost of the dismantling and removal of the buildings is not made
within six (6) months from the date of the mailing of the statement to the owner of such property, the municipal
clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the cost to the county treasurer of the county in which
the property is located. Said costs shall be levied on the property and collected by the county treasurer as are
other taxes authorized by law. Until finally paid, the costs and the interest thereon shall be the personal obligation
of the property owner from and after the date of the notice of dilapidation and lien is filed with the county
clerk. In addition the cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the date the notice of
the lien is filed with the county clerk. Said lien shall be coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other
taxes and special assessments and shall be prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the property. The
lien shall continue until the cost is fully paid. At the time of collection, the county treasurer shall collect a fee of
Five Dollars ($5.00) for each parcel of property. Said fee shall be deposited to the credit of the general fund of
the county. At any time prior to collection as provided for in this paragraph, the municipality may pursue any
civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon including an action in personam against the
property owner and an action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property. A mineral interest, if severed from
the surface interest and not owned by the surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien created
pursuant to this section. Upon receiving payment, the municipal clerk shall forward to the county treasurer a notice
of such payment and shall direct discharge of the lien.
6. The municipality may designate, by ordinance, an administrative officer or administrative body to carry
out the duties of the governing body specified in this section. The property owner shall have the right of appeal
to the municipal governing body from any order of the administrative officer or administrative body. Such appeal
shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal with the municipal clerk within ten (10) days after the administrative
order is rendered.
7. For the purposes of this section, “dilapidated building” means a structure which through neglect or injury
lacks necessary repairs or otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such an extent that said structure
is a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public. “Owner” means the owner of record as shown
by the most current tax rolls of the county treasurer.
8. Nothing in the provisions of this section shall prevent the municipality from abating a dilapidated building
as a nuisance or otherwise exercising its police power to protect the health, safety, or welfare of the general
public.
9. The officers, employees or agents of the municipality shall not be liable for any damages or loss of
property due to the removal of dilapidated buildings performed pursuant to the provisions of this section or as
otherwise prescribed by law.
10. The provisions of this act shall not apply to any property zoned and used for agricultural purposes.
(Amended 1990)
SECTION 22-112.1 BOARDING AND SECURING DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS--PROCEDURE--
NOTICE
A. After a building has been declared dilapidated, as provided in Section 22-112 of this title, and before the
commencement of the tearing and removal of a dilapidated building, the governing body may cause such a building
to be boarded and secured.
B. A governing body of any municipality may cause the premises on which an unsecured building is located
to be cleaned of trash and weeds in accordance with the provisions of Section 22-111 of this title.
C. A governing body of any municipality may cause an unsecured building to be boarded and secured in
accordance with the following procedures:
1. Before the governing body orders such action, at least ten (10) days’ notice that such unsecured building
is to be boarded and secured shall be given by mail to any property owners and mortgage holders as provided in
Section 22-112 of this title. At the time of mailing of notice to any property owner or mortgage holder, the municipality
shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing
and the name and address of the mailee. A copy of the notice shall also be posted on the property to be affected.
However, if neither the property owner nor mortgage holder can be located, notice may be given by posting
a copy of the notice on the property or by publication, as defined in Section 1-102 of this title. Such notice
shall be published one time, not less than ten (10) days prior to any hearing or action by the municipality pursuant
to the provisions of this section. If a municipal governing body anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance
in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 9 of subsection C of this section, the notice shall state; that any
subsequent need for boarding and securing the building within a six-month period after the initial boarding and
securing of the building pursuant to such notice may be summarily boarded and secured by the municipal governing
body; that the costs of such boarding and securing shall be assessed against the owner; and that a lien may
be imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without further prior notice to the property owner or
mortgage holder;
2. The owner of the property may give his written consent to the municipality authorizing the boarding and
securing of such unsecured building and to the payment of any costs incurred thereby. By giving said written
consent, the owner waives his right to a hearing by the municipal governing body;
3. If the property owner does not give his written consent to such actions, a hearing may be held by the
municipal governing body to determine whether the boarding and securing of such unsecured building would
promote and benefit the public health, safety or welfare. Such hearing may be held in conjunction with a hearing
on the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass on the premises of such unsecured building held
pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 3 of subsection A of Section 22-111 of this title. In making such determination,
the governing body shall apply the following standard: the governing body may order the boarding and
securing of the unsecured building when the boarding and securing thereof would make such building less available
for transient occupation, decrease a fire hazard created by such building, or decrease the hazard that such
building would constitute an attractive nuisance to children.
Upon making such a determination, the municipal governing body may order the boarding and securing of the
unsecured building;
4. After the governing body orders the boarding and securing of such unsecured building, the municipal
clerk shall immediately file a notice of unsecured building and lien with the county clerk describing the property,
stating the findings of the municipality at the hearing at which such building was determined to be unsecured,
and stating that the municipality claims a lien on said property for the costs of boarding and securing the building
and that such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date of filing said
notice;
5. Pursuant to the order of the governing body, the agents of the municipality are granted the right of entry
on the property for the performance of the boarding and securing of such building and for the performance of all
necessary duties as a governmental function of the municipality;
6. After an unsecured building has been boarded and secured, the governing body shall determine the actual
costs of such actions and any other expenses that may be necessary in conjunction therewith including the
cost of the notice and mailing. The municipal clerk shall forward a statement of the actual costs attributable to
the boarding and securing of the unsecured building and a demand for payment of such costs, by mail to any
property owners and mortgage holders as provided in Section 22-112 of this title. At the time of mailing of the
statement of costs to any property owner or mortgage holder, the municipality shall obtain a receipt of mailing
from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee.
If a municipality boards and secures any unsecured building, the cost to the property owner shall not exceed
the actual cost of the labor, materials and equipment required for the performance of such actions. If such actions
are done on a private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder;
7. When payment is made to the municipality for costs incurred, the municipal clerk shall file a release of
lien, but if payment attributable to the actual costs of the boarding and securing of the unsecured building is not
made within thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the statement to the owner of such property, the municipal
clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the costs to the county treasurer of the county in
which the property is located. Said costs shall be levied on the property and collected by the county treasurer as
are other taxes authorized by law. Until fully paid, the costs and the interest thereon shall be the personal obligation
of the property owner from and after the date the notice of unsecured building and lien is filed with the
county clerk. In addition the costs and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the date the
notice of the lien is filed with the county clerk. Said lien shall be coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and
all other taxes and special assessments and shall be prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the
property. The lien shall continue until the costs and interest are fully paid. At any time prior to collection as provided
for in this paragraph, the municipality may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing
and interest thereon including an action in personam against the property owner and an action in rem to foreclose
its lien against the property. A mineral interest if severed from the surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax
or judgment lien created pursuant to this section. Upon receiving payment, the municipal clerk shall forward to
the county treasurer a notice of such payment and shall direct discharge of the lien;
8. The municipality may designate by ordinance an administrative officer or administrative body to carry
out the duties of the governing body specified in subsection C of this section. The property owner or mortgage
holder shall have a right of appeal to the municipal governing body from any order of the administrative officer
or administrative body. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal with the municipal clerk
within ten (10) days after the administrative order is rendered;
9. If a municipal governing body causes a structure within the municipal limits to be boarded and secured,
any subsequent need for boarding and securing within a six-month period constitutes a public nuisance and may
be summarily boarded and secured without further prior notice to the property owner or mortgage holder. At the
time of each such summary boarding and securing, the municipality shall notify the property owner and mortgage
holder of the boarding and securing and the costs thereof. The notice shall state that the property owner
may request an appeal with the municipal clerk within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notice. The notice
and hearing shall be as provided for in paragraph 1 of subsection C of this section. Unless otherwise determined
at the hearing the cost of such boarding and securing shall be determined and collected as provided for in paragraphs
6 and 7 of this subsection;
10. A governing body of any municipality may determine that a building is unsecured and order that such
building be boarded and secured in the manner provided for in this subsection even though such building has not
been declared, by the governing body, to be dilapidated; and
11. For the purposes of this section:
a. “boarding and securing” or “boarded and secured” means the closing, boarding or locking of any or all
exterior openings so as to prevent entry into the structure; and
b. “unsecured building” shall mean any structure which is not occupied by a legal or equitable owner
thereof, or by a lessee of a legal or equitable owner, and into which there are one or more unsecured openings
such as broken windows, unlocked windows, broken doors, unlocked doors, holes in exterior walls, holes in the
roof, broken basement or cellar hatchways, unlocked basement or cellar hatchways or other similar unsecured
openings which would facilitate an unauthorized entry into the structure.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property zoned and used for agricultural purposes.
(Amended 1990)
SECTION 22-113. FIRE HAZARDS AND BUILDING LOCATION RESTRICTIONS
The municipal governing body may regulate the construction or suppression, and cleaning of any apparatus,
fixtures, or equipment used in any building, manufactory, or business which may cause or promote fires, may
prescribe limits within which dangerous or hazardous businesses may be carried on and may adopt fire prevention
codes and regulations. The governing body may impose penalties for the violation of such ordinances and
may remove or abate any buildings constructed or located in violation of its ordinances. (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 22-114. ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR SURVEYS AND EXAMINATIONS--
REIMBURSEMENT FOR DAMAGES
A. Municipalities through their authorized agents or employees may enter upon any lands, waters, or premises
for the purpose of making surveys, soundings, or examinations as may be necessary for the purpose of establishing,
locating, relocating, constructing, or maintaining any sewer, waterworks, drain, or public works or facilities.
Entry may also be made for the purpose of terminating any public utility services if the municipality determines
the existence of a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public in connection with said services.
Said entry shall not be deemed a trespass, nor shall an entry pursuant to any condemnation proceedings
which may be pending be deemed a trespass. If the municipality does not have written consent for entry from the
owner and lessee, the municipality shall give notice to the owner and lessee of the property to be entered, by certified
mail at least fourteen (14) days prior to any entry. If the owner and lessee are unable to be given notice by
certified mail, notice shall be given by publication.
B. Municipalities shall make reimbursement for any actual damages to lands, water, or premises as a result
of the entry onto property as authorized in this section. If there is a disagreement as to the amount of any damage,
either the person incurring any damage to land, water, or premises or the municipality may file a petition
with the district court in the county where the alleged damage occurred requesting the appointment of a commissioner
to appraise the damage and proceed to have the damage determined as in condemnation proceedings.
(Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 22-115. ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE--REGULATION AND TAXATION
The municipal governing body may regulate or prohibit animals from running at large. Animals which are
running at large may be impounded and sold to discharge any costs and penalties established by the governing
body and the expense of impounding, keeping or sale of such animals. The governing body may also provide for
the erection of pens, pounds, and buildings for the use of the municipality, within or without the municipal limits,
and appoint and compensate keepers thereof, and establish and enforce rules governing the pens, pounds or
buildings. The governing body may also regulate and provide for taxing the owners and harborers of dogs, and
authorize the killing of dogs which are found at large in violation of any ordinance regulating the same.
SECTION 22-116. JURISDICTION OVER PUBLIC GROUNDS AND NAVIGABLE STREAMS
The municipality shall have jurisdiction over any real property within or without its corporate limits belonging
to the municipality. Unless otherwise provided for by law, the municipality may regulate the banks, shores, and
wharves of navigable streams within the corporate limits. (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 22-117. TRAFFIC REGULATIONS--CONTROL OF STREETS--SCHOOL ZONES
A. The municipal governing body may establish ordinances and regulations governing the operation of motor
vehicles and traffic upon the roads and streets within the municipality in the manner provided by, and not
inconsistent with, state law. The governing body may also regulate and prevent racing and fast driving, and all
games, practices or amusements likely to result in damage to any person or property, in the streets, highways,
alleys, bridges, sidewalks or other places in the municipality, and riding or driving over or upon the sidewalks of
the municipality.
B. Any municipal governing body which establishes ordinances and regulations governing school zone
speed limits, shall place school zone signs designating the beginning and end of the zone on the side or in the
center of the roadway. Such end zone signing shall be as follows:
(a) On roadways of two driving lanes, only the end zone signing may be on either side of the roadway or in
the center of the roadway.
(b) On roadways in excess of two driving lanes, the end zone signing shall be on the right side of the roadway
or in the center of the roadway if said roadway is divided by a median.
SECTION 22-117.1 POSSESSION OF SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM MAY BE REQUIRED FOR
CERTAIN VEHICLES
Pursuant to Section 22-117 of this title, a municipality may by ordinance require the operator of any motor
vehicle registered in this state to carry a current security verification form as defined in Article VI, Chapter 7 of
Title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes or equivalent form which has been issued by the Department.
Any person producing proof that a current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued
by the Department was in force for such person at the time of the alleged offense shall be entitled to dismissal of
such charge upon payment of court costs; however, if proof of security verification is presented to the court
within forty-eight (48) hours after the violation, the charge shall be dismissed without payment of court costs.
Upon conviction, bond forfeiture or deferral of sentence, the court shall forward an abstract to the Department
of Public Safety within ten (10) days reflecting the action taken by the court. (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 22-118. REGULATION OF TAXICABS--SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
The municipal governing body is vested with full police powers, for the purpose of preserving public health,
safety and welfare, over the operation, regulation and control of taxicabs within the limits of the municipality.
The municipal governing body may prescribe regulations for the operation of taxicabs, which regulations may
include, and shall be limited to the following specific powers and subjects:
1. Requirement of minimum insurance, bond or other indemnity for public liability upon each taxicab; and
if other than standard insurance be permitted, requirement and specifications of terms and conditions under
which such other indemnity shall be accumulated, held, maintained, managed, and disposed of to secure persons
in whose favor any liability shall arise out of the operation of taxicabs;
2. Requirement of minimum standards of mechanical condition and efficiency of any vehicle used as a
taxicab, together with the power to require inspections to insure compliance therewith;
3. Restriction of the loading of taxicabs to specified zones or localities; including the power to prohibit
punish “cruising” and the making of such other rules governing the manner of operation of taxicabs as the public
safety may require;
4. Determination, establishment, and enforce-ment of maximum and/or minimum rates and charges to be
made by taxicabs for the transportation of passengers; including, but not requiring, the establishment of zones as
the basis of such rates, or the requirement of taximeters as the basis of calculating such charges;
5. Requirement of municipal license for the operation of each taxicab; together with the right to levy and
exact on annual fee therefor, and the right to revoke, cancel and thereafter refuse to reissue such license for failure
to comply with or for infractions of regulations promulgated pursuant to this section. The granting of any
license may be made dependent upon the holding of a certificate of convenience and necessity issued by the municipality,
if such certificates are provided as authorized by paragraph 6 of this section; and
6. Requirement for the holding of a certificate of convenience and necessity as a condition precedent to the
issuance and holding of a municipal license for the operation of a taxicab; including the power to issue, deny,
suspend and revoke such certificates.
SECTION 22-119. REGULATION OF RAILWAY AND FREIGHT OPERATIONS WITHIN
MUNICIPAL LIMITS
The municipal governing body may regulate levees, depots, depot grounds, and places of storing freight and
goods, and provide for the passage of railways through the streets and public grounds of the municipality. The
governing body may also regulate the crossing of railway tracks and the running of railway engines, cars and
trucks within the limits of the municipality, and to govern the speed thereof, and to make provisions, rules and
restrictions to prevent accidents at crossings and on the tracks of railways and to prevent fires from engines.
SECTION 22-120. PUBLIC HEALTH, HOSPITALS AND QUARANTINE
The municipal governing body may enact and enforce such ordinances, rules and regulations as it deems necessary
for the protection of the public health, not inconsistent with state law; and may establish and regulate hospitals,
and provide for their operation and support. The governing body may make regulations to prevent the introduction
of contagious diseases into the municipality and may enforce quarantine laws within five (5) miles of
the municipal limits.
SECTION 22-121. NUISANCES
The municipal governing body may declare what shall constitute a nuisance, and provide for the prevention,
removal and abatement of nuisances.
SECTION 22-122. TREES
The municipal governing body may enact ordinances for the purpose of regulating, planting and maintaining
trees in the streets, avenues or public grounds of the municipality. Planting and maintaining trees may also be
petitioned for in the manner provided for petitioning sidewalks; and the governing body may make assessments
and collect taxes in order to pay for planting and maintaining trees in the manner provided for sidewalk assessments
and taxes.
SECTION 22-123. VAGRANCY
The municipal governing body may provide by ordinance for the arrest, fine, and imprisonment of vagrants.
SECTION 22-124. MARKET PLACES--MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS
The municipal governing body may purchase ground for, erect, establish, operate, and regulate retail or commercial
redevelopment projects, market houses, and marketplaces. The governing body may contract with any
person, company, or corporation for the erection, operation, and maintenance of such redevelopment projects,
market houses, and marketplaces on terms and conditions and in such manner as may be necessary and proper
pursuant to the authority granted to it by the Constitution and laws of this state to protect and preserve such projects
and markets for the benefit of the municipality and its citizens. The municipal governing body may raise all
necessary revenue therefor. The governing body may also provide for the erection and operation of any and all
necessary buildings for the municipality. (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 22-125. GIFTS TO INSTITUTIONS IN STATE SYSTEM OF HIGHER EDUCATION
The municipal governing body may make gifts of any real estate belonging to the municipality to any institution
in the Oklahoma State System of Higher Education which is located in the municipality. The municipal
governing body may purchase or otherwise acquire real estate for this purpose, execute any instruments necessary
for the transfer of real estate, and may give buildings or monies for the construction of buildings to institutions
in the state system of higher education. The governing boards of such institutions are hereby authorized to
accept these gifts.
SECTION 22-126. PARTICIPATION IN FEDERAL PROGRAMS
The municipal governing body may receive funds for and participate in any federal program, and may cooperate
with the United States Government and any agency or instrumentality thereof, in the manner authorized and
provided by federal law and regulation. In doing so, a municipality may perform all necessary functions and take
all necessary actions for accomplishing such federal purposes and programs, as agent of the federal government,
notwithstanding any provisions of state law.
SECTION 22-127. ESTABLISHING RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
The municipal governing body by ordinance may designate which appointed officers and employees shall reside
within the municipality; but police officers, firefighters and other municipal employees need not be actual
residents of the municipality where they are employed in municipalities of five thousand (5,000) population or
more, according to the latest federal census.
SECTION 22-128. AUTHORITY FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS--BORROWING MONEY--BOND
ISSUES
The governing body may provide for making any and all improvements of a general nature in the municipality
and may from time to time borrow money and issue bonds for the purpose of paying for such improvements. No
such money shall be borrowed or bonds issued until the governing body is instructed to do so by a vote of at
least three-fifths of the registered voters voting on the question at any election held in the municipality, unless
otherwise provided by the Constitution and laws of Oklahoma. Bonds issued under this section shall be payable
not more than twenty-five (25) years from the date of their issue, with interest thereon at a rate not exceeding a
maximum rate established by law. The governing body shall provide for taxes to pay the bonds at their maturity,
and their interest coupons as they respectively become due. (Amended 7/1/83)
SECTION 22-129. WARRANTS AGAINST LOTS FOR SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
Where municipal improvements of any character are made by special assessments upon the abutting lots, or
upon blocks, or where a special assessment may be created by ordinance for the direct benefit of a limited locality
in a municipality, the governing body may issue a tax warrant against each separate abutting lot, in the manner
provided by law, which shall be a valid lien on the lot and shall be extended, collected and bear a like penalty
with other taxes of the state, county or municipality.
SECTION 22-130. REASSESSMENTS FOR VOID OR ILLEGAL ASSESSMENTS
When a municipal governing body has attempted to levy any assessment for improvements which may have
been informal, illegal or void for want of sufficient authority or other cause, the governing body of the municipality
shall reassess any such assessment in the manner provided by law.
SECTION 22-131. MUNICIPAL RECORDS--DESTRUCTION, SALE OR DISPOSITION AFTER
CERTAIN TIME LIMITATIONS
A municipal governing body may destroy, sell for salvage or otherwise dispose of the following papers,
documents and records after the expiration of the specified period of time following the end of the fiscal year in
which the paper, document or record was created, except as otherwise specified:
1. One (1) year: parking citations may be destroyed or otherwise permanently disposed of one (1) year after
the date of issuances;
2. Two (2) years: municipal court warrants, water, sewer, garbage and utility receipts and statements,
which have been previously audited; inspection records relating to water meters and sewer inspections; miscellaneous
petitions and letters addressed to the governing body on matters other than pertaining to the items hereinafter
set forth; utility billing ledger or register; utility cash receipts ledger or register; and utility accounts receivable
ledger or register. Fire run contracts may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of two (2) years after their expiration;
3. Five (5) years: successful and unsuccessful bids for the purchase or furnishing of equipment, material
and improvements; inspection records except as provided for in paragraph 2 of this section; claims that have
been denied; license applications; bonds; special, primary and general election payrolls; election tabulations and
returns; withholding statements; garnishment records; traffic tickets and receipts; bond receipts and fine receipts;
information and complaints; court dockets; paid general obligation and revenue bonds; paid street improvement,
sewer and sidewalk district bonds; warrants; claims; checks; vouchers; purchase orders; payrolls;
4. Ten (10) years: inventories; appropriation ledgers; sidewalk assessment records, except payment records;
cash receipt book or register for the general fund, the street and alley fund, any bond fund or sinking fund,
and all other trust funds that have been audited; and
5. Fifteen (15) years: sewer and improvement district records, except payment records.
None of the above-mentioned records, papers or documents pertaining to pending litigation shall be disposed of
until such litigation is finally terminated. This section shall not be construed to authorize or allow the destruction
of any testing laboratory results or the inspection records of public improvements of a municipality. (Amended
1990)
SECTION 22-132. AUTHORITY TO HAVE RECORDS PHOTOGRAPHED OR REPRODUCED ON
FILM--ORIGINAL RECORD--STORAGE
A. The head of any municipal department, commission, bureau or board may have any or all records kept
by the official, department, commission, bureau or board photographed, microphotographed, photostated, reproduced
on film or stored on optical disk. Such film or reproducing material shall be of durable material and the
device used to reproduce such records on film or other material shall be such as to accurately reproduce and perpetuate
the original records in all details.
B. The photostatic copy, photograph, microphotograph, photographic film or optical disk of the original
records shall be deemed to be an original record for all purposes, and shall be admissible in evidence in all courts
or administrative agencies. A facsimile, exemplification or certified copy thereof shall, for all purposes recited
herein, be deemed to be a transcript, exemplification or certified copy of the original.
C. Whenever photostatic copies, photographs, microphotographs, reproductions on films or optical disks
shall be placed in conveniently accessible files and provisions made for preserving, examining and using same,
the head of any municipal department, commission, bureau or board may certify those facts to the municipal
governing body. The governing body may, by ordinance or resolution, authorize the disposal, archival storage or
destruction of such records and papers. (Amended 1990)
SECTION 22-132.1. MUNICIPAL RECORDS--MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION--AVAILABILITY
Any officer or employee of a municipality having custody of records or other documents of the municipality
shall keep and maintain such records in a manner and at a location prescribed by the governing body. Such records
shall be available for use by officers and employees of the municipality as the governing body shall direct.
The governing body shall establish policies and procedures to preserve and protect the records of the municipality
consistent with other provisions of law providing for the confidentiality of such records where appropriate
and the accessibility of such records for inspection by the public. (Added 1989)
SECTION 22-133. CONTESTING REASONABLENESS OF OIL AND GAS DRILLING FEE
Any person, firm or corporation may contest the reasonableness of any fee imposed pursuant to the provisions
of Section 52 of Title 17 of the Oklahoma Statutes, for the issuance of a permit for the drilling and operation of
an oil and gas well or the regulation thereof, by filing a petition in the district court of the county where the governing
body of such incorporated city or town is located. The court, upon hearing all the facts and circumstances
relating to the imposition of the fee, shall determine the reasonableness of such fee. The court may award attorneys’
fees and costs to the prevailing party. (Added 1986)
SECTION 22-134. PURCHASING OR ACCOUNTS PAYABLE--APPROVAL BY ELECTRONIC
PROCESS
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Oklahoma Statutes, any municipal document, other than checks,
drafts or warrants, relating to purchasing or accounts payable may be approved by the municipality by an electronic
process in lieu of a manual process. (Added 1990)
ARTICLE XXVII
COURTS
Section:
27-101 Creation of Municipal Court not of Record
27-102 Resolution of Governing Body
27-103 Jurisdiction
27-104 Judges
27-105 Prohibition on Change of Venue--Disqualification of Judge
27-106 Acting Judge--Alternate Judge--Compensation
27-107 Vacancies in Office of Judge
27-108 Municipal Attorney as Prosecuting Officer
27-109 Clerk of Court--Duties
27-110 Court Marshal--Duties
27-111 Bond of Clerk and Judge--Form
27-112 Fees, Fines and Forfeitures--Dispositions
27-113 Procedure--Judicial Notice of Statutes and Ordinances--Writs and Process
27-114 Rules for Conduct of Court Business
27-115 Prosecutions by Verified Complaint--Style
27-116 Arraignment--Fines in Lieu of Appearance
27-117 Bail--Release on Own Recognizance--Traffic Citation
27-118 Failure to Appear According to Terms of Bond--Forfeiture
27-119 Jury Trials--Qualifications of Jurors
27-120 Selection and Summons of Jurors
27-121 Fees and Mileage of Jurors and Witnesses
27-122 Enforcement of Payment of Fines or Costs by Imprisonment--Persons Unable to Pay
27-122.1 Municipal Courts--Sentences--Costs
27-122.2 Community Service in Lieu of Fine or in Conjunction with Imprisonment--Violation of Community
Service Conditions
27-123 Suspension of Judgment or Costs--Reconfinement
27-124 Supervision of Juveniles on Parole or Probation
27-125 Contempt of Court
27-126 Costs
27-127 Prosecution for Same Offense of Another Court Prohibited
27-128 Writs of Mandamus, Prohibition and Certiorari
27-129 Appeals
27-130 District Attorney to Defend Appeals in Certain Cases
27-131 Orders Relative to Procedures and Practices by Supreme Court
27-132 Appeals From District Court
ARTICLE XXVII
COURTS
SECTION 27-101. CREATION OF MUNICIPAL COURT NOT OF RECORD
A municipality may create a Municipal Court, as provided in this article, which shall be a court not of record.
This court may be created in addition to a Municipal Criminal Court of Record. References in Sections 27-101
through 27-131 of this title to the municipal court shall mean the municipal court not of record established under
the authority of the provisions of this article.
SECTION 27-102. RESOLUTION OF GOVERNING BODY
Before a municipal court not of record may be put into operation, the municipal governing body shall determine
by resolution that the efficient disposition of cases involving the violation of municipal ordinances necessitates
putting the court into operation. The governing body shall cause a certified copy of the resolution to be filed
in the office of the county clerk of each county in which the municipality is located. The resolution and the filing
thereof shall be judicially noticed in all courts of this state. (Amended 1988)
SECTION 27-103. JURISDICTION
The municipal court shall have original jurisdiction to hear and determine all prosecutions wherein a violation
of any ordinance of the municipality where the court is established is charged.
SECTION 27-104. JUDGES
A. The number of judges for each municipal court shall be determined by the governing body of the municipality
where the court is established. The judge of each municipal court shall be appointed by the mayor of
the municipality where the court is established, with the consent of the municipal governing body. The judge of
any municipal court shall be licensed to practice law in Oklahoma, except as provided in subsections B and C of
this section. He shall serve for a term of two (2) years, said term expiring on a date fixed by ordinance, and until
his successor is appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed by the vote of a majority of all members of the
governing body for such cause as is provided by law for the removal of public officers. Any appointment to fill a
vacancy shall be for the unexpired term. Except in cities of more than two hundred thousand (200,000) population,
nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the judge from engaging in the practice of law in any other
court during his tenure of office. The judge shall be paid a salary to be fixed by the municipal governing body.
He shall be paid in the same manner as other municipal officials.
B. In any municipality with a population of less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500), the mayor, with
the consent of the governing body of the municipality, may appoint as judge:
1. An attorney licensed to practice law in Oklahoma, who resides in the county in which the municipality is
located or in an adjacent county; or
2. An attorney licensed to practice law in Oklahoma who maintains a permanent office in the municipality;
or
3. Any suitable person residing in the municipality or within twenty (20) miles of the boundaries of the
municipality.
The mayor may be designated as judge of the municipal court upon approval of the governing body of the municipality.
C. In any municipality with a population of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) or more, if no attorney
licensed to practice law in Oklahoma resides in the county or in an adjacent county in which the municipality is
located, who is at the time of appointment willing to accept the appointment as judge, the mayor, with the consent
of the governing body of the municipality, may appoint any suitable and proper person as judge.
D. If the judge of the municipal court is not a licensed attorney, the trial shall be to the court, and the court
may not impose a fine of more than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) and may not order the defendant imprisoned except
for the nonpayment of fines or costs or both. (Amended, effective 11/1/84)
SECTION 27-105. PROHIBITION ON CHANGE OF VENUE--DISQUALIFICATION OF JUDGE
No change of venue shall be allowed from any municipal court, but the judge of the municipal court may be
disqualified under the same terms and conditions as are now provided by law for courts of record, and in case of
such disqualification a special judge shall be appointed as provided in Section 27-104 of this title.
SECTION 27-106. ACTING JUDGE--ALTERNATE JUDGE--COMPENSATION
In the event of disqualification of the judge in a particular case, or his absence or inability to act, the mayor of
the municipality may appoint some person, qualified as provided in Section 27-104 of this title, as acting municipal
judge of the court in the place of the judge during his absence or inability to act or in a case wherein the
judge is disqualified; or, in its discretion, the municipal governing body may provide by ordinance for the appointment
of an alternate judge of the court, in the same manner and for the same term as the judge and possessing
the qualifications prescribed by Section 27-104 of this title, who shall sit as acting judge of the court in case
of the absence, inability or disqualification of the judge. If both the judge and the alternate judge are unable to
sit, the mayor may appoint an acting judge as provided in this section. The municipal governing body, by ordinance,
shall provide for the compensation of an acting judge of the court.
SECTION 27-107. VACANCIES IN OFFICE OF JUDGE
Vacancies in the office of the judge of any municipal court shall be filled in the same manner as provided for
the appointment of the judge in the first instance.
SECTION 27-108. MUNICIPAL ATTORNEY AS PROSECUTING OFFICER
The municipal attorney of each municipality where a municipal court is established may be the prosecutor of
the municipal court. The prosecutor shall have full power to prosecute for the violations of any ordinance of the
municipality in the municipal court and shall have the power to prosecute and resist appeals and proceedings in
error and review from the municipal court. (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 27-109. CLERK OF COURT--DUTIES
The municipal clerk of any municipality where a municipal court is established, or a deputy designated by
him, shall be ex officio the clerk of the municipal court. The clerk shall:
1. Assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court, preparation of writs, processes, or other papers;
2. Administer oaths required in judicial or other proceedings before the court;
3. Be responsible for the entry of all pleadings, processes, and proceedings in the dockets of the court;
4. Perform such other clerical duties in relation to the proceedings of the court as the judge shall direct; and
5. Receive and give receipt for and disburse or deliver to the municipal treasurer all fines, forfeitures, fees,
deposits, and sums of money properly payable to the municipal court. Such funds and sums of money while in
the custody of the clerk shall be deposited and disbursed upon vouchers as directed by the municipal governing
body.
SECTION 27-110. COURT MARSHAL--DUTIES
The municipal governing body, upon the recommendation of the judge of the municipal court, may designate
any appropriate person who is a resident of the municipality to serve as marshal, and in the absence of such a
designation, the chief of police or corresponding officer of the municipality shall be ex officio marshal of the
court. The marshal shall execute any writs and other process directed to him, except as herein otherwise provided,
and such duty may be performed by any deputy marshal or by any members of the police force of the municipality,
as the case may be.
SECTION 27-111. BOND OF CLERK AND JUDGE--FORM
A. The clerk of each municipal court shall give bond to the governing body of the municipality where the
court is established. The bond shall be approved by the governing body and shall be in an amount to be fixed by
the governing body. The bond shall be in substance as follows:
I, __________, clerk of the Municipal Court of ________, State of Oklahoma, and _________ and
_________, his sureties, do jointly and severally agree to pay on demand each and every person who may be
entitled thereto, all such sums of money as the said clerk may become liable to pay, on account of any moneys
which may come into his hands, by virtue of his office.
Dated at _______, this _____ day of _______,19___.
___________________
(Signed)
B. The municipal governing body may provide that the judge, the alternate judge, and an acting judge, or
any of them, shall give a bond to the governing body of the municipality where the court is established. If a bond
is required, it shall be in an amount to be fixed by the governing body. It shall be conditioned in the same manner
as the bond that is required of the clerk of the court, and it shall be approved by the governing body.
SECTION 27-112. FEES, FINES AND FORFEITURES--DISPOSITIONS
All of the fees, fines, and forfeitures which come into the municipal court shall be paid by the clerk of the
court to the municipal treasurer. The treasurer shall credit such deposits to the fund designated by the municipal
governing body. The court clerk shall make duplicate receipts for the fees, fines, and forfeitures collected by
him, one of which shall be retained by the municipal treasurer together with a detailed statement of all costs, the
style of the case in which they were paid, and the name of the party paying the same. (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 27-113. PROCEDURE--JUDICIAL NOTICE OF STATUTES AND ORDINANCES--WRITS
AND PROCESS
Except as otherwise provided for by law, the code of procedure in the municipal court shall be the same as is
provided for by law for the trial of misdemeanors. The court shall take judicial notice of state statutes and the
ordinances of the municipality in which it is located. Writs and processes of the court may be issued by the judge
or clerk thereof to any proper officer. All writs and processes of the municipal court in which a violation of a
municipal ordinance is charged shall be directed to the chief of police of the municipality, a county sheriff, or to
some other appropriate peace officer. A law enforcement officer of the municipality or county sheriff may serve
an arrest warrant issued by the municipal court any place within this state. If the warrant is served by a county
sheriff, the municipality shall pay the Sheriff’s Service Fee Account a fee of Twenty Dollars ($20.00).
(Amended 1990)
SECTION 27-114. RULES FOR CONDUCT OF COURT BUSINESS
The judge of each municipal court may prescribe rules, consistent with the provisions of this article, for the
proper conduct of the business of the municipal court.
SECTION 27-115. PROSECUTIONS BY VERIFIED COMPLAINT--STYLE
All prosecutions commenced in the municipal court shall be by complaint which shall be subscribed by the
person making the complaint and shall be verified before a judge, the court clerk, a deputy court clerk, or a police
officer. No warrant for arrest shall be issued until the complaint has been approved by the judge of the municipal
court. All prosecutions for the violation of municipal ordinances shall be styled, “The _______________
(City or Town) of ______________ (name the municipality) vs. _____________ (naming the person or persons
charged).” (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 27-116. ARRAIGNMENT--FINES IN LIEU OF APPEARANCE
The arraignment shall be made by the court. The judge or the prosecuting attorney shall read the complaint to
the defendant, inform him of his legal rights and of the consequences of conviction, and ask him whether he
pleads guilty or not guilty. The municipal governing body by ordinance may prescribe a schedule of fines which
the defendant may pay in lieu of his appearance before the municipal court and such payment shall constitute a
final determination of the cause against the defendant.
SECTION 27-117. BAIL--RELEASE ON OWN RECOGNIZANCE--TRAFFIC CITATION
A. If a resident of a municipality served by a municipal court is arrested for the violation of any ordinance,
traffic or nontraffic, by a law enforcement officer, the officer shall immediately release said person if the person
acknowledges receipt of a citation by signing it unless it reasonably appears to the officer that the person may
cause injury to himself or others or damage to property if released, that the person will not appear in response to
the citation, or the person is arrested for an offense against a person or property. If said person fails to appear in
response to the citation, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest and his appearance shall be compelled.
B. If a resident of a municipality served by a municipal court is arrested by a law enforcement officer for
the violation of any ordinance and is not released by being permitted to sign a citation as provided in subsection
A of this section, he shall be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment, or shall be released on his own
recognizance.
C. If a nonresident of a municipality served by a municipal court is arrested for a violation of any ordinance
other than a traffic violation by a law enforcement officer, the defendant shall be eligible to be admitted to bail
either before or after arraignment.
D. A municipality may require a person who is arrested for a municipal traffic violation by a law enforcement
officer to comply with the procedures provided by law in Section 1114.1 of Title 22 of the Oklahoma Statutes
for state traffic violations with respect to release of the arrested person. The following methods of posting
bail shall apply:
1. Posting cash bail; or
2. Depositing with the arresting officer a “guaranteed arrest bond certificate”; or
3. Depositing with the arresting officer a valid license to operate a motor vehicle in exchange for a receipt
therefor issued by the arresting officer, which shall be recognized as an operator’s license and shall authorize the
person’s operation of a motor vehicle until the date of his hearing but not to exceed twenty (20) days. This procedure
for depositing a valid operator’s license shall not be used unless authorized by a duly enacted ordinance.
A municipality may prescribe a fine for up to the maximum amount authorized by the courts not of record for
failure of a person to have a valid driver’s license when charged with a traffic violation.
E. The amount and conditions of bail granted pursuant to the provisions subsections B and C of this section
shall be determined by the judge who shall prescribe rules for the receipt of bail and for the release by recognizance.
In the event of arrests at night, emergencies, or when the judge is not available, the chief of police or his
designated representative may be authorized by the judge subject to such conditions as shall be prescribed by the
judge to accept a temporary cash bond in a sufficient amount to secure the appearance of the accused. The cash
bond shall not be more than the maximum fine provided for by ordinance for each offense charged. The chief of
police or his designated representative is authorized subject to such conditions as shall be prescribed by the
judge to release a resident of the municipality on his own recognizance. (Amended 11/1/84)
SECTION 27-118. FAILURE TO APPEAR ACCORDING TO TERMS OF BOND--FORFEITURE
If, without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear according to the terms or conditions of his bond, either
for hearing, arraignment, trial or judgment, or upon any other occasion when his presence in court or before
the magistrate may be lawfully required, the judge may direct that fact to be entered upon the court minutes,
thereby declaring the bond to be forfeited. Without advancing court costs, the judge shall then cause the forfeiture
to be certified to the district court in the county where the situs of the municipal government is located,
where it shall be entered upon the judgment docket and shall have the full force and effect of a district court
judgment. At such time as the forfeiture is entered upon the district court judgment docket, the district court
clerk shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of Sections 1330 through 1333 and 1335 of Title 59 of the
Oklahoma Statutes. A surety shall have all remedies available under the provisions of Section 1108 of Title 22
and Sections 1301 through 1340 of Title 59 of the Oklahoma Statutes. Court costs shall be collectible from the
proceeds of the bond.
SECTION 27-119. JURY TRIALS--QUALIFICATIONS OF JURORS
In all prosecutions in the municipal court for any offense punishable by a fine of more than One Hundred Dollars
($100.00) or by imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment, a jury trial shall be had unless waived
by the defendant and the municipality, provided that the municipality has compiled its penal ordinances in accordance
with the provisions of Sections 14-109 and 14-110 of this title. If the municipality has not compiled its
ordinances as provided by law, the fine shall not exceed Fifty Dollars ($50.00). In prosecutions for all other offenses,
or in cases wherein a jury trial is waived by the defendant and the municipality, trial shall be to the court.
A jury in the municipal court shall consist of six (6) jurors, five of whom may return a verdict. Jurors shall be
good and lawful men or women, citizens of the county in which the court sits, having the qualifications of jurors
in the district court. (Amended, effective 10/1/83)
SECTION 27-120. SELECTION AND SUMMONS OF JURORS
Jurors in the municipal court shall be selected under the same terms and conditions as are provided for by law
for the district courts. Upon written request of the judge of the municipal court for a stated number of jurors to
the chief judge of the appropriate district court, it shall be the duty of the clerk of the district court to draw from
the jury wheel a requested number of jurors in the same manner as is provided by law for the district court until
the number requested, who from their addresses appear to reside within the corporate limits of the municipality,
is drawn, and to prepare a list of names drawn and certify such list to the judge of the municipal court. On completion
of the draw, the clerk shall immediately return to the jury wheel all names drawn which are not placed on
the certified list. The judge of the municipal court shall make written request to the chief judge of the district
court for a stated number of additional jurors if, after allowance of claimed statutory exemptions, the listed number
is found to be insufficient. Summons of the prospective jurors shall be issued as set out by ordinance, and
may be served in person by the chief of police or any member of the police force of the municipality, or may be
served by the clerk of the municipal court by mail.
SECTION 27-121. FEES AND MILEAGE OF JURORS AND WITNESSES
The municipal governing body shall determine by ordinance the fees and mileage that shall be paid to jurors
and witnesses in a municipal court. However, no witness fee shall be paid to any police or peace officer. The
jury fee and mileage due jurors and witnesses shall be paid as provided by ordinance.
SECTION 27-122. ENFORCEMENT OF PAYMENT OF FINES OR COSTS BY IMPRISONMENT--
PERSONS UNABLE TO PAY
A. If a defendant who is financially able refuses or neglects to pay a fine or costs or both, payment may be
enforced:
1. By imprisonment until the same shall be satisfied at the rate of Five Dollars ($5.00) per day; or
2. In the same manner as is prescribed in subsection B of this section for a defendant who is without means
to make such payment.
B. If the defendant is without means to pay the fine or costs, the municipal judge may direct the total
amount due to be entered upon the court minutes and to be certified to the district court in the county where the
situs of the municipal government is located where, it shall be entered upon the district court judgment docket
and shall have the full force and effect of a district court judgment. Thereupon the same remedies shall be available
for the enforcement of the judgment as are available to any other judgment creditor. (Amended, effective
11/1/87)
SECTION 27-122.1 MUNICIPAL COURTS--SENTENCES--COSTS
A. All sentences of imprisonment shall be executed by the chief of police of the municipality, and any person
convicted of a violation of any ordinance of the municipality and sentenced to imprisonment shall be confined
in the jail, farm or workhouse, of the municipality, in the discretion of the court, for the time specified in
the sentence; provided, however, the court may, in lieu of imprisonment, order the defendant to engage in a term
of community service without compensation. If the defendant fails to perform the required community service or
if the conditions of community service are violated, the judge may impose a sentence of imprisonment, not to
exceed the maximum sentence allowable for the violation for which the defendant was convicted.
B. The judge of the municipal court imposing a judgment and sentence, at his discretion, is empowered to
modify, reduce, or suspend or defer the imposition of such sentence or any part thereof and to authorize probation
for a period not to exceed six (6) months from the date of sentence, under such terms or conditions as the
judge may specify. Procedures relating to suspension of the judgment or costs or both shall be as provided in
Section 27-123 of Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes. Upon completion of the probation term, the defendant shall
be discharged without a court judgment of guilt, and the verdict, judgment of guilty or plea of guilty shall be expunged
from the record and said charge dismissed with prejudice to any further action. Upon a finding of the
court that the conditions of probation have been violated, the municipal judge may enter a judgment of guilty.
C. The judge of the municipal court may continue or delay imposing a judgment and sentence for a period
of time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of sentence. At the expiration of such period of time the judge
may allow the municipal attorney to amend the charge to a lesser offense.
D. If a deferred sentence is imposed, an administrative fee of not to exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100.00)
may be imposed as costs in the case.
E. For the purposes of this section, “judge of the municipal court” means a municipal court judge who is
licensed to practice law in Oklahoma. (Amended 1990)
SECTION 27-122.2 COMMUNITY SERVICE IN LIEU OF FINE OR IN CONJUNCTION WITH
IMPRISONMENT--VIOLATION OF COMMUNITY SERVICE CONDITIONS
Whenever a person is convicted in municipal court for violation of a municipal ordinance, the court may order
the defendant to a term of community service or remedial action in lieu of fine or in conjunction with imprisonment.
If the defendant fails to perform the required community service or if the conditions of community service
are violated, the judge may impose a sentence of imprisonment, not to exceed the maximum sentence allowable
for the violation for which the defendant was convicted. (Amended 1990)
SECTION 27-123. SUSPENSION OF JUDGMENT OR COSTS--RECONFINEMENT
Whenever any person shall be convicted in the municipal court of violating a municipal ordinance, the judge
trying the cause, after sentence, may suspend the judgment or costs or both and allow the person so convicted to
be released upon his own recognizance. Any person so released shall be required to report at such times and to
such person or officer as the judge shall direct. The judge may cause a warrant to be issued for any person so
released if it shall be made to appear to the judge that such person:
1. Has been guilty of the violation of any law after his release;
2. Is habitually associating with lewd or vicious persons; or
3. Is indulging in vicious habits.
Upon the issuance of the warrant by the judge, the person shall be delivered forthwith to the place of confinement
to which he was originally sentenced and shall serve out the full term for which he was originally sentenced.
SECTION 27-124. SUPERVISION OF JUVENILES ON PAROLE OR PROBATION
In addition to the duties otherwise provided by law, the judge of each municipal court, or some other person
designated by the governing body of the municipality where the court is established, shall be required to supervise
all juveniles who are either on parole or serving probation terms or suspended sentences pronounced and
adjudged by the municipal court.
SECTION 27-125. CONTEMPT OF COURT
The judge of each municipal court shall have power to enforce due obedience to orders, rules and judgments
made by him and may fine or imprison for contempt offered to the judge while holding his court or to process
issued by him in the same manner and to the some extent as the district courts of Oklahoma.
SECTION 27-126. COSTS
The municipal governing body shall determine by ordinance the costs that shall be charged and collected by
the clerk of the court, but such costs shall not exceed the sum of Fifteen Dollars ($15.00) plus the fees and mileage
of jurors and witnesses. (Amended 11/1/87)
SECTION 27-127. PROSECUTION FOR SAME OFFENSE OF ANOTHER COURT PROHIBITED
When a defendant has been in jeopardy for the same or any lesser included offense in a municipal court, or
district court, he shall not be prosecuted in another court for the same or a lesser included offense. (Amended,
effective 10/1/80)
SECTION 27-128. WRITS OF MANDAMUS, PROHIBITION AND CERTIORARI
The district court in each county wherein a municipal court is established shall have the same jurisdiction to
issue to the municipal court writs of mandamus, prohibition and certiorari as the Supreme Court now has to issue
such writs to courts of record.
SECTION 27-129. APPEALS
A. An appeal may be taken from a final judgment of the municipal court by the defendant by filing in the
district court in the county where the situs of the municipal government is located, within ten (10) days from the
date of the final judgment, a notice of appeal and by filing a copy of the notice with the municipal court. In case
of an appeal, a trial de novo shall be had, and there shall be a right to a jury trial if the offense is punishable by a
fine of more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) and costs.
B. Upon conviction, at the request of the defendant, or upon notice of appeal being filed, the judge of the
municipal court shall enter an order on his docket fixing an amount in which bond may be given by the defendant,
in cash or sureties for cash in an amount of not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than
Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00); except that, if the conviction involved a fine only, the amount of the bond shall
be no greater than twice the amount of such fine. Bond shall be taken by the clerk of the court wherein judgment
was rendered. Any pledge of sureties must be approved by a judge of the court.
C. Upon appeal being filed the judge shall within ten (10) days thereafter certify to the clerk of the appellate
court the original papers in the case. If the papers have not been certified to the appellate court, the prosecuting
attorney shall take the necessary steps to have the papers certified to the appellate court within twenty (20)
days of the filing of the notice of appeal, and failure to do so, except for good cause shown, shall be grounds for
dismissal of the charge by the appellate court, the cost to be taxed to the municipality. The certificate shall state
whether or not the municipal judge hearing the case was a licensed attorney in Oklahoma.
D. All proceedings necessary to carry the judgment into effect shall be had in the appellate court.
(Amended, effective 10/1/83)
SECTION 27-130. DISTRICT ATTORNEY TO DEFEND APPEALS IN CERTAIN CASES
The district attorney, and his assistants, shall defend any appeal from a municipal court in his district that has
no municipal attorney who is paid a salary in excess of a rate of Three Thousand Six Hundred Dollars
($3,600.00) per annum.
SECTION 27-131. ORDERS RELATIVE TO PROCEDURES AND PRACTICES BY SUPREME
COURT
The Supreme Court is authorized to issue orders of statewide application relative to procedures in and practices
before the municipal courts and appeals therefrom, subject to the provisions of this article, and under its
general superintending control of all inferior courts, shall have the power and authority by and through the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court, to call annual conferences of the judges of the municipal courts of Oklahoma to
consider matters calculated to bring about a speedier and more efficient administration of justice.
SECTION 27-132. APPEALS FROM DISTRICT COURT
An appeal may be taken to the Court of Criminal Appeals from the final judgment or order of a district court
in an appeal from a final judgment of a municipal court in the same manner and to the same extent that appeals
are taken from a district court to the Court of Criminal Appeals.